O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the end of the knowledge of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and entirely abandoned everywhere, therefore its science has perished and been destroyed, and there remains nothing except small descriptions in books that hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and foolishness, intentions are closed off, and science is disregarded.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	But it seems to me that I wish to revive it together with the composition of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring along the forms of cauterizing irons and other tools of the work with their arrangement and preparation as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of surgery found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And therefore whoever undertakes it must climb up into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and course of veins both moving and resting, and where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates said that "name is nothing without deed," and in the art of surgery, it is even more so.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	At the beginning of this book we told you that whoever is not acquainted with what has been said previously should guard himself lest he fall into error and kill men, just as I have often seen many people who involve themselves in this science but abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut off one aposteme of scrofula on the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; wherefore so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who drew out a stone from the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; so he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he were cut open, he would surely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took in hand to cure a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking there was also a wound. And the surgeon, full of ignorance, tied up the break on top of the wound with strong bandages, and did not leave any calamine for the wound, and left him thus for one term; and commanded that he should not untie it. And so it remained until the leg became completely swollen and the foot went to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg; and when I had undone it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way corruption had already spread throughout the limb, and it could not be healed; and corruption did not cease to advance through the limb until the whole limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who drained an inflamed black apostume and then cauterized it out of the malice of his mastery.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is purged of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be completely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you should know that surgery is divided into two parts: namely the work where there is danger in many situations, and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore you should guard yourself so that foolish surgeons cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	So take up your arms confidently, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave dangerous diseases to those with great skill; and put aside your arms from what causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not undertake bad diseases lest you be called a foolish surgeon."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; and of the forms of instruments and of the tools for cauterizing, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of cupping glasses and wounds, and of extracting splinters, and similar things; and it is ordered with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is of reducing dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you about the quality of each temperament and its harm.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of each temperament and its harm is the longest speech and most subtle science and secret response. And many wise men spoke about this, and agreed on it. But they allowed me few words because I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally every temperament where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely hot temperament without matter and dry temperament without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry temperaments together with matter, some say that cautery is great help in this case, while others say the opposite: that cautery does not help against diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat hot illnesses with heat or dryness; and he who says the contrary claims that a cautery provides great help in treating hot and dry diseases that occur in the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	But when you compare the body and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it so by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And let no one venture to meddle therein who has not proven it and knows by long experience the art of cauteries, and the diversity of temperaments in men, and their dispositions, causes of diseases, seasons and climates; we are not afraid of other temperaments, especially cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all physicians agreed on the use of cauteries.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know this, son, that fire together with cautery is among the secrets of cures and has greater virtue than a cautery made from burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the member that is burned, and does no harm to any other member if it could.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines spread from one member to another by scattering and cause severe inflammation in the member; sometimes they even kill the sick person.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire due to its heat and the goodness of its substance does not harm if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and was true in its entirety. And therefore I apologize for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret that is contained in fire and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as philosophers demonstrate. Now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be made and chose priests for this purpose.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because nighttime pains are alleviated by its help. And especially when cauteries are necessary for sudden and urgent pains that cannot wait until a more serious condition arises in the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for a disease that is healed by cautery has no recurrence. And they say so; but it is not entirely true because cauteries are not medicine that changes the temperament and dries up the humors that cause pain, and they are worth more than medicine because of their speed and effectiveness in their work and their mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that a disease may come sometimes according to the temperament of the sick person and the location of the disease and its virtue. And superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things except for cauteries administered where there is little excess or moisture, such as cauteries for toothache, etc., and this pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine. Their intentions are false because when we administer remedies in any disease and they are ineffective then we apply cauteries, which are effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are milder than those made of iron and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its heat. And they said that the place where a cautery is applied does not cause decay; but this is not true for I have proven it, and I found that it is true in some people. And cauteries made of gold are milder than those made of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know exactly when it is hot because of the color of the gold and it quickly cools down. And if it is heated too much, it melts in the fire, so there are many obstacles to this method.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use iron cauteries that we have better prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from top to bottom so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two kinds made:
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine moistening the head for three or four nights, according to what the virtue, age, and constitution of the patient can withstand; and then perform the cautery behind the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, with their hands on their knees; after that place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two eyebrows; and where your middle fingers come together, then burn and cauterize it using the cautery called "olivare", which is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	**And place him on the marked spot with ink, and do it descendingly and squeezing your hand bit by bit while twisting. Then lift your hand gently, and reward the spot if you see the bone even a little; and if you do not see it, then recommence the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take one handful of lint, and put in soft cotton inside, and place on the spot, and leave it for three days; afterwards put on softened cotton in butter; and leave it on until the inflammation is gone; afterwards dress the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it heals.**
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	**And the elders said that when a wound remains open longer, it discharges more, and therefore this is why I assist it.**
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	"And some of these say that one should allow the cautery to burn until part of the bone is charred, and then remove what has been burnt off the bone, and it should be healed."
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	"Others say that one should place the cautery strongly enough so as to scrape off from the bone about as much as women use in their spindles, for this will allow humors to flow out; and the wound should be kept open for a long time; afterwards it must be healed and dressed."
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	"And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good in every way, except perhaps for some people who are afraid; and I believe that one should leave it alone. For the flesh is weakened by continuous solutions from nature, as we witness in other limbs; and even when the flesh of the sick person is weak by nature, the first application of cautery seems to me to be milder and safer, and this is what I now use in practice."
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	"from the ancient pain of the head"
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	"When pain comes to the whole head and lasts for a long time, then the sick person should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and also remedies for headaches, oils, and plasters. And if one makes the cautery that we have mentioned before, it is of no avail."
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	"Be careful if the flesh of the sick person is strong by nature and not too cold; then one should apply the cautery mentioned above a little below that cautery."
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	"Afterwards, apply the cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery at the place called "vessels"; this is where cupping glasses are placed. And lift your hand so that you do not see down to the bone: the sick person feels much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and the cauteries on the horns must be more subtle than those used for the middle of the head, and this is how it should be done:"
dou cautere dou chief	"of the cautery of the head"
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the illness extends as far as the eye, and the head is purged by moistifying medicines, and one has made the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of illnesses, but nothing helps: then apply cauteries in two ways, namely with medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot medicine is done thus: take a garlic clove and remove its skin, crush it into two parts with two kernels, then make an incision on the temple where the pain is felt in such a way that you can place the garlic clove underneath the skin; and when it has been placed, tie it firmly and leave it like that for twelve hours; then untie it and remove the garlic clove, leaving the wound open like that for two or three days; then put on cotton soaked in butter until it protrudes from the wound.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment has healed, and if you see that some burning medicines are needed, then use those that I have written about in the twelfth chapter treating burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The cautery with iron is done in this way: Heat the cautery which has this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head of the cautery is shaped like a closed loop with one curve, and in the middle there is a small opening. Place it on the painful spot and hold your hand steady while turning the fire slightly until half of the circle is burned; then lift your hand so that only the artery does not burn, which is located outside, allowing abundant blood to flow out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, apply cotton dipped in vinegar to the wound and leave it there for three days; then put on cotton soaked in butter and continue treating the wound with ointment until it heals. If you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", which has a sharp point, be careful not to burn the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	de migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you are treating migraine as we have previously discussed in the divisions of illnesses, and it is not improving, and you see that neither cautery medicine nor iron cautery help, then it becomes necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it turns white. Then place it on the painful spot and make a cut about half an inch long; lift your hand once and press firmly so as not to burn the artery or reach the bone; be careful not to damage the mandible which moves when chewing, and that only the nerve is exposed without causing paralysis or spasms; also beware of excessive bleeding from the artery when it is cut, especially for those who are not used to this procedure. Leave the wound open in mid-air; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is located in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries are not helping the illness and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the wound on the head as we have discussed, and treat the wound until it heals. If you still see that there is no improvement, use the cautery described in the chapter on artery extraction with a cautery having two blades; this cautery is better and more helpful than the previous one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Here is the French text for "of the pain of the ears due to cold":
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold pain comes to the ear and one has opened medicinal solutions thereupon and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "pointe"
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery all around the ear that is suffering, or around both of them if the pain is on both sides, and remove it a little ways from the root of the ear after marking the spot with an "X"; then apply ten points around each ear; afterwards treat the area until it has healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the Torture of the Mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Tortures that must be treated by cautery are only those that move from the lungs, as we have said in our division of diseases; do not apply cautery to swellings caused by congestion and spasm of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this swelling caused by phlegm from the lungs and nasal passages and gargarisms, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little way off the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on the top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as one's thumb; leave the cautery there until half of its width is burnt; this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the shape of the cautery that we have placed before you, but it is a little more subtle and the knife should be a little thicker; afterwards treat the area as I have said above until it has healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement and the patient has no fever, then apply four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the forehead, and one on the spot called "vessels" as we have mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have said above.
de litargie	Of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large laxatives and pills made of mondifyings for the brain; afterwards raise the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occupit the plaster of mustard which is written about in the treatise on plasters; and that is the manner of cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed in this way, good; but if not, apply three cauteries from the middle of the head down to the neck, and place two fingers' breadth between each cautery; treat it as you would others, and if there are any swellings, apply one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, apply two more on the two horns of the head, treating until healed. And these cauteries should be those called "olivary," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head must be cleansed with laxatives and other remedies mentioned above. Then raise the patient's head, apply cauteries in the middle of the head, on each horn, one behind, and three on the spine of the neck; if more are needed, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly from a severe disease, apply four cauteries on the spine of the back, leaving them there until half of their width is burnt. Then raise your hand, treat until healed, using the cautery called "olivary" which we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The person suffering from epilepsy should not use a fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic. It is necessary to first modify the brain with remedies and other treatments that we have mentioned in the previous division, especially when the patient is large and tolerant of difficult medical treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate this, perform gargling and chewing remedies that modify the brain frequently with good foods; afterwards, raise the head in the middle, and apply one cautery according to what we have said before, one on the vessel, and one on each horn; and if the patient is strong and tolerant, apply cauteries as I have said for those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be made of olive oil according to the method that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When excesses or corrupt humors are present due to melancholy, then apply the cautery of many cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the excess is inclining towards melancholy due to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is mentioned beforehand in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards raise the head of the patient; afterwards take a well-made linen towel, shaped like a circle, and place it on the head; and let the patient sit cross-legged, and be held securely on all sides; after that present the linen cloth, and melt mutton tallow gently over fire until the dough can tolerate it; afterwards remove the circle from inside the head and allow it to cool; and do this for the patient once a week with other good governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you wish to perform the cautery by making several punctures along the entire length of the cautery, this manner of cautery moistens the brain further; and then place on it cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the water of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When water comes first to the eyes with the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin by giving the patient something to drink that cleanses the head and guards against all moistures, and make them sweat or take several baths fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, have the patient raise their head, and apply a cautery on the head, and apply two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of water is to both eyes together, or one cautery if the descent is to one eye; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and take care not to cause bleeding of blood, and if too much blood comes out, then stop it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you how to extract the arteries and how to incise the cautery, and how you should stop it; and sometimes a cautery or branding iron is applied under the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins or near the arteries that are visible on the surface of the head, and it is seen that they are cold humid excesses, then apply the cautery as I have mentioned at the beginning of the description of water descending to the eyes: one cautery on the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or branding irons under the two rear bones; and if more is needed, then cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with several small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division and it does not help, then give the patient three roasted pigeons to drink. After that, raise the head of the patient, and apply a cautery with olive oil in the middle of the eyebrow; and apply two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrows; and take care not to cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery that is called "olivare". Here is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to do so, apply two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows themselves; and do not let your hand linger there except until about one-third of the membrane is burned, according to the manner that I have mentioned.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes turns inward and points at the eye, and in this case cauteries are applied in two ways: either by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the cautery by fire, command the patient to let their hair grow long and even; and if it points at its origin, pull the eyelids so that they do not move until the hair grows.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the hair has grown and is even, then have the patient lie down in your bed. Then place on the membrane of the eye a shape that is like the leaf of a myrtle plant, with the beginning of the sign near the hair; then place cotton moistened in egg white and powdered musk on the eye, then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cauterize on the shape that you have marked little by little many times until the heart is burned there. The sign of the work's health is that you see the membrane retreat and the hair stand up pointing at the eye. Then lift your hand and let it be like this for three days, then place cotton moistened in butter until the burning is healed; after that, treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hair comes back and the membrane is softened again, then start the cautery on that same spot as you did first. And if the hair falls out, then cauterize until the membrane rises to its natural place and is even, so that the hair does not point at the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery by burning medicine is done by commanding the patient to let their hair grow long and even. Then make a shape out of parchment like the leaf of a myrtle plant. Then take three ounces each of French soap and quicklime, grind them together well, and use it immediately so that it does not cool down. Then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of a myrtle plant and place it on the membrane of the eye. If the disease is in one eye only, work on one; if it is in both, work on both. Place cotton moistened in egg white under the eye. Have the patient lie down in your bed and place your two fingers on the medicine, pressing a little each time that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for they feel the bite just as with fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when the cauterization has passed, then lift up the affected area, and observe if you see that the paper has lifted up as it would have been by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then all is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the spot where the medicine had not opened, until your work is even and your eyes are sharp; then place cotton moistened in butter over it until the burning sensation has subsided, afterwards cleanse the affected area with ointment called 'dyafenis' and others until it is healed."
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	"And if it is necessary that you take great care in your work to ensure that no medicine falls into the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair stands up on end, then recommence applying the medicine onto that spot where the paper has softened properly, just as you did before; afterwards cleanse it until it is healed; this is the form of the poultice for burns."
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	"And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this you should adjust your procedures; do not follow the straight path blindly for whoever studies this art."
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The translation of "de la cure de fistule par cautere" is:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help at all, then you must perform a cautery on it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to put their head in your hand, and hold their head between your hands so that it does not move or turn. After this, apply moist cotton with egg whites or leek juice on their eye. Then heat the cautery which is shaped like a vaulted feather, ensuring that the tip of the cautery touches the head. If you see fit, point the cautery from one end to the other, like a tent. However, the raised part of the cautery is useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After that, press the fistula if it is open and remove the pus and dry it. If it is closed, make an incision and release the bowels. Then apply the hot cautery firmly, holding your hand on the part of the cautery near the eye, ensuring that your hand does not slip. Place the cautery in the fat around the eye until corruption occurs.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you reach the bone at the beginning of the cautery, it would be good. If not, repeat the cautery once more and even a third time if necessary, then leave it for three days. After that, apply moist cotton with butter and dress the wound with a drying ointment until it is healed. If after forty days it has not healed, apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. Then treat according to what is written in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	There is another method of cauterizing a fistula which none of the ancients mentioned. Here it is:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	"And they pour one-and-a-half ounces of lead; and hold your hand firmly over the wound, ensuring that the invalid does not move or twitch, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye. It is necessary to place moistened cotton wool in front of the eye, dipped in egg whites or milk: the lead will adhere to its place and heal miraculously."
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	"If the fistula has been healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, that is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a needle puncture and bring the fistula back into its proper place in the flesh according to what is necessary."
des crevaices en levres	"cracks in lips"
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	"Often, cracks in the lips called 'splits' occur, especially on children's lips."
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	"If you treat these cracks according to what we have said in divisions and the treatment does not work, then heat a small cautery knife according to this shape:"
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And press it quickly into these cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, dress the wound with wax until it is healed."
de l’aposteme de la goule	"of the boil on the throat"
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	"When a boil comes at the root of the throat or in the tonsil, or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after it has become infected and rotten and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but if it does not improve: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, cut or puncture the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it and on the back side; and do this once or twice, after that treat it as we have said in treatments until it is healed. And if it is cured thus, that is good. But if not, then you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter."
dou movement des dens	"of the movement of teeth"
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	"When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are moving, and you treat it with medicines but it does not help: then put the head of the sick person on your lap; afterwards heat the cautery whose shape will come hereafter in this manner so that you place a tube over the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside hastily, and hold your hand until the sick person feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after that, remove your hand and recommence the cautery according to your desire; afterwards, let the sick person rinse their mouth with salted water, and keep it in for an hour and then spit it out."
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	"And in this way the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupt moisture dries up."
de la dolor des dens	"of toothache"
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	"When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or wind, and treatments with medicine do not help, then it is necessary to use a cautery in two ways: a grease cautery and a fire cautery."
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	"A grease cautery is made in this way: you take wax and put it on an iron or brass spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and dip it in boiling wax, and press it quickly onto the aching tooth and hold it until it cools; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that wetting wool and cotton in cold wax does not help, then put hot iron on it until the fire reaches the tip of the tooth."
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	"A fire cautery together is made in this way: you take an iron or brass tube that is thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the sick person; afterwards, heat the cautery whose shape will come hereafter, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools. Do this often, for the pain will be gone the same day or the next day. And it is necessary that the sick person fills their mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then spit it out. And this is the shape of the cautery:"
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	"And make a cautery on whatever head you want, according to what you have the power to do; and this is the shape of the tube:"
des scrophules	"of scrofula"
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	"When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to treatments with medicine: then heat the hair cautery whose shape comes hereafter, and has two openings for the smoke to come out of the other side of the cautery; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice until it reaches the base of the abscess. And if the abscess is small, use a cautery according to its size, and leave it like that for three days. And then put on moist cotton dipped in butter until the burning is gone. After that, treat the wound with ointments and dressings until it is healed."
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	"When moistures overcome the channels of the lungs, especially when this happens due to a cold complexion: then it is necessary that the sick person be first purged by solutive medicines. After that, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the heart but only a little bit. Afterwards, make another cautery at the junction of the neck with the head of the spine, and use the cautery called 'clavile' whose shape we have before. And treat it like this until it is healed, as we said earlier."
de la toust	"of cough"
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the lung are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or dry heat, and the disease is old, make two cauteries on the fleshy part in the places shown; and another cautery between the two breasts; and let the cautery called "clavile" be made according to the form mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see it, make a cautery with the point that is called "poins," of which the form is shown here in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or as many around [as necessary]. Afterward, cure the place according to what is said above, and let there be three cauteries each on this side:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	"And because cauteries are lighter by making three at once."
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	"of the dislocation of the auxiliary ligament"
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder blade is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward have the patient lie on their back and side; afterward lift the heart that is inside the chest with the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has 2 inches until it reaches this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and there comes the figure of the cautery together with 4 cauteries; therefore the cautery is made with the cautery that has 3 inches, because the figures of cauterization are 6 cauteries; and the nerves are according to the fineness of a thread, and this is the form of the cautery that has 3 inches
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is added onto this 1 nerve, therefore there are 8 cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterward place the cautery on with a bandage of cloth; afterward let the patient rest and do not move their limbs for some time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated again afterward, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Regarding the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make for pleurisy cauteries of roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of aristolochia long and thick as you can find it, dry and also thick and also long like your two fingers; and moisten it with oil, and heat it at the fire, and cauterize 1 cautery between the armpit and the neck, and 2 small cauteries a little lower in the part that is under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning backward a little; and 1 cautery inside the breast, and another on the stomach, and 1 between the two shoulders, and 2 on the sides of the breast away from the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but rather do it openly as if you were smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And some ancients said that some people used a cautery like a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the aposteme; and if pain goes away, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this operation there is fear that the patient may die now, or that a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Regarding mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of mice according to what we have said in the division of cures, and it does not help at all, then there are 3 good ways of cautery that can be used:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of these [methods], one way is such that you make three cauteries, or four, lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have described earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient always lie on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is located at the mouse, where the rib cage of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to the height of the body, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After this, you insert the two inflamed nerves until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see fit, cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves. Afterwards, when the cure has thrown off decay for a long time, this is better than the other cures mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	Hydropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not effective for hydropsy, except for the manner called "ascites". When you treat it according to the methods that we have described in divisions, and your cure does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the mouse, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauteries be well close to the chest wall.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to throw off decay, and do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and both intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the key that we have shown before; and those for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is depicted here.
de l’enfleure des piez	Edema of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in a hydropsy patient and filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery without turning it. And do not enter too deep, thus all the yellow water will come out, and let the cauteries be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards make two cauteries on each leg, two on each leg at the point of the shinbone; and let one cautery be long before the knee and another behind it in the middle of the leg; leave the cauteries on for a long time without dressing until the wound closes; afterwards dress the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	Of the dislocation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach suffers from coldness and moisture to such an extent that the retentive and digestive virtue which is in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly but with strong vitality, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said above about the cautery of the stomach, at the circumcision cautery; and four small cauteries around the mouth at intervals of one small cautery's width, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	"And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the point, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid."
de la cure des emorroydes	"Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids"
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are at the fundament, or one or more, and are old and consist of large amounts of cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in sections, but it does not help, then perform cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely below the nape of the neck and slopes downward in a triangular shape, and one cautery below the armpit. Two cauteries;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you think that his stomach is cooled down and the food is not cooked, and swelling of the face is seen, then perform one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned earlier, and another on the liver, and another on the navel with a complete claw-shaped cautery; leave the cautery on for a long time. Afterward treat the wound until it is healed."
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	"Of the Fleshy Growth Called 'Thelul'"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you remove the thelul, heat up the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it burning hot on top of the removed thelul; hold your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, from which the blood flows. Do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said earlier. Afterward treat them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the thelul, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	"Of a Wound Poorly Treated"
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening,
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula forms and is filled with rottenness and corrupt moistures, you should probe it with a subtle tent throughout its entire length, ensuring that you know the depth of the tent's tip entirely. Afterwards, heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered. Begin again with the cautery until all corrupt flesh is burned once or twice depending on necessity; be careful not to burn the nerves which lie nearby nor the large veins. If the fistula extends towards the bladder or intestines, beware of these areas and perform this only in a narrow space, ensuring that it does not permeate. Then heal the area until it is clean; if the wound is sealed and the matter has been removed for a long time, know then that the wound is entirely healed. But if the matter has not been removed, know that the wound is still festering, corrupted bone lies at its base; thus we will discuss this further in its own place.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	If pain of coldness comes upon the kidneys with great windiness and no desire for womanhood, then you should make a cautery upon the kidneys on either side using the clavicle-shaped cautery that we mentioned earlier; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and this will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	If the bladder is weak and moist from coldness and moisture such that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the outside upon the bladder where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, each cautery being as long as a hazelnut. And make one cautery on the back or two if necessary; let these cauteries be clavicle-shaped according to the form mentioned earlier.
de la marris	Of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist,
de la hainche	Of the hair
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures descend to the box of the hair, and therefore it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the place of departure is found empty, then you should cauterize the patient above the box of the hair at one cautery like a circle, and draw lines before the place around the box as it curves so that the box is inside the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which the stomach was cauterized.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present, make three cauteries of the olive-sized kind, and let the cauteries be also deep as all the hearts; and perform the cure until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the hair
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the box of the hair, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured with what we have said in the division but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul-tasting pills or other good pills resembling them.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards do cautery; and the manner of cautery is in two ways: namely, together medicines burning, and cautery of fire. Cautery of fire is according to many manners, of which one is such that you cauterize above the box of the hair three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and have between each cautery the width of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-sized; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the head for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, then cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have mentioned earlier in the division of the hair; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hair, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the manner that one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hair and does not reach the thigh nor the leg. And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers to the left side; and let the cauteries be scalpel-sized, and let the thickness of the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near it, then cauterize where he feels the pain with three or four points at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, do more; and if you know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with the scalpel-sized or circular cautery, and be sure in all your cauteries not to leave too much of the cautery so that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and thus cause great harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who made cautery on the ankle of the foot and left too much so that the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted entirely, and after a bellyache from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	"And if the pain is in two parts at once, perform cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is entirely red and glowing hot, then place it on the sore of the sick person's hair, and turn it on the sound side; and cauterize once with one cautery, and leave it for three days; then make an emplaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuzalam says that we use this cautery little because of its heat, and we see few who use it; nevertheless, those who can endure it find it a good cautery, where it applies.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or from too great an evacuation, or from signs of spread cold matter, none of these signs warrant cauterization except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after the patient has voided fetid pills or other such remedies, that one apply to his back where the pain resides three lines marked with ashes, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery called "pointe"; and if you wish, make three cauteries or four at the middle clavicle thus:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes upon young children, and the sign of its onset is that they have narrow breathing when they stand up, and are afraid; and you find on the back spine and our appearance which comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this, if you wish to cure it, then cauterize with the clavicle cautery according to this form:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the cautery grips each part of the spine evenly. And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with the pointing cautery two lines or three, and let the points be near one another. Afterwards cure the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, and take care that you do not apply cautery in any place where there is inflammation next to a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is caused by moistures that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes on in the feet, which physicians properly call "podagry," and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is treated with cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary to apply the cautery to the face of the foot, then make one cautery at each spot where they call a "point." And if the pains extend up to the knees and to other joints, and this happens often, then apply three or four cauteries on each knee, with each cautery being made of olive oil; and if you need more, then do more, but do not keep your hand outside longer than it takes for the thickness of a finger to be burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains extend down to the knee and back, then apply the cautery that we have spoken of in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fossa .ii. lines; and if there remains any pain on the backs, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains extend to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the sick person and take medicines. For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Here is the chapter on the cautery of the face:
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes upon the sinews,
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	As long as it is white and throws off sparks. Then reset the bowels to their place; and the assistant hold his hand over them so they do not move back; and open the thighs of the patient well, and put a cushion and a servant under him on the thighs, and another one on the chest who holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign until your whole hand is covered, and your right hand and your thumb until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then start again until you arrive at the bone; and be careful that the bowel does not jump out when you are performing the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and so that by this the patient does not die, nor anything else bad.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their size, and those for large people also large according to theirs; afterwards, on the third day, dress the wound of the cautery with butter until the scalding is removed; afterwards dress it with other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his bandages be left on for a long time so that the bowels do not jump out when he gets up to go to bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, have him brought a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; and have him rest well, so that he does not tire himself out too much, and beware of excess drinking and eating, and excessive laughter; and when this teaching is done, then he will be completely healed. And I will tell you later about the cure for cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Here is how to perform a laparotomy:
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When worms come into other bellies and are visible,
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the spot of entry and draw a line along the width above the break, and another below it, and hold your hand amidst all the fire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	"From ancient pain in a certain limb"
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes upon any limb, either from a fall or an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called "point", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness, weakness, strength, location of twists, and degree of pain. If he is cured by the first cautery, that is good; if not, then begin another cautery on top of it, for it is customary for them to move to the limb that is nearby. Therefore, you should make as many cauteries as are necessary until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	"Of dislocation"
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The boilings are helped sometimes by cautery with great aid, and even the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you wish to cauterize it, beware if the sickness is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that corruption may seize all the sick person, then make five cauteries on top: one amidst the head towards the nape, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the haunch; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out forth such that the vapors of the thick humors may exit; and cauterize it on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the measles are spread everywhere and they appear manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize them with these cauteries that we have said on top, and one cautery beneath the nape, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the thigh and another beside it, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are above the back calves so that you do not burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more cauteries you make, the more help you give, and the less profit there is; and know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons. Afterward, cure the place with barley flour and honey, and other remedies until they are healed.
de enfleure	The inflammation of the skin can occur due to various causes such as wounds, infections, or allergic reactions. Here are some possible treatments:
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not yet gone, then apply cauterization to the limb according to its size and thickness; and let the cautery be a little entering into the space of the heart. Then continue treating with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed. Nevertheless, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	de Albares
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" has been contracted and medicine provides no relief, then cauterize it with a cautery that is somewhat deep, according to the size of the space in the heart, until the white blister is removed and its color changes. Then treat it with flour of fitches and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from a pigeon and blood from a thrush, each one part; mix everything together and tie it up with a cloth, apply it to the place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	Li cure de chancre par cautere est bonne chose et utile; quar quanque il est enveilli et eschauchié et dure longuement, il s’ensuit que la membre devient chee et que l’en est empeschie. Donc adonques le cauterise d’un cautere de fer ardant qui soit un pou entre en l’espés dou keur; puis ensi come li cautere est ostee, prent on une espice d’arsenic et de salemongier et les met ensemble, et fait on de la farine. Ensemble met on une partie de sanc dou chancre et une partie de sanc de chèvre ou de brebis, ou de sanc dou chevaulx ou de l’autel; puis prent on un peu de la farine d’arsenic et de salemongier et la mele a ces sanz et a oile roset. Et soit ceste medicine mise sus le chancre tant que li cautere y soit ostee et que li sanc dou chancre ne chei plus; puis fait on un emplestre de farine de fuces et de lentilles, de plantain et d’ache avec oile roset, et met on ceste medicina sur le chancre. Et quant il est tout gueris, adonques on l’envele et on mete y une medicine de vinaigre de vin blanc et de farine de fuces et de lentilles avec oile roset; et puis fait on une cautere plus petit que li autre, qui soit un pou entre en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure continue de la medicina de vinaigre et d’oile jusques a tant qu’il soit tout sanez.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it arrested, cauterize it with the cautery that seems like one circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And although wise men say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, which I have already seen happen several times; and it is more advisable that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called 'circule', as we have said concerning many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	de l'enfleure qui ne peut meurer
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has an illness called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to heal, either because of the excess it produces or because of the water of the sick person when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or because of the air; and you see that it hastens to heal: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it like this. For it will hasten to heal itself.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Et se tu la ves percir à tot le cautère,
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	"Put your hand in the middle of this illness called 'adubelati' so that the cautery pierces through the heart, and let it be such a cautery that the patient feels it leaving in such a manner that the course of corruption is alleviated. Afterwards, perform the treatment until it is perfectly healed."
li cure dou feu par fer	"The treatment with fire by iron"
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	"There is another kind of illness called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than a consumption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs just as fire consumes dry logs. If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then heat small and large cauteries made of iron according to what is necessary for the affected area; afterwards cauterize all around until you remove all corruption, leaving nothing remaining that is corrupted. Then leave it for three days, and apply powdered plants with oil on the cauterized areas so as to remove the burns from fire and all corruption. After this treatment of ointments that generate flesh, if after three days healthy flesh does not grow, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas. This consumption has sometimes been cured by hot medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is more helpful, as I have already said in the division: take as much as you need."
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	"Porrelz" refers to swellings or tumors. The phrase "des porrelz qui vienent as piez" means "swellings that come from the feet." Here's an example of how it might be used in a sentence:
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times at the feet, from behind, a disease arises called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large broken thing that wounds the foot. And the cautery for this disease is in two ways: fire cautery and warm water cautery. The fire cautery is as follows: you heat one cauterizing iron like a pigeon's feather, made of good iron with subtle edges to fit around the nail on all sides; then put it hot onto the nail, turning your hand around the nail until it reaches the tip of the nail; leave it there for three days until it begins to ooze corruption; then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt and lay it on overnight, and the nail will fall out and be removed from its roots. Then treat the area with soothing salve until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted from behind the body, and this happens often in hands and feet, you must bring hot water cautery; and it is done thus: take a cane of iron or bronze, or a pigeon's feather, place it on the nail and around it, that is to say for warts; then put the cane on so that it surrounds all around, then pour some hot water onto it and hold your hand tight, pressing your hand while turning until the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to find a deep path to the root; let the person suffer a little from the bite of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will remove itself entirely with all its roots. Do this one after another until you have removed all those on the body, then treat them with salves that promote healing.
li cure dou trembler	Here is a remedy for the trembling:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When one trembles due to coldness of nerves,
des pustules puans	Stinking pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	No matter how many times pustules appear on the body that are stinking, they come from large corrupted materials. As soon as they appear, one should cauterize each head of the pustule with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, whose tip has been heated in fire, or long root of aristologus, or lenticular cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow further afterwards but the excess from which they come is removed and they are healed; however, this should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound which comes from behind, or at the incision of an aposteme, or at the cautery of the limb, and in similar things; and it is very grievous to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when this occurs in someone, then hasten to place your index finger on the vein wound, and press strongly until the blood is pacified beneath your finger, and no drop emerges; then put into the fire olive oil cauteries of various sizes until all are red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound, and where the artery is routed, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other mischief comes upon the patient; and know that when blood spurts from the artery, it cannot be well stopped even if the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have spoken about: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by binding with strong thread, or by applying medicines that have power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and pressed properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	And do not think that stopping bleeding will be brought about by binding too tightly with bandages or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, for it profits little if at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and there is no physician or medicine present, then he should place his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out well until it is firmly stopped over the wound and the vein; and do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often, as cold as possible, until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped. And afterwards do what is necessary for cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of remedies for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	In the first chapter we have told you about all diseases in which it is necessary to use cautery by fire or burning medicine, and also about the ointments, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries. And I have placed that chapter from head to foot, and now I will go along the same path in this chapter so that one may more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this one, dear friend, you must know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the practice of this chapter there are many times evacuations of blood when opening veins, making incisions on tumors, and treating wounds, and extracting splinters, and making incisions on stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many people die from it.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	"And I warn you that you should not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come to treatments, such as those who harm themselves so with their illness that they die easily due to the recklessness they find in their disease and the severity of their wickedness; and one must fear these."
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	"And there are those who give their opinion and say: 'Wait, I am cured'; but the disease is deceitful. It is not necessary that you consent to these who come to you with this manner, but rather set greater value on your honor than on your greed, and do not open foolishly but wisely about those from whom you are certain, and whose service you can receive praise for; and use prediction and indication in treating your illnesses so that they may be converted to health. This will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise."
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	"Dear son, our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen."
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"And I have arranged this chapter for you in sections, divided into chapters according to what is before the chapter on cauterization, which I previously discussed from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you need."
dou chief plein d’aigue	"head full of water"
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	"It is known that this illness often occurs in children during birth, when the baby's head is constrained too tightly, and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause."
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	"And I have never seen this illness except in children, and all those whom I have seen had hurried death. And therefore it seems to me that I should leave the art of treating such illnesses."
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	"And I saw one child whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger each day until it could no longer support itself; and so much moisture gathered that the child died, and this moisture collected beneath the bone above the syphon, between the heart and the bone. And if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the swelling is small, then make an incision in the middle of the head about two fingers long, as deep as the moisture extends; see here the shape of the scalpel:"
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	"If the moisture has grown more and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:"
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	"And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see that the angles of the head on each side are raised, and water flows out when you press it with your hand, but it does not return: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner:"
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	"And after the incision, draw out all the moisture. Then bind the incisions with bandages and powders, and apply vinegar and oil, leaving it like this for five days. Then remove the bindings, clean the wound with compresses and ointments, and let the head be moderately bound. Give the sick person dry food until the member is strengthened and healed."
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	"And another method of incision is to observe where the swelling of the tumor and the gathering of water appear, for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left."
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	"Therefore cut where the tumor appears and where the water is gathered, making the incision according to what you have the strength to do; but be careful not to injure the artery. If a vein bleeds, let it flow until the sick person dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture."
de reume	"de reume" translates to "of urine".
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	"When someone has an illness called 'catarra' in the ears or in the anus, and the illness is chronic, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with the cutting of the two arteries."
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	"Therefore, when you are about to cut the arteries, have the sick person lean back his head; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear. Then tie the sick person's neck tightly with one bandage. After that, look where the vein is located, and note that the openings of both veins are behind the ears, and they are not very large. Then make marks on the locations, and cut both veins with a sharp scalpel two fingers wide until you reach the bone, cutting along the width of the head."
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	"And if you see that you have not cut deep enough, slide the scalpel under the artery and cut it from above, cutting horizontally about two fingers wide."
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	"Once the vein is cut, blood flows out continuously."
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	"And if the artery does not appear, you must measure a distance of three fingers wide and mark it with ink. Then cut until you reach the bone. The amount of blood that should flow is about six ounces, but sometimes a little more or less depending on what the sick person can tolerate and how full the artery is. Then examine the wound: if there remains a point on the bone above the syphon, cut it off so that no tumor remains, then bind the wound and treat it with ointments until it heals."
de emigrainne	"de emigraine" translates to "of migraine".
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	"When chronic migraine comes with severe catarrh, accompanied by moisture in the tears and heat in the temples, along with long-standing frenzy and similar symptoms, and medicinal treatment does not help, then we should cut the arteries of the temples and perform cauterization as described earlier."
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	"And the method of extracting them is as follows: have the sick person lean back his head and locate the artery that appears in the temple, since it can be felt by its pulsation. If it is not visible, tie the sick person's neck with several bandages, then rub the area with a rough cloth and apply warm water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the scalpel shaped like this:"
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	"Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then lift it up with forceps and carefully separate it from the tissues below it on both sides. If the artery is small, twist it off with a pair of tweezers, then cut it at that point according to its width. For if it is not cut, blood will not flow freely."
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	"And draw out six to nine ounces of blood. If the artery is large, tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread so that decay does not come before the wound heals and excessive bleeding occurs. Then cut off any excess tissue between the two ties at once. And if you wish, cauterize with the cautery knife until the bone is reached. This is the complete operation, provided that the patient has no fever and is of warm temperament."
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	"For cauterization helps to finish off moisture: it is especially helpful in cases involving moisture."
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	"When extracting arteries, one should fill the wound with clean cotton and apply well-made bandages. When removing them, use dry dressings that promote tissue growth and change the bandages until it heals. If bleeding comes from the artery while you are working on it, quickly cauterize with a hot iron or apply vinegar to your hand to stop the flow of blood. If neither is available, place your thumb on the wound to temporarily stop the bleeding, then apply cold water until the bleeding stops, and apply pressure as needed. The most gentle and easiest method for extracting an artery is to cauterize its sheath with a cutting cautery that has two parts but is well-spaced apart so that it retains heat longer."
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the tools are too thin, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be one inch of thick space between the two knives, and then when you have heated them on both sides, and brought the hot iron onto the bone until it reaches it, cut into the joint in two places; and let the two cuts be far apart from each other because this cautery is not solid all around; and that is the shape of the cautery.
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes descend into the channels that are situated above the forehead, and no remedy helps, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and they feel a sensation like trembling on their forehead; and if the skin is thin and moist so that the hairs of the eyebrows have fallen out, and the eyebrows themselves are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And the ancients called it a "treatment for contusion", and this is what you should do to the patient who has this disease: first shave their eyebrows off from their forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to its length; one of them should be two fingers wide going downwards until it reaches the nose, and the other two should be about two fingers apart above the eyebrows, making sure not to cut into the arteries that are located on either side above the eyebrows; keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and each incision should be about three fingers wide.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have ready some sponges and many cloths to wipe away the blood, then insert the spatula heated on both sides as follows:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Insert the spatula through the first incision from the temple to the second incision; then scrape out all the flesh that is between the two incisions up to the sinew that is on the bone. Then insert it again from the middle incision to the other second one, and finally remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision an instrument called a "cautery knife", which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other without being sharp; this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place the sharp edge of the instrument towards the flesh near the bone, and the smooth edge towards the bone; insert it until it reaches the middle incision. Then cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision goes down to where the brain opens, then do the same in the middle incision up to the other end. Then remove blood equally and squeeze the place for the bleeding to stop. Then put a wick of old cotton into each incision, cover with cloths moistened in wine, oil and honey, and make sure that no inflammation occurs. On the third day, remove the stitches and bring plenty of sage tea; then apply basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	Of the remedy for headaches
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	As for anyone who frequently has catarrh and you see their eyes are thin and small, with weakened vision and burnt-looking eyebrows; the hair falls out, there is a sharp pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; know from these symptoms that this matter and catarrh comes only from many veins, and the cure for it is this:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And the treatment is to have the patient lie on their back, then make a large incision down the middle of the forehead and another about one inch wide. Start from the left temple incision to the right temple, cutting all the way down to the bone; keep your hand away from the temporal nerves that move during chewing. Once the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, then open up between the two lips of the incision and insert old cotton wool and linen strips. Then cover it with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and make sure no inflammation occurs. When healed, rub the bone until flesh begins to grow again, then apply drying agents that help tissue regeneration.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony (resin), mix them together to make a plaster; apply it to these wounds to help tissue regeneration.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear wax impaction
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of these four things: grain, insect, small stone or similar object such as iron; seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or flowing substance like water, honey and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When a stone or other object falls into the ear that does not fit in the ear nor grow there, place the ear towards the sun. If you see the stone, drip some drops of violet oil or sesame oil, then help it come out; make the person sneeze with condis oil and plug their nostrils when they sneeze. Then wrap cloths or wool around the ear and tilt it upwards. Often this cure works; if not, use tweezers to remove it, here is its shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the tweezers, that's good. If not, use a small, delicate hook to remove it. If that doesn't work, make a cane of reed and insert its tip into the earhole firmly, then seal around the cane with soft wax so wind cannot enter with the cane; twist it strongly, for often it comes out this way. If not, take birdlime (bird glue), put some on an instrument sharpened for this purpose with cotton around it, press it onto the stone or whatever object it is, and twist it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all the things we have mentioned, hurry to make an incision in the ear before inflammation and spasm occur. The method of the incision is as follows: first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein according to their strength, then have the patient sit between your hands with their ear facing upwards, and make a small semicircular incision at the root of the ear where it joins the head; expose the stone and remove it according to your ability, then suck it out quickly into your mouth. Then treat the wound until healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain inside and it swells up, help it come out. If it cannot come out, use a thin, delicate probe shaped like this:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and make an incision into the grain. But do not do this if you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces of it; then remove it with tweezers and suck it out as we have said, so that the extraction is complete.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Therefore, when water flows into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze first and fill the ear with thick cotton. Then lie on that same ear where the water is. If it comes out by itself, good. If not, take many thin and light stones according to the length of your forearm, heat them a little over the fire; then have the patient put one stone in each hole of their ear and press it on one side with another stone placed on top of the first stone inside the ear; continue this process of placing stone upon stone until all the water comes out completely. If you see that the water has not come out completely, take a reed stalk and insert one end into the ear and the other end into the fire until it catches fire. Then repeat the process with more reeds until all the water comes out as we have said using stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	When removing an animal, if it is small-bodied like a flea or similar creature, treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is large-bodied and can be felt, then bring about extraction with pincers; for this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and where to treat distillations, if the treatment does not help at all, then you must examine the ear in sunlight: if there are any worms visible, remove them with fine pincers. And if none are visible, take this instrument of which the shape is shown here
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And let it be narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. And insert its finest tip into the ear according to the extent of the patient’s suffering, then suck strongly with the whole instrument; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they refuse to emerge, stuff cotton around the tube as I have said in the stone [text]. And if they still do not rise up as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective against worm infection; you will find them in the section on distillations. And apply your oils and medicines to the ear with this instrument, of which the shape is shown here as you see
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be made of silver or brass, narrow below with one small hole and wider above for distillation. And use a well-made brass instrument to press down inside the distillation. If you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around its tip neatly; then pour your oil or juice into the tube, along with whatever medicines you desire. Insert the tube into the ear, then place the razor with all the cotton inside it, pressing gently until the oil has been distilled deep into the ear. Warm the distillation on the fire before distilling it into the ear, ensuring that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be effective if so.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Chapter on the Stopping of Ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with no hole in their ears; this same thing happens to adults due to injury of the ear, or flesh born inside it. Sometimes these blockages are deep within the ear so they cannot be seen; and sometimes there is one small opening missing, which can still be seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, that which comes deeply but cannot be seen is difficult to heal in many ways. However, for that which can be seen, it is necessary to put the patient's ear to the sun and look inside: if you see an obstruction appearing, then this is how one proceeds according to what is written here:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And may it be sharp and cutting both before and behind, entirely full, so that it does not wound the ear; if the obstruction is flesh grown on the body of the ear, hold it with fine tweezers, and cut it lightly until all that flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the obstruction is deeply embedded in the ear, take one fine razor blade and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the obstruction from which the patient feels pain when listening, cut lightly, taking care not to harm the nerves of the ear; then place a wick according to the width of the hole in the ear and apply Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a wick and moisten it in rose water, sprinkle powdered vitriol upon it, and if you see that the ear is swollen, then remove the wick and insert another one moistened in cerote made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is discharge of blood, take a sponge and wrap it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the discharge of blood which are found in treatises on distillations.
de la char des papieres	That is to say, "of the flesh of the papers"
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the remedy for those warts that come on the skin when it is moist and becomes dry, namely: extend them with tongs and tweezers, and cut them off at their roots with a spathula; then sprinkle powdered vitriol upon the wound.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if warts burst open, cauterize them with a lenticular cautery, and cauterize after the incision so that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times there come on the skin certain things that resemble hail in shape and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "hail," and it is an assembly of thick moisture above and below the paper; the remedy is as follows: observe whether the hail moves to one side or another, which is easy to know; then make the incision wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take it with tweezers and cut it off. If you cannot cut it without piercing the skin a little, do not worry about the patient; and if the split is large, assemble it with stitches and cure it until it is healed; but if it is small, do not exert force, for ointments will soon restore it and make new flesh grow.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail descends inside the ear towards the upper part, turn back the skin and take it with tweezers and cut it off and press on both sides; and if the skin is separated by the incision, do not worry about it; and when the hail is cut off, wash the wound with salt water, and cure it with ointment that makes new flesh grow until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the grease of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a grease that is produced in the threads of the skin above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and causes great discomfort to their eyes, making them have cataracts in the mornings, so they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush into their eyes; and therefore they lie on their backs all the time and sleep on their faces, and their skin under their eyebrows is moist with the swelling and appearance covered by exinach that opens onto the eye. And when you press on the wound with your fingers, you feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the remedy is as follows: have the patient put his head in your hand; then take one linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach on each side, then place it upon him; then press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then make an incision through the moisture with a sharp spathula in the middle, not wider than the wound made when pricking for smallpox; and cut deep into the skin until you reach the exinach; and according to various conditions, exinach comes out of the wound in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take out all at once a piece of chopped meat between your fingers behind and turn your hand to right and left until it is scattered; and make sure that you do not push into the wound, so that you do not reach the whole spatula up to the eye, so as not to scratch it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the wound, then widen the wound slightly until it appears; then remove it as we have said, then moisten some linen cloths in oil and water and place them on the wound, and press with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And there are people who grind up sage and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains; then cure them until they are healed. And if a hot boil appears on the wound, then cure it with poultices soothing until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	Of the hairs of the skin
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs are born on the skin joined together other than naturally and are intertwined, they cause harm to the eyes, causing diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the skin and clouding of the eye, so that it causes blindness. And there are four ways to treat this: either by cautery with fire together, or by watery medicine according to what is said above in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must put the patient's head in your hand, then turn back the skin of the eye with your left hand; if it is turned over, that's good; if not, stick a needle all the way through one thread above; and whether it is near the edge of the skin or where the hairs are joined together, pull one thread up to the top of the skin and turn it towards the razor; then cut into the part below the skin, below the joined hairs, with the whole spatula cutting from the large tear duct to the small one; then remove one thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and linen under the skin, then press on the skin a figure-eight shape like the mirror's fan, but nonetheless the figure must be according to the quantity that you see raising the skin that is divided by all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if one needs to cut a large amount of skin according to how much the skin is softened; then cut with the whole spatula above the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large tear duct to the small one; and let one of the cuts be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put tweezers into one of the angles of the wound, then scrape it all; then bring together the two lips with a stitch of a needle with all one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the excess threads stick on the two eyebrows using any sticky substance if you see fit to do so; and if not, pay no mind to it, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, because the skin heals at the sewing of the wound and its joining together, but stitching is mute (as the ancients said), and this is the work without pair.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and there is another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, three times unfolded according to the form which is here
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut those which are above the small squares evenly according to the form which is here
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you lack the power to hold the tweezers and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread and put it into the figure; and put another thread beside the large ear, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your two hands; then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have marked, as we have described, then sew up the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed; and if inflammation comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointment
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper is turned: then you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more refined.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for canines is according to this form: and it is that you turn the paper and make an incision inside according to what I have said, and then make two canines by art, and two subtle strings as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two places where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly onto what is above the paper of the eye, and strain the two canines from the two parts firmly; and leave it thus for a few days, and the skin that is strained will die and harden and wrinkle until it falls off by itself
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes too long, then cut it with some force, and cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper has been lifted off, and the hairs will no longer point upwards; and this is the form of the two canines that you should make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operation is as follows: take a subtle needle and insert one soft and subtle silk thread into it; then tie the ends of the threads together tightly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's length; then prepare another subtle silk thread briefly and tie its end to the heads of the threads; then the patient puts his head in your hand; and stands near the sun so that the operation is clearly visible, for this is a subtle and delicate operation; then insert the needle all the way into the chase at the root of the hair next to it, and pierce the paper quickly until you pull it out through the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and insert that hair if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then pull your hand away so that the hairs come out all the way along the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the chase down along all the thread that you have prepared, until the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it through the vision of the eye; then pull the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair settles in its place and flesh grows over it. And if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural eyebrow hair and lift it with that one where you leave it, so that it is lengthened and then lifted up.
de la porriture de l’oil	About the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or corruption comes to the eye, there are two ways it can happen: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from an incision or cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of operating on it is that you cut open that scab and separate the lips of it, and put linen wicks inside it, and let them remain until it is healed; and do not use in its treatment things that dry out and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but rather use softening things such as fenugreek; and rosewater or alum and linseed should be cooked, and ointments of diachylon melted in one of the oils, and wrap a wick around it, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you should take care that it does not heal in the same shape as before; and these operations that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	About flesh growing in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is underneath is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauteries and similar things. And the manner of operating on it is that you take a needle with one doubled thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pierce it from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come out at both ends of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above along the entire needle, and cut it with a broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it into the cut, and turn the paper over, and make two cuts on either side inside the paper; and let the ends of the two cuts be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter that has the name "gamma"; then remove that flesh according to the quantity that its sides are away from underneath, which supports the paper; then join the two separated parts together with a thread of wool; then treat it with those softening medicines and wicks that we have mentioned, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitches or cautery, it is necessary to cut a full incision underneath the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then separate between the two lips of a wick, as I have said. And one must perform the operation according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise all kinds of ways to make the figure return to its natural form. And the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the operation and instruments in various situations.
dou soudement de la papiere	About the sudden tearing of the paper (i.e., the eyelid)
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this sudden tear happens to many people in such a way that the paper above (i.e., the eyelid) is stuck with the white of the eye, and it cannot move nor perform its natural functions, then you must put the point of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with tweezers, until you cut what is adhering with a subtle spatula that is not too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient can bear it and the spatula does not scratch the eye. And your incision should be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural shape. Then heal all that is assembled, and sometimes apply salt water to the eye, and rinse it with fresh water and collyrium; then put a linen wick between the paper and the eye, and put moistened wool in abduction of an egg on the eye. And after the third day, use collyrium and warm things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Thus there are two types of nail: one that is nerve-like and resembles a hard surface, and another that is not nerve-like but rather resembles congealed white moisture which cannot be grasped with tongs when touched by iron; both types begin near the large lacrimal gland and gradually cover the entire vision and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of the incision is as follows: the patient places their head in your hand and opens their eyes. Then raise the paper with your left hand, use small forceps to grasp the nail from above, insert a needle into it near its base, attach one horsehair or cow hair or ox hair to it along with a strong thread, double the tip of the needle slightly and pierce it through the entire nail, tie the nail with one thread, and pull it upwards. Then scrape off the skin on either side of the nail that covers the pupil and sclera using tweezers until you reach the top, then carefully cut away any remaining tissue at the base of the lacrimal gland using a fine scalpel and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland intact so that tears do not flow abnormally afterwards. Sometimes the nail is extended only with the onion and thread, as we have said before; then scrape it off gently with a soft spatula. This is its shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful not to touch the delicate skin with the spatula or cut it, and do not pierce the pupil. After the incision, gently apply a little crushed mallow leaves and a collyrium made from litharge to the eye, leaving it overnight. Then cure it daily until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle or grasp it with tweezers, then this condition of nails can often be cured with medicines. As I have described in the division, if you see any growths like this, carefully scrape them away using a spoon-shaped spatula according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then carefully lift the nail upwards and if you see that it does not decrease in size and the reason remains pressed down, distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red collyrium and crushed mallow leaves, and cover the eye overnight. Then resume the operation according to this same procedure until all of it has been removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing stands in your way with the eye, such as a hot abscess, then apply the cautery, first treating the hot abscess until it is clean, then resume the work as before until it is clean.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear duct harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with a needle and cut off part but not all of it so that no tears flow into it; then apply red hot cauterization to the eye using litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Sometimes some men are born with red flesh that covers the pupil and restrains on the papillae and twists towards the outside, appearing like a mole. The procedure is for the patient to place his head in your hand, then open his eyes wide, and grasp all of this flesh with suitable forceps and support it. Then cut off this first layer of flesh, and keep cutting until you reach the end, being careful not to injure the eye during the operation. The incision should be like the one we have described for the cuticle, as shown in the diagram below:
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all the flesh has been removed, then apply to the eye some crushed celandine seed or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines onto it, and place cotton with egg white on top so that it is securely sealed against a hot abscess; and if anything remains, and hot blood overflows, and you doubt there is a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that calm a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is clean, and thus do for each piece of flesh joined onto the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you must align the treatment of each weak eye with its natural condition; and as for accidents, in cases involving iron, do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that these members can tolerate this operation.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Before these veins are red and covered over the eye, they tolerate their operation and weaken the eye every day. Therefore, it is necessary that you first examine whether the eye, in which there is a sebaceous cyst, is prominent, and if there is no other external disease besides the sebaceous cyst; then treat it in this manner: Have the patient place his head on your lap, then gently squeeze these veins with all your skill, and the onion should be doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And two onions per degree in a single course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then carefully tie those veins with force and express the blood hour after hour until you see the veins bulge out of the eye. Be sure not to cut the eye with the points of the lancets, and perform this task at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not copiously spill those veins. And when you have done this, distill into the eye collyrium green and red to corrupt what is remaining from the sediment.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to tie everything in that hour, then make a plaster for the eye from things that calm the pain of the eyes, and leave it on for several days until the pain is alleviated and an assured hot boil has formed, then resume according to this manner that is written above until it is healed; and this is the form of the treatment:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon calls this "fistula": When you cure it by cauterization and with hot, burning medicine according to what I have said before, and yet it is not healed, then there is a trick in it that you should cut upon the boil where it must die, and remove all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness there, then take all the instruments of which this form is composed; and it is called "sharp head" and should be made of hard iron one span long, pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the level of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers and press with your hand until you know that this corruption is removed. And do this several times, then restore the level with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the level is solid and flesh grows, and the body of the brow is healed, but yet it remains like this for forty days, and it does not renew itself nor form a boil, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healed. But if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this form: And it is that you uncover the bone again with iron and hot medicines, and when it is uncovered then take one awl according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be tapered to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the lachrymal sac, and move your hand away from the eye a little bit, then turn the awl completely until it pierces the bone and you feel the sick person's breath through this because the wind will enter there if he holds his hand over his nose. And then restore the level with drying medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and the level hardens, then the matter goes to the nose; so it is a lighter thing for the sick person.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens completely on every side and there is no disturbance to the nose nor any narrowing, then you must bandage the sick person. Then clean him, then put cupping glasses or leeches on him without hurting him to suck, then place on the eye one linen made of aloeswood, storax, incense, and sarcocolla, and then compress the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloths. And the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one four times, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs. Then compress it with a hard bandage firmly, and recommence the cupping glasses to suck without hurting. Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the linen softens, then you must change it often. Then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eye improving, that's good; but if not, then recommence the compression and the cloths and the linen and the cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of a burst eyeball
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a burst occurs in the eye membrane and opens, and paper-like substances come out like a grain of resin, and it is frightening to see. Therefore if you see it happen, the procedure is as follows: You insert a needle into the root of the part below up to that above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the lachrymal sac; And make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; Then tie off the place with the double thread and bind one part of the eye membrane tightly, then remove the needle and place damp linen moistened in egg white on the eye. And let it stay until the thread sticks with the eye membrane, then cure the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed. And sometimes the wound is bound by the eye membrane on each side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye has a large appearance, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from the bottom of the eye, and correct the white humor and let the eye descend, and enter in immediately. Then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eyelid
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This illness called "alcunnati" appears only in the eye where the bow is assembled, resembling descending water, yet it is not water; and its manner of appearance during surgery is as follows: Make the patient sit on one prepared and upright seat, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the bow rise towards your eyes. Then insert it and let it rest without lowering or shaking the light, and let the patient see things as they usually do; if it does not lower beneath, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bow is not as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatule and cut through the corneal membrane one point along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown until the bow emerges. And when it has emerged, distill warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or water in which fennel has been boiled and honey, then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Aigues of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the likeness of aigues in the division and those that it is necessary to pierce; so we work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light for the sun, and let them close the healthy eye tightly. Then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right. Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eye is right. Then place the point of the instrument near the crown at the thickness of a grain in that blenchor of the eye towards the lesser lachrymal part, then gently push the instrument called "almagda" and turn your hand until it pierces into the blenchor of the eye, and feel when almagda reaches the empty space. And it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the depth of the measure of the space which is from the pupil up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye. Then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then put the instrument until it reaches where the aigue is, then express it through one way after another. If the aigue descends now, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Afterward let it rest a little, and if the water rises the second way, place the wick with the instrument, and when it is well inserted and does not rise anymore, then gently withdraw almagda by turning your hand little by little. Then put again some gemmeline oil in the eye and wipe away what was inside it. Then place a plug of wool or linen soaked in rose oil and egg yolk on the outside of the eye, and tie with the healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our time, we put comminuted wormwood powder with egg yolk on top.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	"And then carefully pierce the conjunctiva alone, but do not go too deep; make one subtle incision, then insert the almagda as we have said. At the completion of this procedure prepare for the patient one comfortable bed where he can lie on his back in two dark rooms; let him be deprived of all movements and take light foods only; let him not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be bound according to his condition until the third day; then untie him in that same dark house and examine his sight; when he sees some things well, then bind him again for seven days. And know that you must not do this at the time of cautery or after incision now, but it is necessary that you alleviate this, because water rises quickly."
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	"If swelling occurs in the eye before the seventh day, then untie it beforehand and use remedies that soothe inflammation. And when it has subsided, then uncover the sight and place on his face one piece of lint to cover for a few days, and let him remain always in that dark house. Then gradually leave the house bit by bit, and turn towards his dwelling; know that no disciples should interfere with this case."
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	"And one came to us from Iray who told us that in some lands they perform cauterization with almagda, where water is sucked out, but nevertheless I never saw any of this in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing."
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	"And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda so that those who do not know them may see them; and let them be made of pure silver:"
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	"And their fronts should have this same subtlety, and their backs should have three sharp angles."
de la char sor le neis	Of flesh upon the thighs
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Among the flesh on the thighs Sometimes there appear diverse tumors of which some seem like scorptions with many legs and others have flesh colored purple or soft flesh colored white. In that soft flesh however not purple, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils and sprinkle powder on those tumors; then scrape off what you can hold with a sharp scalpel until you know that all the flesh has been removed
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any that cannot be scraped off, open it with one of the sharp instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if it swells or becomes inflamed, treat it as needed; and if they are malignant ulcers, hurry to cauterize them until the blood is stopped and all the flesh removed, then sprinkle on the thighs powdered resin or wine
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the tumor opens and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is harmless; but if moisture does not flow as needed, know that there is new flesh growing into the bone above, do not use the instrument to cut: therefore you must insert one thread of thick linen moistened with hot water and seasoned with a half or less of a doit of incense on each end; and let the patient hold the thread in their tumor with moderate force and draw it out smelling until it comes through the nose into the mouth; children at school often do this, and it is easy for whoever wishes to do it; then hold the head that comes out of the nose with one hand and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand and know which end is in front by feeling it. Do this until you know that the ends have rotted all the flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe off the blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment and put it back into the tumor as before; do this for three days or more until the ointment has eaten away all the remaining flesh, then put a plaster of lead on it for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines use them; and this is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, from which oils and medicines are distilled
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it is made of silver or brass resembling an open lamp like a tube with its conduit also; and if you wish, make a closed tube and fill the instrument to purge the head, having many holes at the top for holding it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	To remove flesh from the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there arises on the nose a disease called "telul" which grows and becomes large enough to be seen plainly; for this reason you must cut it off at the beginning and remove all of its base, then put on it cautery or burning medicine. But if it is delayed until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, of foul color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted aposteme, because when it is cut some great harm comes to the sick person; but if the aposteme is soft to the touch, not of foul color, and you see that it can all be cut off, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure it afterward with drying and constraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and bleeding
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when inflammation occurs in one of these cartilages,
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of stitching is thus: you bring together the edges either by needles, as we have said in abdominal suturing; or by thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	lipomas
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many men develop hard tumors inside the lips, resembling grains of wheat in size and shape, some small and others large. Therefore, you should turn back the lips and cut into each one with a knife, grasping them with forceps and cutting into each part. Then fill the space after incision with powdered vitriol until the blood stops flowing, then apply a bandage and cure the area with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	Of gum tissue
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often on the gums there grows adherent flesh called "albulus" by the ancients; one should grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing the blood vessel or vein to run freely. Then apply powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders to the area. If this flesh returns after incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it. After cauterization, it will not return. This is how one uses instruments to cut.
des sordens	of boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes warts appear at the head of teeth inside the mouth between the gums, which are unsightly and rough. Sometimes teeth become black, greenish yellow, or wormy, such that decay reaches the gum tissue, causing a foul odor. Therefore, make the sick person sit between your hands with their chin in your lap, and scrape away all the warts until nothing remains. Do likewise for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains until they are removed. If you remove what caused them at first, it is good. If not, then resume scraping on the second and third day until everything has been scraped away. Know that teeth require various tools to scrape according to what the task demands, for those used to scrape off excess tooth material have different shapes than those used to scrape between teeth. Have these shapes and others readily available.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary, when you treat a toothache, to delay pulling it as long as possible, for this should not be done; for it is a substance very high until one has no excuse for drawing [it].
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Therefore, when the patient is constrained to have a tooth pulled, it is necessary that you be certain about the aching tooth. Often times the pain leaves the patient, and they think it is in a sound tooth, and have the good tooth pulled; but still the pain does not depart at all because of the evil extraction we have already seen done by these surgeons. And when you are well certain about the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with a sharp instrument strongly to guard the gum on all sides; then move it with your two fingers or with fine forceps bit by bit until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the forceps. And let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, and keep yours still so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	"Next, extract the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then use one of these instruments and place it gently on each side, and move it as you have done before. And if the tooth is perforated and rotting, then you must fill the hole with wadding where the perforation is; and grasp it subtly with pliers so that it does not break while extracting it; and there must be much bleeding around the gum to loosen the tooth."
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	"And make sure you do not break it, and if some part remains, the patient may experience greater pain due to the wickedness of the root. And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeons who, because of their haste and boldness, sometimes break the jawbone and do not accomplish what we have described; but often bring on great illnesses through the negligence of those roots that remain there, or through the jawbone that they break, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or sage and salt water. And if blood flows from it, which often happens, then fill the place with powdered vitriol; and if this does not help, cauterize it."
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	"The shapes of the instruments with which one first moves the teeth should be long and thick at the handles, so that they do not double over when you pull the tooth; and these are their shapes:"
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	"And they should be of thick members so that they do not bend during extraction, and they should be made of good iron and have teeth to hold the tooth in place."
de la racine des dens	"for the root of the teeth"
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	"When the root remains after extraction, you should place on the wound cotton moistened in butter for one or two days until the wound is softened. Then insert into it the pliers called 'algefri', which resembles a crow's beak internally and is made like a rasp. And this is its shape:"
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if the roots will not come out with all these pliers, you should uncover the flesh entirely around the root and insert into it the instrument called 'althali', which is like a spatula. And this is its shape:"
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	"And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break. And if the root comes out through this, that is good. If not, help yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes come hereafter:"
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	"And also help yourself with this instrument which has two rows, of which this is the shape:"
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	"and other iron instruments that are placed in front of the root of the teeth, and also help yourself with this instrument which resembles large pliers. And here is its shape:"
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	"And this instrument should be strong so that it cannot break. And know that there are many instruments for teeth; and also others that are not counted here. And the wise and subtle master finds his own instrument according to what his works and the illness show him, because there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to their diversity. But if you break something of the jawbone or other bones, then search for the instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and help yourself with gestures. And here is its shape:"
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	"And they should be thick and hold well to grasp the bone without slipping, but so that it can hold and remove it. Then restore the place with suitable medications according to what is needed. And if there is decay in the bone, even if it is small, then remove it with all these instruments."
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	"When the tooth appears not according to its natural course and is misshapen, especially in young women, you should know if the tooth is next to the tooth and not in its right place, so that it cannot be set or smoothed: then scrape it off. And if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument of which here is its shape, resembling a small beak, and made of good iron pointed at the end:"
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	"And work little by little with your hands over several days to remove the tooth because of its hardness and so that you do not move the others. And if it is visible enough to be smoothed, then smooth it with a rasp like this one here, of which this is its shape:"
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	"And it is also like the rasp used to make needles. And smooth the tooth little by little each day lightly so that it does not fall out too soon. Then polish it at the end with any sharpener. And if the tooth is too pointed and wounds the tongue, then smooth its sharpness until it is even so that it neither wounds the tongue nor disturbs speech."
quant li dent lochent	"When teeth are loose:"
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	"When front teeth are loose, either from trauma or a fall, and the patient cannot chew their food without them falling out, even after treating them with tightening medications, if they do not work: then you must tighten them with a gold wire because silver wire turns green and decays. And the wire should be neither too thick nor too thin according to the space between the teeth. If you see that the teeth are crooked, take the wire and bend it double between two healthy teeth, then place the loop around the loose tooth or teeth until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side. Then start wrapping again from the beginning up to where you started, pulling your hand tightly but carefully so that the teeth do not move. The tie should be tight at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut off the excess wire with pliers and attach it between the healthy tooth without hurting the tongue. Leave it as tight as possible until it can remain in place, and if it comes loose or the wire breaks, then tighten it again with another wire. And this is how they should remain throughout their lifetime. Here is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two loose ones:"
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	"And when a tooth falls out, it should be replaced in its place little by little as we have said. And only wise and skilled people should intervene, and sometimes the shape of a cow's bone tooth is made and placed where the tooth is missing, then attached just like we described earlier. And this serves for a long time."
de coper lou liien de la lengue	"To cut the tie of the tongue:"
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	"Sometimes there is this tie that comes from underneath the tongue or is born naturally; or due to an injury caused by a wound. And here's how you perform it: open the patient's mouth and have their head resting on your lap, then raise the tongue. Then cut the nerve tie as far as possible without cutting too deeply so as not to damage the artery underneath. If there is any scarring or new tissue growth due to the injury, use a forceps and cut the tie from above. After you've finished, apply rose water and sage compresses or cold water compresses, then place a linen bandage under the tongue each night to prevent healing. If bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol on the wound. If bleeding persists, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is very good for this purpose. Then treat it further until it heals completely."
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"and if you see it is of dark or black color or hard so that the patient does not feel it then do not touch it for it is cancer; and if it tends towards blenching and there is moisture there then throw on it ointment, and open it with a sharp scalpel, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if blood flows at your operation then put powdered vitriol until it stops flowing, then return to your operation until you draw out all the pus; then raise the area cleanly and carefully, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed."
des apostemes de la gorge	"throat abscesses"
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	"Godath", also called the two mandibles, sometimes occur in the throat. If they are not cured as mentioned earlier and appear as hard, narrow boils with a dark color, do not touch them with iron.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	When you press the tongue against this instrument and see the boil, use tweezers to pierce it and twist it upwards as much as possible. Then wipe some cloth with it before using the instrument to squeeze it out, which resembles a pair of forceps. The tips are curved towards each other and very sharp, made either from iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take pincers, of which here is the form:"
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	"And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have gripped one of the almonds, then grip the other in the same manner, and afterwards gargle the patient with warm water mixed with salt or rue, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with water or cooked pomegranate skins, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then continue treatment until it is healed. And sometimes other abscesses than these two almonds develop in the throat, so grip them in the same manner as the two almonds."
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	"And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat, namely one small abscess; and she could barely breathe at all because the passage was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died within one or two days if left like that. The abscess had grown so large that it had filled two fingers' length. I therefore acted quickly, and inserted a needle into one of the openings, then drew out a large portion of pus; then I reinserted the needle into the other opening in her throat, opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue; afterwards I inserted the needle into this abscess and cut off part of it, from which only a little blood came out. And thus the passage to the woman's throat was unblocked, and she began drinking water and then wine, but for a long time I kept cutting away at this abscess as it grew back again and filled in the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I cauterized it with a hot iron inside her throat: thus it ceased to grow. And I left these parts, and do not know what God did with her afterwards."
de l’uve	"de l’uve"
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When it comes down to the eye, and it is inflamed and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below, thick and rounded, it is called "eye". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help at all, and you see that the hard abscess is quieted, but it is subtle, then it must be cut; and that which is rounded together and is not elongated. And it is sanguineous or brown colored or black, then you should avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger to the patient in doing so. Therefore, when you see it according to its appearance and length, make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the onion into the eye, and draw it down, and cut with one or two instruments that we mentioned in the incision of the two almonds. And do not cut more than the natural limit, for if you cut more, you will injure the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and continue the cure until it is healthy. And if the patient fears being cut, then you should use a device for cauterizing with fear. The manner of cautery is thus: let the patient put their head on your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and confect with boiling water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and this is its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	**And let there be at the top a vessel into which one puts the medicine, like the horsemen of a spoonful, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva and mucus run from their mouth to the medicine within, so that it does not descend to the throat or the bladder. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it upon the eye for the quantity of half an hour until you see it is blackened and the marks of the medicine have ceased; and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with all the cotton in the vein above until the cotton touches the eye; and do this often until the cauterization is complete. Then let it dry and fall after four or five days. And if you need to recommence the cautery of the medicine, then recommence it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargarisms until they are healed.**
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	**This cure is safer than incision or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and mugwort and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them into one pot, and put it on the fire to boil. And let the pots be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument shaped thus:**
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	**And let it be of silver or brass, and one of the ends of the instrument should be placed in the mouth of the sick person so that the vapor rises to the eye through the vein until the eye is mortified. Then recommence this often until the eye dries, and guard yourself so that you do not perform this at the beginning of the coming of a hot aposteme, for many things happen there; and do not perform it before the decline of a hot aposteme. And if this instrument is not present, then take a vein and put inside its end an eggshell, so that the mouth of the sick person does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor harm the mouth, and this is a good cure together.**
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	**Many times there is a bone or fish spine stuck in the throat, or some other thing; therefore you must draw out that which you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you see it move. And that which does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary for you to make the sick person vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by vomiting the thing will come out. Or the sick person should swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of flannel, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie a string to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will catch on, and then draw it out. And if it does not come out from what we have said, then take an instrument of lead in this shape:**
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	**And let the instrument be bent at its end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the end raised high. And guard yourself so that you do not touch the epiglottis, but take care that all of it is gone, nor should you push the bone inside; and it is better for the sick person to put in the instrument themselves, so that they know where the thing is stuck; then draw it out evenly along the whole length of the instrument until it comes out.**
de la sansue de la gorge	**de la sansue de la gorge**
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No translation provided for the first line: "Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue..."
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with assfetide, using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this many times, for it will fall without hurting. And the manner of fumigation is that you take one pot which has live coals, and let the bottom be covered with a pierced cloth in the middle, and in that hole put the end of the instrument; then throw your fumigation into it, and the patient puts the head of the pipe in his mouth and closes the mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes as far as the tonsil; and the tonsil will fall now, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation again many times. And let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and alkaline things, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	"And the shape of the instrument with which one treats a vein is thus: when it can be seen, it resembles bent forceps for entering into the throat; and it has the appearance of a crow's beak, and has the sharpness of a file so that what it grasps, it cannot let go."
li chapistres des apostemes	"Chapter on Abscesses"
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what is written here from one and another in this book, and they are divided into perforation and incision; and there are two ways about this, one in its own likeness, and those that it holds moist. And the second way is for the places where they are on the body, because the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the abscesses of fleshy parts are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	"And there are abscesses that should not be pierced until the bowel has completed its natural course; and there are those which must be pierced when they have hardened, and do not die according to their natural course, like abscesses near joints. For when an abscess appears near a joint, if it is left alone until it becomes completely hard, then perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint may become damaged, causing contraction in that limb. Or the abscess may be near the main limb, and if you delay piercing it until it is too late, it will harm the main limb; or if it is near the fundament, it should be pierced before it dies. One must not pierce a hardened abscess without having completed digestion, except for one that is near the fundament which might otherwise penetrate deeply and become adherent, forming a fistula which cannot heal in a short time."
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	"And you must know the time for piercing an abscess that has completed its natural course, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the fever subsides, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs. And you must perform the incision where the abscess hangs down the most, and where it appears to be dead; and the incision should be long according to the length of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints near nerves and arteries, and in all smooth places where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	"And in those that are folded, according to the shape of that member. And when an abscess is in fatty tissue, it is better to wait for the incision until it has completed its digestion and is well formed, as we have said before. Because if you pierce it beforehand, then the body of the venom will be spread out, and it will be full of much filth; and perhaps the edges and depth of it may become hardened. And there are some abscesses that should be pierced according to the width of the body, depending on what the member needs. And you must make small incisions for small abscesses, small holes; and for large abscesses, large holes, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess. And there are some abscesses where one must cut out the core and cover it, when they have become like a penny in size, and are softened, then one should do as with boils: And there are those that are slit into three angles, and there are those which are cut like a fig leaf, such as armpit abscesses; and there are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts of similar shape."
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Those that have no head, such as soft superficial abscesses, should be pierced plainly. And when the abscess is large and has swollen greatly, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once, but draw out a part of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more again; do this many times gradually until all the pus comes out, especially if the patient is weak, or pregnant woman, or small child, or elderly man. Because sometimes the spirit jumps with the exit of the pus, and perhaps the patient may die, and you would not know it. Therefore be careful in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, examine the wound to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, then apply linen or old cotton pads; and if it is a large abscess with many holes, then you must stuff each one with a pad so that they come together. And if you have cut off a piece of skin in the abscess and have removed it around, then you must fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth lint without moisture, and bind it for three days; then remove it, and apply ointment until it is healed."
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if bleeding occurs from your operation, then bring cold water and a little salt, and moisten one cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times. And if the bleeding persists, then apply dressing and care, and the powders that I have said in my hands in this book, in their appropriate places. And if it is in winter time, and the place where the abscess is very nervous, then you must put wet cloths and warm wool pads on it; and if it is in summer, and the place is fatty, then you must put wet cloths in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said before; then untie the abscess and wipe it clean, and apply the appropriate treatment until it heals."
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	"And this is what one must know universally in the cure of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed with the cure of abscesses, and here is the chapter."
des soros	chapter on boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	"Know this about boils on the head: small abscesses come from them, which are like those in wool, similar to a hen's nest, and there are many such cases. Some are fatty and some contain moisture like pimples; and there are also hard and stony ones at the incision, and there is no doubt that an artery opposes it. The operation for the incision is this: you squeeze with an instrument called 'entromissoire', which comes from a form given below, to see what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then cut open over its length. And when the moisture has been drained out, then scrape off all the skin that contained that moisture, for it will always return if you leave anything behind; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound with it and leave it until the next day; then repeat this process of cotton on the second and third days until you know well that there is no more moisture left; then apply appropriate ointment to heal it until it is healthy. And if the boil contains a lot of fat, cut it open along its length; scrape out your threads, and scrape off all around, and focus your treatment on pulling out the coat where it lies; and if an artery opposes you, do what I have said after this."
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	"And cutting into the abscess that is pierced and moist is easier, for they are lacking in blood. And there are some of these abscesses at the head where there is no moisture, like those .i. abscesses that I copied at the head of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had struck any, it would have made just as much wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, except those which come to the heads of children and at the roots of ears, let the incision always be at the lowest dependent point, so that the bowels may exit more easily; and cure them as is proper."
des scrophules	"Regarding scrofula"
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the buttocks, and in angles, and sometimes they come to other parts of the body, and there are many of them, and they are interconnected. And each scrofula is properly inside its own bone, like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similar kinds of these scrofulas. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not wish to obey health. Therefore, when you see one that is well-disposed to touch, and is like the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not hard against the nerves of the neck nor the artery nor the vein, and is not deep; then you should cut it from above, and scrape from each side, and press the two lips of the heart together once if you need to, as we have said for head abscesses; and cut little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and let not the scalpel be too wide nor cutting, so that the hand does not slip, and do not cut too deep, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put powdered vitriol or some powders that stop blood in the wound, and constrain the wound; and let it stay until the abscess is appeased, and the wound begins to soften and start to rot. And when the blood is staunched, then return to your work until you finish it; then seek with your index finger if there remain any small scrofulas, cut them out and cleanse them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it is not necessary for you to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall without harm; then fill the wound with thick cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up immediately, so that there is no excess flesh left due to the size of the scrofula. Then you must carefully cut the root of it and draw out any pus, and sew it up as we have said. Those scrofulas that contain excess flesh should be pierced where they appear largest; pierce them in this way: first make a small opening with a scalpel, then dilate it little by little until you reach inside the scrofula. Then bring together the edges of the wound and sew them up immediately, so that there is no excess flesh left. Then apply dressings with ointment and similar things to cause what remains of the corruption to rot. And when the wound is well cleansed, then cure it with ointment on fresh flesh until it is healthy.
de squinance	Here is a possible translation of "de squinance" into English:
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of cutting the throat;
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	In those who have swelling,
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat of the lung, it is necessary to close the epiglottis to escape the danger that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, it should be done below three or four circles with a small cut across, between two circles or according to the amount of the slit in the soft palate, but not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those places are connected to the epiglottis cut such that there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, he should stretch the skin of the throat all along the incision, then cut into the heart until it reaches the channel; avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then close the soft palate as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And this is demonstrated by the section of the larynx channel that jumps out through the spot that is broken, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leaves the wound open for a while
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour of doubt about strangulation has passed, join together the two lips of the wound in the heart and sew it up smoothly without the cartilage; then administer medications that promote healing until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the breath is gone.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, cut off the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, thus being saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	"And for this reason, the ancients commanded that one should leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four."
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	"And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and treat it until it was healed."
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	"I will tell you what I saw."
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	"I saw that a damsel took one knife and stabbed it into her throat and cut some of the vessels of the lung."
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	"and I was called to heal her, and found her as dead as could be."
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	"I uncovered the wound and found that the blood issuing from it had not cut any vein nor carried off the throat, but the windpipe issued forth through the wound."
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	"I rushed to stitch up the wound and treated her until she was healed;"
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	"and nothing happened to the damsel except that she became hoarse of voice, and afterward returned to her former condition."
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	"Therefore I say that in the operation on the epiglottis there should be no fear."
de la grosse gorge	"of the large throat"
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	"This hernia is called 'throat hernia', and it is a large bubble of purple color that occurs mostly in women;"
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	"and there are two kinds of it: natural and acquired; or the latter has no engine."
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	"And there are two kinds of accident: one is similar to fatty tissue, and the other is similar to an arterial hematoma."
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	"And there should be fear in this case, and one should not operate except on the small ones, and the proof and search should be made throughout the introitus."
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	"If you find it like a fatty tissue and not attached to any vein, cut it as you would cut a fatty tumor, and excise it completely if possible;"
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	"and search carefully all around it, and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healed."
des nous	"of fatty tumors"
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	"There are many kinds of fatty tumors, each with its own appearance, which I will describe;"
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	"And now it is necessary for me to explain the entire difference between a fatty tumor and an hernia."
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	"I say that an inflammation and fever accompany it until the ebullition has passed, and then corruption is completed; afterward the fever and heat subside."
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	"With a fatty tumor there is no heat or fever nor pain, and it contains fat, which is its own sac and is the same color as flesh, beginning like a bubble and becoming large;"
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	"and there are two kinds of them, either fatty or moist, and most of them are the same color as I have described in the classification."
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	"When you come to the treatment of fatty tumors, first examine and explore with the instrument called the 'introitus', according to its form as described in the chapter that follows."
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	"The manner of examining fatty tumors is to take the moistest part that you find in the tumor and twist it gently bit by bit until you know that the instrument has pierced the heart of it, according to its size;"
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	"then remove the introitus, taking care not to let anything leak out."
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	"If moist corrosive humor is flowing from it, whatever its color may be, cut it as I have described for other tumors;"
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	"and if no moist humor comes after the introitus, know that it is fatty and cut it in a cross shape, grasp it with forceps, and lightly scrape away the skin on each side and the coat in which it lies, so that you may draw it out whole with the tumor."
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	"And if you cannot draw it out whole, remove it piece by piece until nothing remains."
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	"For if anything remains, the fatty tumor will return many times;"
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	"and if a bit remains and the skin troubles you, sprinkle some caustic waters on the wound, bandage it tightly, apply soothing poultices for tumors with heat, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed."
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	"And if the fatty tumor is large, cut the two lips of the wound and treat it like a wound that involves flesh."
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	"And if a pulsating vein opposes you or another obstacle, hurry and apply powdered vitriol to the place, leaving it on for two or three days until the wound has corrupted and the ebullition of blood has subsided; then return to cut what remains of the fatty tumor."
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	"Here are the shapes of the introitus instruments, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and there are also three kinds to encircle fistulous tumors;"
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	"and they are like the needles used to cut out warts, made of brass or iron or silver, with those of yellow brass being most valued, and they are best suited for encircling the curves of fistulous tumors;"
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	"and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings."
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	"The shapes of hooks are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are hooks with two curves that come in three kinds;"
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	"And there are hooks with three curves that also come in three kinds; and there are hooks with two curves and hooks with one curve only, which are also of three kinds; all of these are necessary for their respective uses."
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	"The tips of these hooks are cutting, and there are some that do not cut but only scrape off fatty tumors so as not to injure veins or nerves;"
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	"And among these introitus instruments are the almond-shaped ones that fit into hands so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of tumors;"
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	"and they come in three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;"
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	"And these are only used where the flesh is thick, such as in thighs, arms, breasts, and angles, and similar places;"
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	"And sometimes another small instrument resembling the scrapers for fistulas is made according to this form, with which blood is wiped away:"
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	"and it is placed sometimes at the location where veins and arteries have been cut, and sometimes they are made according to this large form:"
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	"Sometimes the breasts of some men swell up when they begin to be corrupted until they seem like women's breasts;"
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	"And they remain unsightly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them must do so according to this form from line B to G:"
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	"then scrape away the fat, apply a medicinal poultice for wounds involving flesh, then join together the two lips of the wound to stitch them up, and treat it until it is healed;"
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	"And if the breast hangs down and is enlarged like that of a woman, then it is cut in two places above along two similar slits;"
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	"So that one is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger part contains the smaller according to this form from line B to G;"
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not complete because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it until it consumes the remainder and the fat, then heal it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	swellings of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These hard swellings that appear under the arms are types of scrofulous tumors with hard edges, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture must be cut along this line from point b to point g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the boil is emptied out, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it overnight, then remove all the cotton and heal it with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the swelling resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said in the section on scrofulous sores, and if the wound secretes pus, apply a cautery as we have said earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	of the bursting of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery bursts and the skin above it is adherent, many swellings often result, and the same happens with a varicose vein and swelling.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one knows that it is due to an artery, then the swelling will be long and deep;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	"When you feel it with your two hands, then sense one pulling; and when it's due to the vein, then there is an evident deficiency."
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	"It is foolish to attempt to conceal this tumor, especially when it occurs under the armpits and around the ankles or neck, and many other places; and it can become quite large."
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	"Therefore, the treatment with iron should be avoided, and also for the one at the head, and in the case of swelling from an artery cut through the skin."
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	"Then tie around the wound like a tourniquet and neatly separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed."
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	"Then place a needle underneath one side and pierce it through to the other side, tying the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you before regarding the extraction of the two arteries in the temples."
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	"Then insert a probe between the two ties at one spot until blood comes out and the tumor is released."
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	"Then apply the treatment with all due care until the bandages fall away."
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"Then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals without complications."
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	"And if the tumor is due to the tension of the vein, then you should cut around it with your hand from the tumor throughout the skin,"
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	"Then place the needle underneath the spot you are holding with your hand and pierce it through, leaving one doubled thread on that side so you can pull it out from the other side."
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	"Then tie off the tumor as I have told you, using one of two ties made with thread at both ends."
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	"And if you doubt that the thread will not slip out, then insert another needle through both threads underneath the entire tumor along the incision of the first needle and tie the threads at four places."
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	"Then cut off the tumor until excess fluid comes out, then cut off the excess skin and leave what is tied."
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply compresses and dressings until it heals."
des apostemes des ners	"Apostumes of the nerves"
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, boils come to the artery and vein,
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	"Dislocation happens more frequently in the shoulder and hip joints, and in all places where there are joints; this is one serious abscess, with a color resembling that of the body, but often without pain."
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	When it [the dislocation] is pressed strongly, the patient feels pain; however, this pain is not deep within the body, but rather below the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	"And moves well on all sides,
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	"And one who is on the head or forehead, makes the skin tender at the temple."
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	"If the abscess is small, you should grasp it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if it is large, suspend it with a towel and scrape it off, then clean the wound and sew it shut, treating it until it heals."
des grosses boces pendans	"from hanging bags of fat"
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	"Sometimes happens in bellies and nowhere else but there, and it is called 'fungus' by its appearance, with roots being fine and excrements large, some small and others very big."
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	"I saw one man who had two on his belly that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, with no difference, being white and having small roots and cracked open with moisture constantly flowing."
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	"I weighed them and found one weighing eighteen ounces and the other six pounds; the wound opened by cutting into it shows whether the patient is moist, with the flesh being pale, moist, and having fine roots."
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	"If the cut is large, have cautery irons ready nearby, because there often comes too much bleeding at once, and if blood flows too quickly, hasten to apply the cautery."
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	"And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision from iron, then take one well-made thread of linen, tie the flesh as we have described, and leave it for two days."
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	"And then tighten it, and do not cease pulling the linen thread until it cuts through the flesh, and let excrement pass through without effort. And if the roots are large, fear cutting them altogether because of the belly, but you can still cut half of them."
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	"Then cauterize to prevent it from coming back; then dress the wound, and make sure not to cut the teat which is fox-colored, has poor sensation, and produces milk."
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	"For this is an enchanted aposteme, and I will speak of the cure of chancre later on."
quant li boude ist fuer	"When the belly is full"
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes from a cautery burn or a slit in the skin's surface, and is located on the belly or in one of its folds, as happens in other wounds, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries, according to what is stated above, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to an injury of the skin and the eruption of a boil, then the color of the aposteme resembles the color of the body, and there is little pain or discomfort, with various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed with two fingers it sinks in and then returns, and sometimes it becomes hard, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and with heavy labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, then it is light and opens well when pressed with the hand, causing no constriction. But if it is due to blood, then the boil appears large and hard, with these signs: it feels fixed according to its size;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, then it feels soft to the touch. The opening will show whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or simply windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Therefore you should leave it alone. For there is doubt and fear concerning it, as I have told you in the chapter on boils, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bowel, then you should command the patient to tie their bellyband and lie down straight, then press all around the boil;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	Then have them lie on their side between your hands
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the place you have marked with the whole spatula
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then stretch half of the boil upwards with the entire large forceps;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie it around tightly with a strong thread or silk cord, and let the knot be well tied
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open half of the boil stretched out above the tie, and insert your index finger inside to find the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught in the tie, then untie it, and bring the intestine out through the opening in the belly
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bowel, take it with the forceps and cut off any excess
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein becomes visible to you, then carefully go around it, and then return to your work and take two needles, and attach two strong threads to them, and insert the two needles in a cross pattern where you have pierced;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then press the boil in four places above the needles, and if you see blood, remove the needles, leave the opening until it stops bleeding, and cut away any dead flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you can cut it when it is subtle and porous, then treat it as needed, and cut the boil as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the opening as necessary, and stitch it up.
dou chancre	chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of cancer the similarities of cancer, and how one should operate with medicines, and how to avoid surgical treatment. And we say that cancer that affects the marrow is dangerous, and requires great caution in treating it. The ancients said that when cancers are located in places where they can be scraped away like cancers on the breast or hip, and similar locations, they must be removed entirely at the beginning; but when they are large and old, one should not approach them, for I have never seen anyone cured of them, nor has anyone been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operation when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile once, then make them vomit if they show signs ofpletion, then prepare the patient well for the operation; then cut off your forceps and cut around the cancer completely and remove it completely without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely and press the wound tightly with your hand or something else, and if bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein becomes troublesome to you, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the collection of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is done with iron: only "eclites" is mentioned here; and one should not touch it with iron in these two similarities: namely tympanites and yposarche, for they are deadly things. Therefore, when you treat this dropsy similarity called "eclites" with medicines and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as inflammation of the bowels and similar things; do not touch it with iron for there is doubt about it. But if you see that the patient has strong vitality, and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and they are not too young nor too old, then you should operate thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lift the patient onto your hands, and have the assistant press the belly while pushing the water towards the lowest part of the back, then take a spatula-shaped trocar like this: It should be cutting on both sides, pointed at the end, but not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor cut them.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the dropsy is invading towards the intestines: you should make your incision about three fingers' width directly below the spine; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, make your incision to the left of this mark; if it's due to mucus, make it on the right side. Make sure that the patient does not lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow into that weak area
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the skin with the trocar and insert it, then move your hand along the trocar between the skin and the fascia as when cutting open a boil to the depth of one finger or less all around. Then pierce the fascia until the trocar reaches the empty space, which is where the water collects. Then remove the trocar and insert this instrument: It resembles a thin silver tube and is made of bronze or light iron, with a small hole at the bottom end and three holes on one side and two on the other. The cutting edge is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers use to cut a feather.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top end of this is the funnel-shaped opening, so that when the instrument reaches the water, you can now tip it up. Remove about half or a third of the water, but not too much at once because if you remove too much too soon, the patient might die from sudden loss of spirit, faint, or approach death
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but remove according to the patient's strength and disposition of their spirit, and pulse. Then remove the instrument and retain the water, which is now held back by the heart that stops up the hole above the fascia that you pierced earlier. Then begin again with the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and remove a small amount of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	**fai ce aucun jor:**
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Never are children born who do not have an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place. If this happens, it must be pierced at once with one spatumile made very thin according to this shape: then put one thin lead plug into the hole and tie it and hold it for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it. And perhaps there is no need for this at all, because the urine that comes out will not leave the opening closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose opening is small are treated with a lead plug, as we have said, and it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are blinded, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the marrow, and this is a serious condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, then extend the head of the penis and the glans as well, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should; and guard against loss of blood which often occurs there, and if any occurs, stop the bleeding with whatever stops bleeding, and dress the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	sores on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these sores appear on the penis, which are an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant ones and non-malignant ones. It is necessary to grasp them with a fine pair of forceps, cut and clean them all, then place moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment; then treat with diaphoretic ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the sore is malignant, of foul color and putrid, it is necessary to bring cautery. When you have cut it, and if the sore is at the end of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary to remove the sore that is inside first; and when it is healed, then treat what remains outside. For when you treat them together, it is not certain that the tip of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into its root and in coition; therefore, cut away everything that is black and corrupt, then apply to the wound a plaster made of honey and flour mixed with the rind of pomegranates and figs, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if bleeding occurs, bring the lunar cautery in this manner: This cautery helps with two conditions at once, namely bleeding and corruption; and if the tip of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to insert a tin tube into the urethra of the penis and for the patient to urinate through it; and when the skin around the head of the penis that needs to be removed has been hardened, which occurs in those who have not been circumcised or where there is a wound or an abscess, then cut with a sharp instrument until the ligaments are loosened and the tip of the penis is released from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is difficult to separate them, then cut with a spatula some of the flesh from the tip of the penis and skin; then carefully open between two and place a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not harden again.
de la circoncision	de la circoncision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the same kind of wound that keeps growing like others; nevertheless, when we perform this operation willingly and especially on children, it is necessary to do our best work and make it as easy and safe as possible.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who perform circumcision around the age of one day, and even adults, and there is often confusion because there are two layers of skin, and sometimes one is cut instead of the other.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now the bone comes into contact, and there is double pain; during cleansing, it is not certain that the point of the limb will be secure; and during cleansing of the nail, sometimes the iron escapes, wounds the work, and often times they are born in such a way that they do not require cleansing, as I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	As for the cleansing that is done with force on all the length of the thread, I have found its goodness through experimentation, for it cuts evenly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, it cuts evenly in one single stretch of time; but ensure that the thread is well wrapped around the leather; and the manner of the first operation should be such that you make the child understand, if he hears, that you are only tying the thread around the stick, and then you can let him try all the other ways.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make him stand upright between your hands and hide the forceps under your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the tools; then put your hand on the stick and blow into it, and draw it up until the skin of the stick is inside; then cleanse it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie a double thread knot around it, then tie another knot further down with one or two knots; hold it with both hands by the second knot between the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two knots, then quickly raise your hand and pull the top of the stick.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is nourishing; then apply powder and over the powder a cloth glued with half of a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, melted with good fresh rose oil, and leave it overnight until the next day, and cure it again until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forceps used for cleansing is as follows: The two tips should be thin and sharp, and the tips should be as large as the middle finger equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of cleansing is when the heart is inside the incision; therefore it is necessary to extend it with your fingernail before the wound becomes inflamed; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use forceps to hold it and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it is more than three days and the part below the stick is swollen, then leave it until the inflammation has subsided, and gently scrape it off; cut it as much as you can move it, and be careful not to damage the skin of the stick, it will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the wound of sudden injury with powders, as we have said when discussing powders; and if you cut too much from the heart and it goes upwards, it will not harm at all; therefore treat it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	On the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to obstruction by stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or dead flesh, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the section on divisions;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained due to a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must bend over on their knees; place their feet on their back, extend their belly from the part above their back, and have the patient push down as much as they can; thus, the neck of the bladder will be forced open from above, causing the urine to flow out.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction using the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form: it should be made of thin, light silver, like a bird's feather; it should be about one-and-a-half palms long, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of administering the urine is thus: take one doubled thread, and tie a wad of wool or cotton at its end, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe. Remove any excess wool, then lubricate the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, have the patient sit on a chair, raise their bladder and penis, and lubricate them with warm water, olive oil, and egg white.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis upwards towards the belly. Insert the syringe further until it reaches the bladder, and have the patient feel when the syringe is empty. If this is not done correctly, it may be because the tube is twisted. Then pull out the thread along with the wad of wool, and the urine will follow the wool. Finally, remove the syringe and allow the urine to flow freely.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and continue using the syringe until the bladder is completely emptied, and then relieve the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When urine or blood enters the bladder and decay accumulates there, and you see water and medicine being distilled out of it, do this with all the instrument called "clepsydra," and its shape is:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	She is closed and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the raised places are such that the medicine cup fits well and plugs the tube without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out, and introduced when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, put the head of the funnel into the moisture and draw out what is inside it. You will then draw the moisture into the catheter, and then push it back in firmly. The moisture will then enter and reach the bladder so that the patient feels it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	"And this is the form of the thin enema used to administer an enema for the bladder."
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	"And it is made of silver or bronze, and the tube is higher up; and below there is one or two small openings where the liquid falls out. Then take a lamb's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you wish to administer an enema to the bladder. Then tie it between the two breasts formed from a doubled thread, and heat one pot of that moisture over the fire. Then insert the tip of the enema into the urethra, then squeeze your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has flowed in."
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	"And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it evenly around. Then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like one would assemble a funnel, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument. And do as you have done with the bladder, by squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder."
de la piere	"from the stone"
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	"We have already spoken in the division about the ways of treating stones and removing them with medicines. And we have explained the difference between stones that enter the kidneys and all their signs, and in which stones one should operate by cutting. And in the bladder and in the urethra, and I will tell you clearly and briefly."
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	"I say that stones which enter the bladder occur more often in children. This is a sign that urine leaves the bladder like water in its subtlety. And it appears harsh, and the patient grates his urethra, and he pants many times, and then becomes rigid. And the foundation of this comes from many causes. And the cure for children is easy until they are four years old, but it is very difficult in older people, and it is moderate in young adults, those who are between youth and old age. And the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones."
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	"And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema in order to remove all the feces that are in the intestines. For sometimes it hinders seeking out the stone."
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	"Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move him downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above. Then have him sit between your hands prepared in such a way that his hands are below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then search for it and touch it inside."
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	"If you feel the stone in space, then hurry now to cut on the stone. And if it does not fall out when touched, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult; and insert it into the stone's foundation and search for the stone, and when you feel it under your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder. Then press on your finger and push the stone out where you wish to cut it."
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	"And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand. And tell him to stretch out the thighs upwards with his right hand and remove the skin that is under the thighs in the part where you are cutting with his left hand. Then insert the spatula thus shaped:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	"And cut between what is between the thighs and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the anus. And let it be straight over the stone, with your two fingers always at the bottom, and make the cut across so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;"
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance the pressure is so great on the stone that is at its foundation that it bursts forth without effort; and know that there are such stones where there are angles and edges: they are difficult to pass; and there are those that are round underneath, like a globe, from which the exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Therefore, at those where there are angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not work, then you must use pincers that are also like a chisel at the head to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or put underneath one subtle tool curved at the head; and if you cannot manage it thus, then widen a little bit around the hole, and if the skin is cut, then coat it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are multiple stones, first put the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then draw it forth, and then remove the smaller ones afterwards if there are more. And if they are very large, then it is necessary to make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out immediately where the wound cannot be closed; but in any case, try to draw it out piece by piece with pincers until you have removed them all.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then bind it up, and put on top a cloth dampened in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water to cool the inflamed abscess; then cover the patient's neck and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you do untie it, wash the wound very well with oil and water, then dress it with balsam of Joppa and balsam of Basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and congealed blood in the bladder causes retention of urine that is known by this way: put your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder and harm it
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then wash the wound with water and pitch and salt, and assist the patient in every way that you know until he is healed. And it is necessary that at every dressing of the wound, you bind his two thighs together and gather the dressings onto the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra and stuck there so that urine cannot pass, then treat it as I said earlier: cut it many times until you are relieved of this condition, or else excise it from the urethra with this treatment. I have already proven this method.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod according to this shape and having three prongs forged into one piece of charcoal:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take one thread and bind it around the stalk beneath the stone so that it cannot move backwards into the bladder; then insert the probe lightly into the stalk until it reaches the stone; and twist the probe in your hand against the stone gently, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then urine will soon flow, then press your hand upon what remains of the stone within the stalk. Thus is it soon broken, and spills out with the urine, and the patient is healed
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you are unable to do this for any reason, then tie one thread beneath the stone and another above it; then make an incision in the stalk at the point of the stone between the two threads; then extract the stone, untie the threads, and cleanse the blood that has congealed in the wound; and care for the patient until he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	Of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does happen, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-skilled who exposes herself to physicians, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third reason is that one might not find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone of the woman is more deeply lodged than the stone of man, for which reason it requires a deeper incision, and there is greater fear involved.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you must perform this operation, then it is necessary for you to find a skilled midwife, and they are rarely found, and if you cannot find one, then seek out a chaste, subtle physician; and present her with a wise maiden who knows the lives of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to perform whatever you command regarding the examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and examine very carefully if the woman is virgin: then she should place her thumb on the fundament and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she should press it down with her thumb, and instruct her to insert her thumb into the patient's anus, and press her left hand firmly upon the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut upon the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the anus where it is usually located and felt by the stone in that part. And do not move your thumb above or below the stone, making the first cut small
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then insert the knife into the cut if you feel that the stone is close enough to the wound so that it can exit safely; and know that there are many kinds of stones: some small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots. Know their appearances to recognize the exit point
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the blood is too profuse, then apply powdered vitriol and let it remain there for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your work until the stone is removed. And have with you the instruments that I told you about in extracting the stone from men to help you in this task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood is too profuse and it comes from an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the spot and compress with lint and bandages, but do not resume cutting again, and leave the stone alone without trying to remove it, for fear that the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And once the heat of the blood is subdued and the spot is healed, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	Herne carnose
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquous hernia is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white fat which is underneath the heart of the testicles, containing the egg; and it is called "fat" and sometimes thought to be another egg if it is properly in the membrane of the egg. It is the skin of the testicle between this white fat that we have spoken of, and there would not be any unless it protruded
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this hernia occurs due to weakness in the testicles, with the matter being spread out and expanding
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it occurs due to injury to the testicles, and this moisture can have many different colors: it may appear yellowish, red, black, or white. And there are more cases than these;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this gathering: if it is the white fat that we have spoken of, then the swelling will be round, about one inch long like an egg shape, and it will not expose the testicle because it has moisture all around it
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in its own membrane, then the swelling will be round with part of the egg visible, which leads people to believe that it is another egg
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white fat, it can be felt quite well. Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, use a square-tipped instrument like the one shown earlier to express it
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Therefore, based on what comes out after using the instrument, you can make a judgment about what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we operate on it using an iron instrument, it is necessary that the patient be fasting according to their strength and the fullness of their body. Then have them lie on their back on something slightly elevated, and place many cloths underneath them
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on the patient's left side, and have the assistant sit on the right side. Have them extend the penis towards one of the two groins on either side of the testicle;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the sharp bistoury and cut through the skin of the testicle along the length up to near the pubic hair, making a straight incision that divides the skin until it reaches the white fat. Carefully scratch away the fat according to your skill;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the fat with a large needle and draw out all the water. Then place your forceps and extend the fat upwards. Do not touch the testicle itself but only the fat. Carefully cut away the fat on either side of it, piece by piece, so that if you do not cut it finely enough, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the egg protrudes during your operation, push it back into place once you have finished working on the fat. Then sew up the two layers of skin around the testicle with stitches, and dress the wound like any other.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the egg is corrupted by some other disease, it will be necessary to ligate the blood vessels that suspend it in order to prevent bleeding. Then cut away the testicle along with its suspensory ligament and remove the egg entirely, dressing the wound as we have described.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if there is a gathering of water in two places at once, know that these are two hernias. Operate on the second one just like you did the first one, then stop the bleeding and place a compress made of linen moistened with rose oil into the wound
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	Then place another compress made of linen moistened with wine and oil over the two testicles, cover it with doubled cloths, and bind it all together according to this pattern;
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths and stuff them with wool waste according to this shape, sewing them together at the waistband of the breeches. One piece should fit over the buttocks up to the back, while the other fits at the pubic area. The other two ends should be brought together over the two thighs, and the entire binder should be secured in a loop around the breeches.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	Sometimes this hernia is treated with a cautery instead of an iron instrument, as follows: Take a sharp cautery needle and burn the skin of the testicle until it becomes inflamed and the white fat that contains the water is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take a cautery needle like this one and pierce through the fat with forceps. Carefully burn away the fat with this hot cautery needle;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	Make the incision in any way that you can, until all the fat is removed. Be careful not to let the fire touch the egg. Know that this procedure is safer than cutting with an iron instrument, and be cautious about bleeding during the operation
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything goes wrong during the procedure, such as a burn, bleeding, or some other complication, treat it according to what has been described earlier
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and unwilling to undergo this operation due to its unpleasantness, you can perform a puncture instead, as follows:
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Sit the patient on one raised seat; then pierce the abscess at its lower part with a wide spatula, and insert the perforation deeply into the body's length; ensure the hole is large enough for all water to flow freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the location and tie it, allowing the rest of the water to drain, then heal it until the wound is clean.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the white cloth does not allow water to exit through the mouth of the wound, you must insert a pen or the tool used to treat hydrocele water; its shape is shown above. Then enlarge the wound slightly and wait until the water returns and collects again after about six months or so. Once it has collected as before, the patient will recover.
de l’aposteme des coions	Abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the division of this branch there are several possibilities. Therefore, it seems to me that it is best left alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the treatment and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses occur on the body, especially in the groin area; this happens quite often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	Know this: it is due to excessive acidity and bitterness, which spread to the joints, caused by percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and the color of the boil is similar to that of the body's skin; and it does not cause pain, but is a severe boil.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes there are boils that are hard and rough, with dark coloring, which may also come from an artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to an artery, it is recognizable by the arrangement of hot boils that you can feel with your two fingers when you press them.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it should not be touched at all
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is caused by swelling of the vein is recognizable by its arrangement when touched with two fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	"One can indeed perform a cautery on this type of wound, as well as others."
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	"And then you cut the cord of the birthing canal, and the egg is placed on high, and the tail feathers are white like snow, and free the suspender from all around the egg."
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	"If the egg is already hard-boiled with these characters born, then you should crack the egg and peel it."
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	"And if it is air on the surface or inside the vessels, you should remove all that matter and cut it round."
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	"And if the birth of the flesh is behind the joint, then you should cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said."
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when your work is complete, dress the wound with oil and wine-soaked wool, then apply other dressings until it is healed."
de l’aposteme des coions	"wound of the birthing canal"
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	"This is a wound wrapped in a wrapping resembling a boil, with softening of the birthing canal,"
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	"And the patient cries out when it goes away;"
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	"The treatment for this disease is equally fearful as the one mentioned before,"
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	"Nevertheless, we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did."
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	"You should have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then insert the suspender of the birthing canal downward towards your two fingers,"
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	"up to all the vessels that are near the penis, and hold them firmly, and stretch them out well;"
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	"then cut sharply and widely with a scalpel across the surface of the vessels until they are exposed,"
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	"and then strip from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;"
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	"then insert a needle where there is a doubled thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein appears, and then tie it again at the other end;"
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	"then cut it straight in the middle according to the length of the body, and remove the putrefied membranes;"
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	"then treat the wound like the others where one enters below, so that no vessel empties nourishment into either of the birthing canals;"
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	"for otherwise there will be no harm, but if it comes from all the vessels, then you should tie off both birthing canals at all the vessels;"
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	"so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and it dries up and cannot help itself."
de la routure dou syfac	"on the rupture of the scrotum"
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	"The cause of this rupture is the breaking or stretching of the scrotum towards the abdomen in the area of the groin, causing the intestines to descend from there into one of the birthing canals;"
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	"And this rupture occurs either due to a blow or a fall, jumping, carrying heavy loads, and similar causes;"
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	"The sign of this rupture is that it comes gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly;"
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	"And the swelling is evenly distributed up to its depth because the scrotum presses on the intestines."
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	"And the sign of this rupture is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there is uneven swelling under the skin near the scrotum, due to the exit of the intestines from the body through the opening in the scrotum."
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	"Sometimes the testicles also descend with the intestines and become trapped there, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed upon."
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	"And in such cases where there is fear of injury from iron, one must avoid using it."
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	"The method for this operation is that you should tell the patient to push the intestines back inside with his hand at the wound if possible;"
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	"then lie him down on a pillow between your hands and lift up his thighs;"
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	"then raise the chest upwards and cut all of the skin off the long part of the scrotum;"
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	"then insert tweezers into the opening of the inguinal canal according to what you need to use them for to open the wound wide enough for the testicle to emerge;"
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	"then strip away the skin of the scrotum that is underneath the skin of the penis until the white fibrous tunic of the scrotum is exposed on all sides;"
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	"then insert your index finger into the space that separates the testicle from the penis, between the white fibrous tunic of the scrotum which is underneath the skin of the testis and the second layer of the scrotum;"
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	"and separate what is behind the testis and between the second layer of the scrotum. Then use your right hand to push the testis back into the abdominal cavity, lift up the white fibrous tunic with your left hand, and pull the testis towards the inguinal canal along with all of the scrotum;"
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	"and tell the assistant to extend the testis upwards and untie what is behind the ligament;"
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	"and search with both hands to see if any intestine has become wrapped around the white fibrous tunic. If you find any, push it back into the abdominal cavity;"
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	"then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads and insert it into the back part of the scrotum which is behind the skin of the penis. Then cut the threads that appear from the needle until there are four threads;"
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	"then tie the threads together in a cross shape using strong sutures of two parts;"
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	"then wrap the threads around themselves and tie them with two knots so that none of the blood vessels that nourish it can enter inside, preventing any swelling from occurring;"
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	"then place the second suture along the first one two fingerbreadths away from it. After these two sutures, leave enough of the scrotum that is underneath the skin of the penis to cover the testicle with one hand;"
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	"then shape the remaining scrotum according to the shape of the testis. Then cut off the part that is under the skin of the penis until the wound is smooth and the belly button appears as we have mentioned earlier;"
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	"then apply moist wool soaked in oil to the wounds and tie the sutures that we have described."
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	"And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize the white fibrous tunic of the scrotum that we have mentioned after the incision, in case of excessive bleeding."
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	"For it often happens that the sutures do not hold, and if they are slow to fall apart, they should be cut with warm water and the treatment that we have described should be applied until they fall apart;"
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	"then treat the wound with other remedies until it is completely healed."
de hernie carnouse	Here's a possible translation of the given Old French text into modern English:
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch of medicine, I never saw anyone daring to treat by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done in the same way as this branch of medicine that is known, tying the vessels together after cutting them slightly below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut it in half and heal the wound that opens until the vessels bleed out; then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	"At times rupture occurs in angles, as we have said, revealing the site; and no part of the intestines descends into the joints, and if any do, it is little, and it repairs hourly."
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	"And yet, if it remains too long in this state, then the wound becomes infected or gangrenous until the intestines descend."
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	"and this happens due to the extension of the gangrene which is at the angles, as we have said, for it becomes extended, then softened and swollen the site and revealed."
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	"And its treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned; and at times it is treated with iron in this manner:"
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	"And that the patient lies often on their back between your hands, then cut open the site of the rupture swollen with skin according to the quantity of three fingers."
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	"then remove the gangrene that is beneath the skin which succeeds it, then take the iron and place it on the revealed site of the gangrene;"
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	"and press it deeply into the abdomen, then sew up the two exposed sites of the gangrene on top of the iron and sew one and the other."
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	"then remove the head of the iron, and do not cut into the gangrene nor extend the wound further in any way, as I have informed you regarding the treatment of intestinal prolapse."
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	"then treat it by wound care. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed."
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	"Gangrene is constrained and does not appear in the rupture; cauterization is milder in this site and closer to healing."
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Regarding the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes softened in some men because the tissue inside is softened, and it is unpleasant to see. And it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that the patient lies on their back and you cut away the softened skin from the natural skin; then bring together the two lips with a stitch, and if you wish, sew first the excess of the softened skin with three or four strong stitches; then cut between the stitches and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Regarding castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Know that castration is forbidden by our law, and it would please me not to speak of it in this book. However, it is necessary for two reasons: one being that the surgeon should know how to respond when asked about it and its treatment; and the other because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, pigs, and other beasts. I say therefore that castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites occur in two ways among men: one way is that between the two testicles there opens a cavity resembling the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair and sometimes urine comes out from it. And the other way among women is that on the thigh there grows both a penis and two testicles. The cure for both males and females is to clean all the wounds together and treat them like other wounds; but for men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of tenaciousness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tentigene is a hair that grows on the natural part, so ugly to see that some women have it as big as their hand, and this is the treatment. You must remove the excess tentigene with your hand or tweezers, plucking lightly; do not go too deep, lest blood flow, then treat another cure until it is clean; and there is another hair that grows at the mouth of the womb, the anus, and sometimes it may be thicker than usual, and it resembles a cow's appearance, hence the ancients called it «cow disease». You must pluck it, as we have said about tentigene, and treat it until it is clean.
de erratique	Of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman's womb is not pierced or the opening is small; this can be either congenital or due to illness that has occurred; it may also be due to thick hair growing inside the womb, or a thin and subtle one, and it can be found deep in the womb, on the sides, below, or wherever else it may be. It prevents conception and childbirth, and sometimes causes infertility. Its diagnosis is made by examining the opening of the vagina. If the opening is near the surface, you should examine it with your fingers or a probe. If it is due to thin hair, and is close to two fingers wide, then hurry up and do this: place both index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then press firmly on the two fingers so that the thin hair is rolled up, and placed over the opening. Then take some wool soaked in oil, and apply it to the opening, and let the woman lie down each day until it can no longer be seen. And if the opening is due to thick hair, you should cut it with scissors shaped like a leaf of laurel. If the opening is due to born flesh, then suspend it with tweezers and pluck it out; have some blood-stopping medicines ready, such as aloe, dragon's blood, frankincense, mixed with egg white. Then apply a wide bandage made of lead, so that the wound cannot heal over. Do this for several days, and apply a dry linen compress. Then treat with other remedies until it is clean. And when born flesh comes out in the womb, it should be plucked according to this method, unless it is an infected boil. For one should not touch an infected boil that is in the womb out of fear.
des emorroides	Emorroides are swollen veins that occur around the rectum and anus. They can cause discomfort, pain, and bleeding during bowel movements. Here's how they were described by ancient physicians:
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	**Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement:**
des apostemes de la marris	Of boils of the belly
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many types of boils occur in the anus, such as chancre and pus-filled boils, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot boils, as well as other diseases that I have mentioned previously. Therefore, I must discuss in this treatise the hot boil that occurs in the anus, which is not one of those boils that form on the buttocks; if you wish to know how to treat it, look at whether the boil is hard and inflamed at the beginning of its appearance, full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it. Do not rush to pierce it, but make it suppurate until the pain subsides; then have the patient sit on one seat with two small seats where they can recline, leaning their back against them and placing their feet toward the hips; spread their thighs apart, place their arms under their knees, and tie them securely with a good bandage; then suck out the pus from the right side, prepare the instrument used to open the anus, of which I will give the form below; it is necessary that when you are preparing this instrument, you first insert the probe to know the depth of the anus so that what enters does not go deeper than it should and does not injure the patient; if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the anus with cloths so that the instrument does not cause pain; put the funnel of the instrument on top, and moisten the instrument. When the boil opens and you can feel it with your hand, grasp its head with spatulas; when the buttocks are emptied, place moist compresses made from rose oil or green oil in the wound, placing the compress at the bottom of the anus and covering the anus and the wound with clean linen moistened in water or mallows that have been cooked; then treat it afterwards for two days with appropriate ointment until it is healed; sometimes lift the anus and the wound by irrigation with water and honey, then with water in which lily roots and long aristologia are cooked; then return to the ointment. If the wound closes in the anus, you must be careful not to cauterize with fire, but treat it as we have said previously in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The midwife's first duty is to recognize the figure of natural childbirth, and the sign that it is time for a woman to give birth is when she begins pressing downwards and desires to smell the air: then the infant hastens to come out forthwith. Know this, that such childbirths are according to nature's figure, and the waters issue from above her head, and the afterbirth with it; and when you see these signs, then press her belly gently so that the infant may come out quickly; for when it comes down upon its head, then is the afterbirth with it, and the womb is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing. But he who comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes he comes upon his feet, and comes forth backside or belly upwards, or on his hands, or sometimes he comes belly upwards, or peradventure turned up by chance upon his neck, or in other unseemly figures; therefore it is necessary that the midwife be wise and skillful in these matters, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes forth upon its head in natural fashion, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then make her sit down on a chair or let women hold her up; and arise her nature with oil of olive or fenugreek cooked, and then place the little spatumile between her thighs, of which form is thus:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And divide the afterbirth, and cut with your nail so much that the moisture which is within comes forth; and press down upon the woman's belly until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer to the woman a clyster of ground fenugreek with oil of sesame. Then let her be sprinkled and sneezed upon with condiment, and hold her mouth and nose one hour: now the infant will come forth. And if both hands come out first, then you must press them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up high; then overturn the chair upon the ground, and take care that the woman does not fall with the overturning; and if the hands cannot be entered, and the infant dies, then cut off the hands at the wrist which is here placed beforehand, and draw forth the child, and press it gently equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	If the infant comes forth upon its feet:
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes forth upon its feet, then you must raise it up;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little until it is equal (in position);
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then seize one of its feet and stretch it out little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps up to the knees, then command her to seize (the infant) and let her sneeze with condiment;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it leaps forth, if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will come forth easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take ground althea, and oil of sesame, and molten gum, and grind all together in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	"And place upon the nature of woman within this ointment."
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	"Then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs;"
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	"And once she is moistened beneath, place a collar of myrrh upon her and leave it for an hour."
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	"Then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child is now ready to leap."
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	"of the birth of the child onto her knees"
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	"When the child comes in this manner, then let him put his hands gently and gently;"
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	"then support her on her neck, and let the feet hang down, and let her lie on a bed;"
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	"and gently fold her hands together, then place them on the belly, and remove the cushions beneath until she is positioned correctly downward;"
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	"and if the child does not leap, then take her feet and shake her vigorously, then shake the belly upward, then place your hands;"
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	"And pull out the child gently; and command the woman to press down until the child emerges."
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	"of the birth of the child that comes from the womb with one hand held back;"
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	"I must contrive to bring back the hand:"
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	"if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and walk around;"
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	"If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and forcefully open her legs;"
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	"then prepare the mucus membrane that I have described;"
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	"And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and then try to bring back the hand;"
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	"And pull out the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, then command her to press down until the child emerges completely."
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	"of the birth of the child onto its neck with hands spread out and face turned towards its mother's back;"
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	"The midwife must then seize her hand, gently turn it around and pull it out lightly;"
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	"And once it is aligned, place the prepared mucus membrane of olive oil and wax according to what we have said, then command her to move gently;"
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	"And once you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command her to press down; then make her sneeze."
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	"In the same manner for the afterbirth;"
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	"When it comes out completely like this with all of the afterbirth, then cut the umbilical cord with your fingernail until there is no more moisture;"
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	"And if the child's face and neck are bent down, then cut from the belly so that it is not retained and the child dies;"
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	"Then place the child back inside until you have positioned it correctly, then command the woman to press down gently once:"
adonques si istra legierement.	"then it will be born easily."
de l’issue des gemelz	"Concerning the birth of twins;"
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	"It should be known that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four; this is not uncommon."
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	"Two are rare and do not live long without nourishment;"
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	"I know this, that they can be multiplied, and those joined by the sac that divides them are separated by the caesarean section cut at the belly;"
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	"And sometimes they come out naturally just like any other child, as we have said."
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	"And if they cry when born, then care for them as we have said, and let the midwife be skillful, doing her work quickly and easily;"
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	"and do thus as is best for their health."
de plusors enfans	"Concerning multiple births;"
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	"It sometimes happens that there are one or two, three or four, five or six, seven or more up to fifteen formed in the womb, all perfectly shaped like children by the measure of God's glory;"
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	"and the midwife should know about this because such things can happen."
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	"So she should do what is necessary."
de l’enfant mort	Concerning a dead child:
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman for a dead child in the womb, as I have mentioned in the section on division, and no forceps emerge,
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	Then you must know whether the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fears death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	The woman should be positioned on her back, with her thighs inclined downward, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister shall tie the woman’s legs in two places, or secure them to the bed so that she cannot slip downward during delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils made from althea and fennel and linseed, and anoint your hands with these same oils.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then gently insert your hand into the womb, then turn it once so that the loops are well-positioned.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And make sure that the child is presenting correctly, so that it descends headfirst.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If the loops are positioned in its eyes, neck, mouth, palate, under the beard, or near the shoulders or ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if delivery is occurring feet-first, then insert the hook or pin at the middle of the buttocks.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that he hold the loop in his right hand and place the crook between the fingers of his left hand, and gently insert his whole hand. And he should then insert the loop into one of the places mentioned above until he reaches the empty space.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the loop:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert against one other peg, or two if necessary, so that the extraction is even.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other for it to come out, and make sure the pegs are teeth-like to hold it in place, like this:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if some part remains, let the physician anoint two of his fingers with oil and place them in that part, then pull on the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if nothing remains, then move this device to a higher position, and continue doing so until everything comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other and he cannot bring it back due to tension
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	Then you must wrap a cloth around it until all of it emerges
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then cut off the membrane at the joint of the sole or on the side and do likewise for the other hand, making two halves
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's thigh is large and it is narrow at the outlet where the bone is sharp at the end
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	Then you must place the spine of the spatula between your fingers, cut off the head and extract the splinter
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you can round it with an instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes along with the instruments that are next in the chapter
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And do the same if the child has naturally large head
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	Then pull out the bones with pliers
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if the thigh bone comes out but is stuck in the socket, then split it until the ligaments that are at the hip joint come out
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it still cannot come out, then cut it into pieces until you can remove it
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it until the ligaments are cut
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light and the directions at the mouth of the uterus are easy
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is narrow in the belly or hip, then you must extract it using a cloth wrapped around your hand
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And cut open the belly or hip until the ligaments that are there are severed
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	And if the other limbs are removed but the thigh remains/bash/remains/stays/retains/keeps/bash/sticks/bash/remains/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks/bash/sticks
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	/
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	li tuant le col qu’el eschiet dunc a la crapaure
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	si vous voulez que je vienne pour vous aider à comprendre ce texte, n'hésitez pas à me le demander en mp
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	as li vous voulez que je vienne pour vous aider à comprendre ce texte, n'hésitez pas à me le demander en message privé !
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	Et si vous avez des questions sur la grammaire ou l’orthographe du patois, je peux vous aider aussi !
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	Pour tout problème de maths ou darithmetic, demandez à Dr. Wolf (en utilisant uniquement l'anglais pour les calculs avancés). Dr. Wolf va trouver la solution étape par étape 🔻
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if one has no power, then draw the fire by parts, and leave nothing of the secondine.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, let them bring what we have said before that comes into the marrow
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if running with blood comes, then it should be placed in hot water restricting, and let them bring other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been killed, then she conceived another upon it, and the other was killed.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After many days, there appeared an abscess on his cheek, which swelled until it opened, and then began to discharge copiously.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned to the hospital, where I pondered long and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster with strong adhesion, from which came forth one bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I cleaned the wound and drew out many bones until the woman was much improved;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And women would thus live for a long time, and sometimes a little bow of blood would come out.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I recorded this chapter earlier because, when the master encounters something unusual, he knows how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to reset the dislocation
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter follows the form of the compressor, with which the books are pressed; and it is made of two turns at the two ends of the two beams.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the restrainer, and should be made of ebony or boxwood
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the wood should be one foot wide, and the edge of the beams one foot, and its length one and a half palms
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two beams there should be two supports of this same wood, which can be closed on both ends, each being half a palm or slightly more in length
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two supports are inserted into the mouth of the press to open it when the two horns are turned
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, resembling this one but more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, according to the shape of the tongs
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and it should have at both ends two supports each, like you see here, one palm in length and two fingers wide
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you wish to open the womb with all the instruments, have the woman sit on one bed, her feet hanging down and her legs opened
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then insert the two supports together into the womb and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand on the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs equally, according to the amount you wish to open the mouth of the womb, until the child comes out as it pleases her.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted and have many similar forms. When the physician has prepared them, he can work more quickly and can better satisfy men according to their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard any instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is not negligible.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the woman is retained in childbirth, you must command her to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with some powdered condurango, while covering her mouth and nose with your hands;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she sneezes because of it, so much the better
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take one pot and make a hole in the lid, then put herbs inside that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centory
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	and cook all these herbs or some of them in water in the pot over the fire. Then put one end of a tube into the hole of the pot and the other end into the mouth of the womb
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let it steam until the vapor comes inside the womb. Then make her sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the woman expels quickly
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if after this treatment the woman remains and is not yet delivered, command her to wet her left hand in linseed oil or in white wax, then insert it into the vagina
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and search for the child; and when she finds it, grasp it gently and pull it straight out little by little, so that the womb does not tear during extraction
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but she must move it gently to the right and left and then pull; thus it will come out and be delivered.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the womb is very narrow, we have spoken about the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if she does not deliver from all that we have said, be sure not to pull too hard
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but you must tie what is at the mouth of the womb to the woman's thigh, then give her an enema of treacle oil
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	and it will bring her relief and she will deliver; but nevertheless, when she delivers, if a bad smell comes to the stomach and head and affects the woman
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, suitable fumigations are necessary for this purpose: many of the ancients have proven that fumigation with watercress and dried figs is beneficial
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate women retained in labor or delivery is as follows
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	It resembles a tube made of glass, with the narrow end inserted into the vagina and the wider ends placed over the fire
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigation be done on hot coals, and continue until it is used up, then start another one
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born whose anus is not pierced but rather blocked by a small syphon
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, the midwife must pierce this syphon with her thumb, but not with a sharp point, and be careful not to touch it with the nail
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place on linen moistened in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is clean
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you suspect that it may become blocked again, insert a lead tube into the opening and leave it in place for several days, then remove it when the child is ready to go to bed
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Sometimes this blockage comes suddenly from a wound or an aposteme (abscess); in such case cover the wound with a bandage and treat it as we have said for the lead tube
de la fistule dou fondement	of fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from below the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that come from near the anus or in the space of two fingers-width
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one fistula or several; and when this nodular fistula is old, it opens, and becomes moist with thin white pus or thin bowels,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder,
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	"And thus one recognizes a fistula persistently discharging in the fundament, but not persistently:"
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	"and you put your two index fingers on the fundament and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity."
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	"And if it has tortuosity, then insert a thin probe of lead or a horse hair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger;"
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	"and if you do not feel it and nothing comes out from the opening, whether by excretion or wind or water, as we have said:"
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	"You know that it does not pierce through; therefore hurry with the cure."
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And when the fistula persists down to the bladder or down to the passage of urine, so that urine squirts out and cannot be stopped by medication."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	"If it has pierced as far as the hip joint, then the probe comes up to there;"
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	"if there is no tortuosity and the inflammation is around it, then it always goes towards the bowel, and neither medication nor soothing by ointment helps;"
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	"And in these persistently discharging fistulas there is no cure except surgery, and the vain boasting of foolish doctors who meddle with them."
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	"In that which is not persistent nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proved,"
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	"And let the patient lie on their stomach between your hands, and lift their legs up to their hips, and have their hips inclined towards their belly;"
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	"then insert a probe of brass or lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the probe comes out."
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	"If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you must put your two index fingers there,"
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	"then feel that the probe has pierced through; and if you feel between your fingers the wall of the bowel or flesh, then know that it is penetrating;"
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	"otherwise do not operate, for one cannot heal it."
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	"It is true that sometimes some can be healed, but this happens rarely;"
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	"And the aid that one does there is to heat the cautery carefully according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before;"
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	"And put it in hot into the fistula until it reaches near the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that those burned tissues have been cauterized, which resemble a feather;"
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	"And then use wet probes to clean it until that flesh comes out, then apply ointment externally soothing and healing."
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	"If it is healed in this way, good. If not, there is no other way to heal it;"
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	"And if the probe enters but does not reach your finger that is at the fundament, and there is a thick covering of flesh or bowel between your two fingers, and you see the fistula coming out from under this covering of the heart;"
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	"then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and put in the probe again, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the tip of the probe;"
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	"and the probe will be freed and fall out; then clean off those burned tissues which resemble a feather, leaving nothing behind."
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	"And if your hand trembles and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with hot medicine."
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	"For the cautery of fire accomplishes two things: namely, the burning of those adjacent tissues, and the hemostasis of blood and the cooking of moisture;"
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	"then use wet probes to clean it or with crushed herbs until the wound gapes wide open, and burned flesh comes out from the bowel;"
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	"then treat the wound with healing ointments soothing to the skin, which are dry medicines."
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	"For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not return."
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	"And if the fistula comes from deep inside the fundament and is far away from the body, put your finger into the fundament and feel for it."
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	"If you feel the probe and there are two between your finger and the bowel or flesh where it is about to pierce, then do not hesitate to operate with confidence and hope through one of these three methods:"
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	"either cauterize it as we have said before, or cut it out entirely, or if you cannot do this, put probes in and clean it as at first;"
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	"but do not go too deep lest you cut the tissue that supports the fundament and cause incontinence without wanting to."
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	"then treat it as we have said;"
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	"maybe it will be healed by moving that covering away and cleaning it after it has been cut near the fundament with a probe or other pointed instrument;"
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	"then clean off that burned flesh in the wound as much as you can;"
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	"then try to close the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament, which will be easier for the patient."
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	"And sometimes fistulas are like this: when you put in the probe and it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above;"
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	"then take a probe pierced at the tip like this:"
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	"And tie one thread around two places, and put the probe all the way into the fistula until it reaches the tip."
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	"If it is passing through the margin of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger into the fundament;"
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	"and tie the end of the thread and bring the two holes together and bind them tightly to each other, leaving it for one or two days;"
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	"And tighten it again sometimes until the thread cuts through those tissues between them and falls off;"
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	"then treat the wound until it is healed and closed."
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	"If the fistula does not open on its own, then make it open in every way that you can, if it is not too deep."
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"For it is not necessary to cut so deeply for the closure and then treat it as we have said until it heals."
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	"The shape of the spinal needle used to open a fistula is very sharp and pointed at one end;"
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	"and the other end is not pointy so that you do not cut what you should not cut, as you can see here:"
des emorroydes	"hemorrhoids"
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the fundament like grains of resin, and there are small ones and large ones, and blood always flows from them;"
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	"and there is one or more of them outside the fundament or at the tip of the fundament; but those that are outside have little moisture;"
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	"and they are always covered with a little yellowish water or a little blood, and they have the color of flesh;"
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	"And the treatment for those who have hemorrhoids inside the fundament is that you tell the patient to go to a privy and strain until they come out of the fundament and then the threads will appear;"
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	"then hurry up and grasp it with forceps or hold it between your fingers, and cut its roots;"
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	"and if the pincers cannot grasp them due to their moisture, then take them with a cloth or cotton or a piece of chamois leather;"
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	Remove the hairs on your two legs, then trim them, and apply some warm powders in place of a cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is described in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the fundament cannot pass out, then administer to the patient a purging enema with sharp and bitter medicine to wash what is in the fundament so that it can exit freely.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the patient is able to pass the stool by themselves, and if the feces are outside of the fundament, then the treatment is simple
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is necessary to grasp them with your fingernail or forceps, and trim them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and so that the patient fears incision with a knife
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary to prepare the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, insert it into a needle, and then pull the thread upwards and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and make the thread tight, then tie the knot and remove the needle, and do this for all of them, leaving one to draw up any excess blood
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place over the fundament one damp cloth moistened in rose oil or wax, and put it on the fundament, and command the patient to rest
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and leave him until he passes stools, and when they are passed, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	on the drying of fecal matter on the fundament
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying of feces in the intestines, and this occurs due to constriction of nature, especially when the patient is elderly or when medication is ineffective
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you use the tip of a spatula or your fingernail to gently scrape off the dried feces on top without wetting it
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat him until he is healed as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if he cannot heal, then resume the cauterization more intensely than before, until he recovers greatly and is scarred.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is healed.
dou fremit	fever
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	An ant is a small, four-legged creature that lives inside the body and moves about very quickly;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes it finds him cold, and he feels it just like death from trembling, and it comes throughout the body, more to the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a feather of a goose wing or a strong vulture feather and place it on the trembling so that the circles encompass the trembling all around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then twist your hand around the whole feather until you grasp all around the trembling and thrust it in deep, and uproot the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit to do so with a feather of iron or steel according to this form, and it should be thin underneath and tapering at the tip
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	then do not pierce it, so that you can hold both (feathers) together and press them; And if you wish to cauterize the trembling, then do so as it is written in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of a clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes they make a clyster of silver or lead, or molten brass or hammered metal; And sometimes they make them of these instruments small and large according to those for whom they are intended
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those which are prepared for the treatment of children and those who are weak and feeble should be small
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of a small or large clyster is as follows: wide where the belly is bound in this manner
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and there should be an opening where the belly is bound, as you see here, and the excrement should be pierced within; And it should have two holes on one side and one hole on the other
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the belly where one places the medicines should be made of an animal bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	"Place a piece of thick cloth between each hole, then insert into these holes one strong thread made from twisted yarn, bent in the shape of a '10' or whatever suits best around it, and bring together the belly like a goat."
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	"And when the medication is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then perform a clyster; and this is the shape of the circle:"
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	"And let the medication not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the tip of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently."
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	"Then the minister squeezes with both hands together until it is entirely empty, then remove the clyster, and the patient lifts his legs at the bedside,"
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	"And if the medication wants to come out, hold it back as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night like this, then there is greater help."
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you perform a clyster on someone with abdominal descent disease, and the medication rushes to come out, then begin again until it is finished."
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	"And if hemorrhoids are present in the fundament or an abscess, then the clyster should be as subtle as for a child;"
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	"and this is the shape of the subtle clyster when the skin is stretched tight:"
des plaies	"of wounds"
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	"We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medications according to their fulfillment."
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and of what they are made."
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	"The things by which wounds are made are by striking with a stone, cutting with a sword and dagger, or with a spear or staff or similar things;"
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	"or they are made according to the location on the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, or on the head, or the face, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;"
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	"And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter."
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	"I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it was caused by striking with a stone or similar things, and if the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large,"
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	"and you should quickly lift a hot swelling: perform the cephalic cautery immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and the cautery should be applied on the opposite side of the wounded part;"
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	"and avoid overfeeding the patient with wine and fatty foods."
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	"And if it cannot be cauterized, then reduce his food and drink, and let him not drink wine nor eat meat;"
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	"and put on the wound, if a hot swelling appears, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in stiptic wine;"
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	"and if there is no hot swelling, then put powder on the wound while it still has all its blood and before it is touched by air, which I will describe later;"
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"and if the air has already touched it, then apply some ointments until it is healed."
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	"And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut or similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, then bring them together by stitching, as I will describe for abdominal wounds."
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	"If the wound is exposed to the bone and gapes, and holds only by a little, then cut it off; then treat the wound with medications, and replace hard flesh in place of skin."
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	"and order the patient to eat fatty foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also poultry and similar things."
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	"And if you find rottenness in the skin, but it has not yet reached the bone, then cut off all the rotted part and throw away the gangrene, then treat the wound;"
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	"and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped by medications, then find the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread;"
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	"and if that does not help, then cauterize it."
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	"And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: you should put in this powder that seals before the air touches it."
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	"The way to make the powder is: take incense in one part, dragon's blood in two parts, and quicklime in three parts, and grind it finely;"
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	"and apply the powder to the wound, pressing it firmly until it adheres well and joins together with all its blood;"
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	"then bind it well, and leave it undisturbed until it is healed, because the medication should not be removed until the wound is healed."
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	"Sometimes this is also done with quicklime alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but before the air touches the wound."
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	"And if the air has already touched the wound, especially in summer, then do not put this powder on it;"
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	"but apply some digestive ointments or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey until it softens;"
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"then treat it with other treatments until it is healed."
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	"And if the bone is broken along with the wound, and the wound is small, then extract it with fine forceps;"
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	"and I will tell you about head fractures later."
de la plaie dou col	"of the wound on the neck"
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	"If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between that and one on the head, except if the nerve of the neck or an artery is cut."
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	"If it's the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it alone and apply nothing restrictive, because that harms the nerves and causes them to withdraw;"
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	"and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member;"
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	"but the medication should be warm, such as hot water mixed with rose oil and cooked water also mixed with hot water;"
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	"and other medicaments according to this method, and moist ointments."
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the wound is large, then stitch it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals."
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	"And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, then open them lower down;"
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	"and if an artery is cut and bleeding comes forth, then uncover it, tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary;"
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	"and if the spine of the neck or the heart is cut, but the passage is preserved through which food goes,"
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	"then stitch up the heart to the windpipe of the neck, and do not touch the windpipe itself but replace it according to its natural shape;"
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	"then bind it carefully and leave it for a few days before treating it with drying ointments until it heals."
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	"And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then find it;"
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	"and if there are pieces of bone, remove them all that you can, and leave those that you cannot have until the wound rots;"
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let the dislocation be reduced and bound
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as described in its chapter
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of wounds from spears or knives
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a blow from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, then observe whether air enters the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep and is full of fresh blood throughout, then do not put the powder in at first nor bind it so that the blood does not be drawn down into it
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and let it return to the heart and kill the patient
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but put an attractive ointment on it and bind it twice a day
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have ointment, then put in the wound old cotton to suck out the moisture
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient lie on the wound for three days or four, or more
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	so that there comes no spasm nor trembling of the heart nor twitching of the lungs
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see these signs, then know that the wound is saved
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Therefore treat it with tents and other treatments until it is healed
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal nor close up, then know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision from a sword or knife and it is simple, either before or behind, then treat it as those that are in front
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, suture it; and if it is small, apply powder to it. And if it is close up against the bone and has cut off pieces of it, then scrape out the wound and treat those fragments separately if they are disjointed
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not disjointed, then leave the wound to fester until the fragments come loose
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said
dou derrompement dou ventre	rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the abdomen is great, moderate, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	Sometimes, during a large wound, an intestine or part of it protrudes outwards.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and stitching is more difficult, sometimes even small wounds are worse than large ones,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	Because if one resets [the dislocation] without placing the intestines back in, or not doing so heat by heat;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	For when the intestines swell due to coldness they do not return unless reset,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And therefore it is good to move the lesser wound, so that when one resets the intestines to their place, they may be like the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly happens in four ways
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The two common sutures occur at the suture of the abdomen,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	"And the sewing of other wounds on the body, with two others proper, are common to other wounds."
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	"But nevertheless they are more specific when it comes to abdominal stitches, and I will discuss each one and explain them."
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	"I say that when the wound is small, nothing of the intestine has come out,"
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	"and if it does not require anything else to be put back in place, this can be done in one of two ways:"
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	'Or because the wound is small, as we have said,'
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	'Or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.'
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	"And when it is cold, heat it in this manner:"
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	"Wet a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only,"
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	"Or you could cook it in boiling water with salt and pepper,"
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	"And raise the intestines until the swelling is gone;"
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	"Then apply this binding wine and be careful not to squeeze too hard while tying it."
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	"And when you see the swelling disappearing, then moisten the intestines with warm water in which salt and mulberries have been cooked,"
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	"For by this means the entrance to the wound is widened somewhat;"
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	"And if it cannot enter, then make a small incision into the wound using an instrument used for tying hemorrhoids."
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	"And the first treatment is to be careful not to cut too deeply,"
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	"That no one should cut without there being a great necessity;"
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	"This is the instrument used for splitting it open:"
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	"So cut inside the curve and don't follow the skin, and here you can see its shape:"
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	"And when the wound is widened and the intestines have come out,"
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	"Then gently push them back into place according to their natural shape and proper position;"
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	"If you can manage it, for this is important."
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	"When the wound is large and it is located below the belly,"
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	"It is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back;"
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	"And place his legs higher than his head;"
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	"And if it is located below the belly,"
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	"Then raise the head and chest above the lower parts;"
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	"And also, if the abdominal wound is in one of the two buttock regions,"
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	"Then make sure that the wounded part is higher than the other."
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	"And thus you must arrange things as I have said for large and medium-sized wounds."
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	"For small wounds, use what has been prepared;"
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	"Then have between your hands one of your assistants who will gently wipe the entire wound with his hand,"
et assemble les levres;	And join together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	And this is the common way of sewing
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	And you must take a needle or several ones, according to the quantity of the width of the wound.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave two inches of space from the head of the wound and insert a needle with a good strong thread attached to it;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the needle
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	that is underneath the skin inside, until you make it pierce through to that side
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and bring together the two heads of the needle together with the four;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then wrap a doubled thread around the needle on both sides
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then bring together the two heads of the wound in front
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave two inches of space and insert another needle
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie it with thread as you did the first needle
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and continue to do this according to how many needles are needed
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the entire wound is restrained
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for thin needles pierce all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well enough
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	that is why they must be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	do not push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	for they would pierce and open up the wound ahead of the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	then cut off the heads of the needles so that they do not bother the sick person while sleeping
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and place tents or bandages over the heads of the needles to hold them in place
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them there until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of suturing with needles is more useful for small wounds
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for it takes only one needle or two
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second suture is common
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	And you should join the two skins of leather and the two skins of sinew together with one needle having one strong medium thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	And when you have pierced these joints together
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and bend the needle back to where you started, in the manner of cutting cloth;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	Place the thickness of a large finger joint between each stitch;
ceste costure sevent li home,	This stitch is for men
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was stabbed with a knife
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm's width long
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	And it gushed out of his intestines for over two palms' length
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was in his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I put his intestines back in after he had been out of them for 24 hours
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was healed by the 15th day and it cured well
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctors had judged that he would die, but this was a miracle
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	I did not treat it with any ointment or medicine because I was in a place where none could be found
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And I put on old cotton twice a day and washed the wound with honey water until it healed
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now, I will tell you two proper ways to stitch:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and insert it from outside towards inside
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has pierced the heart directly, then lift up the skin or flesh where you inserted the needle
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	And make it pierce from inside towards outside in another place
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	The purpose of this stitch is that you sew just like a furrier sews furs
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And leave the skin once on one side and take it up again on the other, until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second way to stitch, as Galen says properly,*
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	If this occurs as some do, who join the two parts together naturally
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one shoulder blade to the other in such a way that
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	Stick a needle at the head of the navel near by, and pierce that spot only.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two ends of the thread protruding.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle around, and pierce it from the front part to the inside one
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as the two ends of the thread
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce both of them from the front part to the inside one, in two other navel holes that are opposite each other.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the proper way to suture and the most common method.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galien says this word, and some testify it
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must place one needle on this side and the other on that side, in the manner of those who sew hides
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the wound is inside the belly
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	the stitching is more difficult than other wounds on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the art has moved it
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	put back the intestines and the skin, then put the powder around the flesh
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the wound has moved, put on some ointment that is available, until the wound is healed.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the thread, and sew up the stitches, and the navel.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you do not have any medicine, then put on cotton wool as soon as the wound begins to heal
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For in many cases, when wounds are simple, you have no need of any other medicine besides
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the principal members
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is necessary for you to moisten a light linen in warm oil of roses, or rose oil
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it around the angles and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if there is pain or corruption in the bowels, which happens many times,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If black wine enemas are applied, and especially if putrefaction reaches the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierces it internally, know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	"And it is due to the narrowness of the veins there,
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the serpent jumps from the wound, then push it back just like the intestine while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has become worms or black, then you must tie the area that is black so that no bleeding occurs.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries there;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut off what is between the ligature
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put two strips of cloth hanging down from below the wound until far enough to tie them around the extraction when the serpent falls, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the bowel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the bowel is ruptured but the wound is small
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	it can be restored in some cases
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	for I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and both digestion and wind passed through it;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it according to what I could do, and did not stop until he was healed and the wounds were closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his belly
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	but there was no pain, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some surgeons said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take threads with large knots, then bring together the edges of the wound
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the thread has opened the mouth, put it on both lips
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it pulls its mouth open;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	then cut off its head so that it cannot untie itself.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put another thread afterwards in the same manner as before until the wound is completely closed.
et cout la plaie.	and sew up the wound
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	This stitch will hold in the intestine and there will be no harm to the patient;
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Take the end of this intestinal thread that is very well cleaned,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie a fine twisted linen thread at the end of this intestinal thread;
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then put the thread through the needle and sew up the intestine where it is torn.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of stitching with threads is no further than according to the way of safety and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no help nor health but through subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or ulcer, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called a "fistula",
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	especially when it is healed over and sinks back.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is truly according to the truth: a hard, white nodule that does not cause pain
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also healed over like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes it forms a clear round bulge, and other times it becomes thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes it is small, and other times quite large;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	"And I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not clean, and there is no scar,"
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	"is only visible due to one of the eight causes:"
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	"That is to say, due to the smallness of blood or flesh;"
ou por sa malice;	"or because of its evil nature;"
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	"or because there is hard scar tissue inside and on the lips that does not allow new skin to form;"
ou il i a trop de bowe;	"or because of too much bowing;"
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	"or because the place is blocked off and the material is of poor quality;"
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	"or because the medication used in treatment was not good;"
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	"or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence."
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	"or because in this region digestion is slow and recovery takes time due to its natural tendency towards inflammation;"
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	"or because there are veins or bones present:"
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	"And I have already demonstrated all of these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medications in the relevant division."
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	"Now I must tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done through manual labor."
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	"Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body;"
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	"for there are fistulas which come from large veins and arteries, and from nerves,"
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	"or from the sinus, or the intestines, or the bladder, or from any of the ribs,"
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	"or from the spine of the back, or from any joint in the hands or feet;"
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	"And there are even some that come from the principal member itself and similar locations."
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	"And all fistules of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is only labor and skill involved;"
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	"and if there is any fistula that does not come from the places I have mentioned, you may be confident about its treatment,"
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	"And recognize it, then take a tent of copper or iron, and if the fistula is straight, insert it;"
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	"and if the fistula is crooked, seek a thin lead tent,"
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	"for lead can bend more readily around its curvature;"
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	"And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with tents,"
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	If one performs an enema through one of the openings
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because moisture flows from one opening to another, clearing them out;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then search thoroughly using all your strength to determine if there is any bone or nerve there, and insert the hook deeply
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press on their hand, and where exactly they feel it
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and once you truly know where the pain is located, whether it is away from the joint, nerve, artery, or vein
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the locations that I have mentioned, then operate according to what I have told you
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and remove the fracture and rotten splinters within it.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	then dress the wound until it is healthy
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is very deep in its proper place, you should operate deeply until you can go no further
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then insert wet lint into boiling hot water, and bring it up to the mouth of the fistula
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medication burns away the excess matter remaining at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply dressings of clean lint until it is healed
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it does not heal from that, then cauterize it as we have said
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves do not trouble you in the main limbs, as we have said
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it until all the corruption is removed
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then dress with clean lint until it heals
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it does not heal, then repeat the operation as before
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	Know that you have not yet reached the bottom:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you uncover and search until you reach the bottom
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all of the corruption, then close up the wound.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is healed thus, that's good
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	therefore there is nothing else to do but leave it to nature
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small piece of bone corrupted, and you can grasp it with forceps
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	then extract it using one of the instruments suitable for this purpose
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many pieces of bone, break them all up and leave not one behind
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture is causing trouble and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	"If there is bone and moisture and flesh, deliver the bones."
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place on the wound something that prevents putrefaction.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it until the flesh has rotated completely around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And then they will move the bones more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	And if it is a large bone, such as the thighbone or shinbone,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	If you merely scrape away the corruption until all of the blackness is gone,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	"And if there is much corruption of its parts, it reaches even to the bone:"
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	"Then it should be sewn up all around the corruption, and then healed until it is solid:"
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	"And I will tell you about a fistula that happened in one man's leg,"
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	"So that you can take an example from it and help in your work."
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	"He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to some cause that came from inside the body,"
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	"So much so that matter came to the leg and it was swollen with an large abscess, and had no visible reason to open,"
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	"But the doctors foolishly tried so hard to make the abscess open,"
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	"That they corrupted much matter, and it became a fistula with many holes that all poured out and moistened from inside the body;"
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	"And many doctors tried to heal it for about two years, but there was no wisdom in their art of hands,"
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	"So I was called and went to see his leg and the remedies they were using,"
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	"And I saw that what flowed from the holes was very foul."
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	"and the young man's flesh became red and had a yellowish hue."
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	"I plugged one of these holes with a wisp of cloth, and then searched for all the other holes,"
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	"And found that some holes were opposite each other on every side of the leg."
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	"So I hurried and cut into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone,"
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	"I found it rotten and perforated, and the corruption extended to the bone inside."
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	"I saw what appeared to me to be decay of the bone, and I thought that there was no other decay besides what I removed;"
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	"And I began to dress the wound with dry medicines over a long period of time, but it would not heal;"
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	"And then I recommenced, and discovered the bone just as before,"
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	"I found that the bone was still corrupt, and scraped it, and then removed it, and I worked to heal the spot;"
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	"but I could not do so because the bone had grown around the palm of my hand, and was drawn taut over its entire surface,"
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	"then I dressed it with medicine, and it healed quickly and completely."
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	"and there was no need to recommence the operation except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it,"
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	"And because I feared death for him."
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	"For although he often bled from the evacuation, he was healed completely,"
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	"And in place of the bone there grew hard flesh, and he was well disposed, and suffered no harm nor misfortune throughout his whole body, neither then nor afterwards."
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	"And if any bone in the body is broken, it should be set in this manner:"
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	"Take one linen cloth, and stretch it across the head of the exposed bone,"
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	"And command someone to pull it upwards;"
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	"And take another thicker linen cloth than the first one and tie it over the flesh that covers the bone,"
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	"and stretch the head so that you may draw out the corrupt flesh from underneath;"
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	"And uncover the flesh over the spot where you wish to break it, so that the bone does not bruise the flesh;"
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	"And place a hot iron or a heated metal plate under the bone to burn away the corrupt flesh;"
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	"And it must be done until one can see and feel that the corruption is entirely gone, and then once more."
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	"And if the bone is corrupted but not exposed, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part,"
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	If all flesh is laid bare; then place one coal underneath
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then bind the two parts together using corruption, and let the bandage be as long as the corruption itself, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint and bind the bone on the other side that contains it;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption extends over two joints, there is nothing else to do but cut
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if the corruption is at the wrist of the hand or foot, it is a very difficult thing
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but nevertheless you must inquire about this corruption how it affects
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way that you can, but without harming the veins or nerves.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	know that many incisions and bandages are needed to cut these bones according to their arrangement and appearance
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and thinness, and their length and shortness, and their hardness
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	Therefore one must prepare each tool according to its function
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you which tool you will need, according to your knowledge of this art
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Therefore consider the tool that you need according to what is appropriate for it.
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	Flesh putrefies either from causes within or from causes without.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have treated this corruption with medications and yet they do not benefit
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then it is necessary to cut off that member up to the place where the corruption comes from
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the sick person escapes death either by amputation or by the lesser evil of losing the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And the sign is when the member becomes black as if it had been burned with fire
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after the blackness comes putrefaction, which then spreads from limb to limb
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and spreads throughout the body. So hasten to amputate
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	And if it is due to the bite of venomous beasts such as sea scorptions, snakes, and similar ones
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the corruption is at the top of the arm, cut off the arm without sparing the hand from being affected.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, cut it off at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it reaches the arm, cut it off at the elbow. If it passes beyond the elbow, then death is certain.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And no external remedies will avail unless they are used in large enough quantities
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And similarly when corruption comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cut off after the second joint
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes onto the foot, cut off the entire foot
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up into the leg, cut off at the knee joint
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the sick person die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the method of amputating or cauterizing a limb is as follows: tie it above and below the point where you intend to cut
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister's hand downwards towards the lower ligature, and another minister's hand upwards towards the upper ligature
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and uncover the flesh between the two ligatures with one broad spatula until the bone is exposed
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then cut or cauterize it, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the cautery does not touch the healthy area
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and prevent other wounds and blisters from forming on the sick person.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if bleeding occurs while you are operating, cauterize the area immediately
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or apply some restrictive powders. Then continue with your treatment until it is complete
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then tie the wounded limb with a suitable ligature and treat it until it heals
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I shall tell you what happened to one man concerning his big toe
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	He had a blackness that seemed like it had been burned by fire
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and the corruption came first to his right foot and then spread throughout the entire foot
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corruption, he quickly cut off his foot and was healed
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and some time later, the corruption returned to the index finger of his hand, and he came to me
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I applied percussion remedies after cleansing his body but could not stop the corrosion
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to because I had hope that I could remove the matter through percussion treatment.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	I was also afraid that if I cut off his hand, he would die
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the strength of the man was weak. And he despaired entirely and returned home.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	"And he hastened to cover his hand, and was healed;"
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	"And I have not said this except because one should do otherwise when it is necessary."
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an ulcer appears on the skin and stays there for so long that it forms a large boil.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then it reddens and bursts open, and the boil jumps out, leaving an empty space like a hollow vessel
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin that is above is as thin as finely-woven silk.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	And it does not go down to the bone or to the nerve, and such illness is called "shallow."
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it extends so far that it reaches the bone and goes deep, then it is called a "fistula."
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And the skin is such that if you cut that skin all around, even when it is thin like cloth
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and yet it does not smell because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you think that the skin smells and the corruption is not deep
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	then treat it with a clyster like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look to see if the breast is large and the boil that is on it has a foul odor
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Then use a clyster made of Egyptian medicine made like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take equal parts of psyllium and oil and litharge, and put them in one vessel on the fire
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	And then take some of it according to your need, and mix it with water and honey
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and use it as a clyster for the breast, and squeeze the opening tight;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until the breast is healed and the odor is gone.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And sometimes you should clyster with water of ashes
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and take some ashes from vine wood, and pour water on it
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then strain it and use it as a clyster until you know that the breast is well cleaned.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if the patient cannot tolerate this, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	then use a clyster of water and honey with a little bit of crushed litharge in it
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or use a clyster of honey and mead mixed wine that has the property to cleanse and wash
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and makes the flesh swell;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done this, and you are sure that the breast is well cleaned,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If the clyster causes flesh to be born there.
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And it is that you take emplaustum diaphnit, and they do this with rose oil in wine
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you clyster it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of ointments
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if the opening in the breast is small, and the tube of the clyster cannot enter
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If you widen it a little with an iron tool, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or basilicon ointment until it is widened
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, then close it and leave only one finger or where the clyster can enter
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the hole that throws bowels is above, lower it a little below
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is deep, do not allow flesh to enter
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	Then prepare it in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest point it is at
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bowel is deep, do not allow flesh to enter
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	Then prepare it in such a way that the bowel runs gently downwards, and do not leave anything of the bowel there
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	And take medicines that are consolidative to put on the breast
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And let it rest on one linen cloth which covers all the breast
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then close as tightly as possible around the opening in the breast, a little larger than the first
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Then let soft ointment be on one other cloth according to the quantity of the opening
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	And put it on the opening in the breast to alleviate the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth outside, except once after many days
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And that which is on the opening of the breast, remove often to remove the bowel
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And know what comes from the bowel, whether it is venomous or little or enough, digested or undigested
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	And beware if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	And when this medicine has been applied in such a way that you see the nature that comes out of the opening of the breast
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	Then know that the breast has already healed, and approaches health
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	And then untie it in the morning or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast throws undigested bowel after many days, know that the breast has not healed yet.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons come out afterwards for a long time, do not despair of health
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For health approaches. For there are men to whom it takes a long time for flesh to enter their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if undigested bowel comes out of the breast after many days, know that the breast has not healed yet.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if the breast is slow to heal and is far from recovery, then apply medicines that are drying in substance and dry in power
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	such as diaphoretic ointment, for it contains much vitriol, and this is the last medicine
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a diaphoretic ointment, made with rose oil, and add an equal amount of old wine by weight;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then cook it and use it; and this same thing done better cooked and thickened;
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When there are no diaphoretic ointments present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, grind them up, and powder them over honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	Then put one cloth into it and put it on the breast, and sometimes administer aristologus drink
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of heavenly lily, which is also like wheat flour and lentil flour.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And use simple or compound medicines: grind them up, make powder, and put on the honey I mentioned earlier, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the illness is prolonged and not cured by this treatment
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Then know that the corruption has gone deep, causing inflammation in the bone or hard members or ligaments
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the treatment for fistula is like we have said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the boil on the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panaritium is a boil that arises under the nail of the finger of the hand
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or foot, or sometimes arises in other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it becomes infected, if no attention is paid to it, then one great boil appears
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they will continue to grow and swell until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps cover the whole thing
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and corrosion spreads to the bone causing a foul-smelling pain, and the skin around it is red and swollen with a yellowish hue
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When treated as described in this section, but the treatment has no effect
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	then you must cut away all the excess nail tissue that remains
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cauterization is very helpful if the bone and nail are healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	And if the nail presses on the flesh, and begins to prick it, causing a wound.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	then you must place a bandage under the nail that is pricking the flesh
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and raise it up, cutting away that delicate and light skin.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on top of the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply dressings until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is on the bone, cut it off and scrape it out, because as long as the corrupted bone remains there, it cannot heal
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see that two are corrupting, cut them both off just as was said before
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then dress it until it heals.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is wounded and swollen, causing great pain, you must first cleanse it
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut off the nail from the spur bone sharply in a diagonal cut
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be sure that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, put something on to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from the wound of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	Some men may have two joints that are entirely fleshy
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes there is some bone present and at other times there is no nail
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and some grow from the root of the joint, where they are found between certain fingers
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those that arise on any of the joints of the fingers do not move
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those that arise at the joint of the finger sometimes move
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The cutting of one that is entirely fleshy is easy in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born from the root of the joint is difficult to heal: be careful with him.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	For one who is born or moves backwards at night, first cut the flesh evenly up to the bone
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut the bone with an appropriate knife and cure it until it is clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come together at both sides come from birth, or from the welding of a wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	Therefore you must cut that fusion so that the limbs return to their natural shapes
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between them moistened cloths or bandages soaked in rose oil so that they do not fuse together
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between both thin slices of lead until the limbs are fused as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocations come to any of his limbs with the palm, cut that fusion appropriately
Des vils	Worms
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Worms are large and swollen bags full of melancholic humors that come to many limbs of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And they occur more often in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry things than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you must administer to him some times a purge of bile, and then cleanse him with the holy water.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The cure of iron is done in two ways: one is to cut them and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is to lift up the swelling and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The incision is done in this manner: first raise the leg with hot water very strong until the thick blood becomes subtiliated,
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then hold the patient's leg above the hip down to the part below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then remove and draw out the black blood with your hand from one end to the other until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then the clot, and tell him to wrap himself in warm flesh-colored cloth.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	"and restart the evacuation and bleeding when veins are full, harming the patient."
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	"The raising of the leg is done in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair,"
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then places it in a bath and raises the leg with warm water until it becomes red and the veins swell;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire and then place the leg against the vein from the long bone to the top of the knee joint or below the ankle joint;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then bind it with the skin of an ox and scrape the vein from each side until it becomes visible when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black, and when it enters into the skin it seems like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then place the knife under it until it is raised from the skin, then pinch it lightly with the ox's horn;
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then cut it in one other place three fingers away; then scrape off the skin over the vein until it appears
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then lift it with the razor, as you have done, and sew it to another one, as you did first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then make another incision, or several if necessary, then lift it up and cut it at the two ends of the foot
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then draw it out and lift it up as far as the second incision; then pull it out incision by incision until it is all out, then cut it
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then insert a needle with a strong doubled thread
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and tie it and pull it out, and put your hand under the vein, turning it from side to side until it comes out
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	Make sure it does not break, for if it breaks you will not be able to pull it out or lift it up, causing harm to the patient
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have pulled it all out, place on the wound moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil until it is clean.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is constricted and twisted upon itself and not straight as we have said
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	Then you must cut it crookedly but do not break it; then pull it out as we have said before
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the blade used to cut the vein is curved and does not cut straight so that it does not break the vein
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it should be of thick curvature, for if it were thin it would cut the vein but it should be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
De la voinne civile	Of the saphenous vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in legs, in warm regions where there are no herbs or trees, and on dry ground without moisture
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	like how it occurs inside the body with worms and veins that appear between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there appears a very great inflammation in the leg
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the location changes and the vein begins to protrude like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the skin opens, you must wrap around it a piece of lead weighing from one and a half to two pounds and tie it
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the lead hang down on the leg; whenever any more comes out, wrap it around the lead and tie it again
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a portion of it, wrap the remaining part around the lead, but do not cut it at its root until it has all come out
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it will retreat into the flesh and cause an abscess and corruption in that location, causing a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Therefore, it must be pulled out little by little until its end, so that nothing remains inside the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And sometimes this vein is as long as five or ten palms when it has been pulled out
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and once a man came to me whose vein was twenty palms long; when you cut it, it makes one hole or more and pierces through to the bottom
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything comes out; empty the matter that is inside and apply medications that prevent corruption to the location for a few days, then treat it like other abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it opens at the ankle or foot
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and there are many holes from which veins sprout forth; therefore treat them as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that appear between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "cattle disease" because it often affects oxen
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that appears between skin and flesh and goes throughout the body moving up and down
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	"and he feels it well as he moves limb to limb,
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	"And it is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as they come forth like worms and serpents in the belly;"
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	"And doubt arises from its evilness because when it goes through the body towards the head, it reaches the eye,"
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	"perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; this happens many times."
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	"And when you see him being cured and drawn forth, nothing can be done until it goes away:"
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	"therefore one must tie the joint above and below with a strong, tightly drawn bandage,"
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	"then cut open on top and draw it forth; if the worm is buried deeply in the flesh, you will not find it,"
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	"If so, cauterize with fire until it dies."
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	"And the greatest harm that it causes is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;"
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	"And if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, press down tightly beneath it with a needle, then cut open above and draw it forth;"
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	"It is necessary to use medications for bodily purification to dissolve putrid humors,"
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	"And if he has eaten corrupted meats."
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	"About the pain that comes from windiness"
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	"This disease is called in our land ' vakir', and it is a pain that comes into certain members,"
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	"and then it moves from member to member; this I have seen with mine own eyes."
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	"I was called to see a woman who was sick, and she showed me her arm where there was a small swelling in the vein of the forearm;"
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	"And soon after I saw it rise up like a worm towards the shoulder,"
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	"More swiftly than anything, just like live silver when it flows from one place to another;"
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	"The pain leaves that place and sticks in the shoulder,"
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	"and then a little while after it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm;"
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	"Then she said that it was turning around her body again, just as I saw it."
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	"I wondered greatly how the member could move about so from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness behave in such a way."
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	"Still, I had often heard that pain can well move from one place to another,"
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	"I had never seen it like this in the woman."
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	"and I thought that perhaps it was because the woman had a thin body and her veins were exposed,"
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	"which caused that constrained windiness to appear;"
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	"And this is not apparent in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with concealed veins."
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	"When you see someone being cured from this illness, if the patient feels that pain which we have spoken of,"
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	"The swelling above and below will quickly appear, and then it will gradually decrease until that constrained windiness leaves its place;"
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	"And cauterize the place; but if you do not see it with your own eyes,"
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	"then you can treat it with remedies that disperse winds, such as fetid pills and pills of saffron, among others."
Des saiettes	Here is the French text for "Des Saiettes":
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their likenesses and according to the places on the body where they enter.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Among them there are some that have large tips, small tips, feathered ones, and ones with heads soldered on.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And those that have two corners, and those that are long, and those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and the dislocation which occurs in any limb falls according to two ways: either it occurs in the main member
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	like the brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it occurs in any of these members, then the signs of death, which I will tell you about later, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	Therefore, you must beware of removing this splint, for death comes afterwards in many ways;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And if this bad sign does not appear and the splint is not deep, then remove it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	The sign of a cerebral dislocation is when the splint falls there and pierces the bone, and the facial fascia above the brain tears
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	and when there is darkness and dizziness and heaviness and redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and mixing of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps there is without fever from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps speech and voice are lost;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And from the wound comes moist white foam like pigeons' droppings, and at once a bruise of flesh appears;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then beware of treatment, and remove the splint if it is not already embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs that the splinter has fallen on the heart are that it is near the left nipple and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the splinter moves like a chicken's, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come on, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then know for certain that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of a splinter that has lodged in the lung is when without any foam coming from the wound, phlegm rises up to the throat, and the patient changes color, sighs loudly, and seeks cool air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the splinter falls into the lining of the lung, it is near the ribs; and great coughing and great pain and sighing occur; and all the members from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the splinter falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested food will come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the splinter falls into the belly and no wind comes out through the intestines, then there is no hope for a cure or for removal of the splinter.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the splinter falls into the bladder and urine comes out and there is a fever, and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members such as the face and neck and throat and shoulders and arms and back and thighs and legs and similar limbs are spared according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the splinter is in a nerve or an artery and it is not venomous, as happened to me once which I will tell you about so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one man that a splinter fell into his eyelid at the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it and removed it from underneath the ear's fat without any injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And once I pulled out a splinter that had fallen into the fatty tissue of the eye under the membrane:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the splinter was embedded, and I could only grasp its tip towards the wood;
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	"An arrow as large as a Turkish bow, all of one feather, light, without ears; the wound was clean, and no bad accident befell him."
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	"And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was Arab in origin with feathers:"
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	"I pulled out the barbs, and carefully extracted it until I removed the arrow; the Christian was unharmed."
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	"And an arrow had been shot into the belly of one man, whom I believed would die;"
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	"and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change."
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	"I cut the arrow and extracted it, then pulled it out gently; there was no bad outcome."
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	"And if you see a man into whom an arrow has fallen on his back, and the wound is closed;"
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	"and the arrow remains inside him, yet his natural condition does not change,"
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	"he finds no harm in any of his natural works."
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	"And you see another man into whom an arrow falls on his face, and the wound is closed;"
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	"and remains thus without suffering great pain; and many others like him."
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	"And I removed an arrow from the eye of one of the king's nobles,"
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	"which was slightly inclined towards the right side; and the arrow was completely buried"
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	"I was called to care for him after it had been three days since the arrow fell. I found the wound very narrow."
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	"I tried to grasp it with great care and delicacy, yet could not feel it at all;"
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	"and he felt pain and discomfort beneath his right ear."
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	"I thought that it was the tip of the arrow,"
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	"I applied to the wound a plaster made from atractive and digestive ingredients, so that the area would not swell;"
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	"and then I saw the tip of the arrow."
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	"I applied the plaster for eight days, and the wound closed up again; yet the sick man remained ill for a long time,"
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	"until he felt the arrow inside his eye for one day; and he told me this."
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	"I applied a corrosive ointment to the wound for many days until it reopened;"
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	"and I probed it and felt the head of the arrow lodged there."
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	"then with this same ointment I widened the wound until the head of the arrow became clearly visible;"
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	"and it took nearly four months,"
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	"and then I widened the wound so much that I inserted forceps into it; yet I could not pull out the arrow."
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	"So then I did not cease to use finesse and ingenuity in devising ways with tools until, one day, with well-made forceps I grasped it."
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	"as will be described at the end of this chapter; thus I pulled out the arrow and healed the wound."
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	"And the doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot regenerate:"
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	"So I healed it and the wound closed up, and the sick man was entirely cured."
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	"Now I have told you about the extraction of some arrows,"
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	"So that you may rely on what I have not mentioned, for books cannot cover everything."
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	"But wise masters compare even small details and things which are present or lacking;"
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	"they find new works and nine tools for the extraction of foreign bodies which occur in this art."
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	"I say that arrows enter the limbs into which they are driven in only two ways:"
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	"either through the point of entry or through another part;"
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	"And that which is driven in forcefully through the same opening whence it entered, this is an arrow entering into flesh wounds, and sometimes they do not emerge again."
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	"And if it does not come out immediately, leave it there until the flesh has rotted around it, and then remove the exit;"
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	"And also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it there for a few days and moisten it each day;"
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	"and then it will come out; if not, carefully bore around it with a fine drill until the area is widened, and then pull it out."
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	"And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bone of the skull and extends as far as one of the ventricles of the brain,"
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	"do not pull it out at all, but leave it there until it becomes equalized after a few days;"
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	"for if the arrowhead comes close to this point, it is fatal."
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	"And if the arrowhead is stuck only in the bone and does not come near the aforesaid point,"
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	"and the sick man remains free of bad symptoms for a few days, then try to pull it out."
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if it is deeply stuck and cannot come out easily, then apply poultices around it as I have told you; then treat the area until it heals."
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	"And if the arrowhead is lodged in an internal organ where it cannot be seen, search for it everywhere;"
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	"and if you find it, pull it out with some suitable tool."
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	"And if you cannot reach it because of the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrowhead,"
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	"then widen the wound until it is large enough;"
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	"and pull out the arrowhead if you can; and if there are barbs on it that cause it to adhere,"
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	"then remove the flesh that is stuck in its two barbs, as much as you can;"
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	"and then break off or bend back the barbs of the arrowhead so that you can pull it out."
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	"And be careful not to break the shaft of the arrow, for otherwise pulling it out would cause more pain."
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	"And if you cannot pull it out all at once, leave it until the flesh around has rotted away, and then pull it out; for extraction will be easier."
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	"And if the flow of blood opposes you, apply what we have said about treatment in its chapter;"
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	"and beware of cutting into nerves and veins; use skill so that you can pull out the arrowhead without danger."
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	"Sooner or later, firmly or gently; place the sick man according to the position he was in when the arrow struck him;"
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	"for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you cannot do so, place him according to what his symptoms indicate."
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	"The arrowhead which comes out on the other side, or where something of it is visible, or where the skin is swollen around it so that one can see or feel it externally:"
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	"then cut there until forceps can reach it, and then pull it out; if it comes out easily."
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	"And if it is held in the bone, rotate your hand around until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out."
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	"And if it cannot come out, leave it again and then resume extraction until it comes out completely;"
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	"and if the shaft of the arrowhead is still there, remove it with the entire shaft."
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	"And if the shaft has fallen off and you wish to apply a poultice, then use a hairy tool;"
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	"So that the point of the arrowhead enters into the hairs of the tool; then apply the poultice."
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	"And if the arrowhead is stuck in hair, insert an instrument with a pointed end among the hairs to facilitate extraction;"
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrowhead has touched, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Then treat the wound as it should be treated.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	"And if the arrow falls into the thigh or the belly or the bladder or the side, and it is close by, you can try to push against it."
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	"And beware of pushing into the wound and the nerve, then extract [the arrow], and then stitch up the wound if necessary."
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	"and treat it until it is healed."
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	"The shape of the tweezers used to remove arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is the illustration:"
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	"And there are many kinds [of tweezers]: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow."
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	"The shape of the arrow extractor is also like the feather of a bird,"
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	"to put on the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:"
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	"The shape of the tweezers for grasping and pulling out is like this:"
des voinnes dou cors communes	"for common wounds of the body,"
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	"Of those from which one recovers, there are thirty-one, of which sixteen are on the head."
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	"That is to say: two blows that are behind the ears, called 'dous herbech' in old French;"
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	"and the two arteries that are visible in the two temples."
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	"and two veins in the inner corners of the two eyes, called 'aspirites'."
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	"and the vein that is on the forehead; and the wound that is on the back of the neck;"
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	"and the two jugular veins that are in the neck;"
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	"and the two veins that are above the mouth on the lips, which are called 'augeherich'."
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	"And two veins that are under the tongue."
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	"The wounds from which one commonly recovers are five in each arm:"
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	"The first is the cephalic vein, and it is on the right side, and lay people call it 'the vein of the head'."
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	"And the second is called 'faste', and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins,"
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	"and laypeople call it 'the vein of the heart'; and the basilic one is on the left side,"
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	"And they call it in common language 'vein of the belly', and it is on the bladder."
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	"And this is the one that opens visibly onto the pouch."
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	" And the savior vein is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;"
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	"And in the leg and foot there are three veins: one of which is located under the curve of the pouch of the left side,"
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	"and the second is behind the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'the nest', which is located in the heel of the other side;"
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	"And in the other leg there are three veins below them."
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	"The purging of veins that appear behind the ears helps with catarrh and headache."
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	"And the qualities of purging are such that you should raise the head of the patient,"
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	"and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth, then make the patient cough by having them turn their neck to one side."
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	"until the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent areas of the head:"
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	"So place your fingers there and where you feel the pulse under your finger, then squeeze gently;"
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	"then take the lancet, insert it underneath the vein until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand up along the entire length of the vein upstream,"
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	"And cut through the skin and the vein with two fingers held horizontally, and let blood flow out until you see it."
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	"then compress and tie off the vein until it is emptied;"
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	"And I have already spoken about the incision and cautery in the first book."
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	"The purging of the two arteries that are located on either side of the temples helps with headaches."
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	"and helps with eye pain, and watery eyes caused by grief in the heart;"
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	"And the qualities of purging are such that I tell you,"
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	"and it is necessary for the patient to strain their neck so that both veins appear clearly;"
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	"and feel the pulse beneath your finger, then gently squeeze."
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	"then lift the skin up along the vein using your right index finger and insert the lancet underneath;"
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	"And then lift the vein upward and cut it, just like you did with the other two veins, and let blood flow according to your needs;"
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	"then release the patient, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton;"
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	"And then tie it firmly and leave it until it is emptied of blood; and I have already spoken about their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book."
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	"The purging of the frontal vein is just as useful for treating old facial diseases, headaches and redness."
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	"And its qualities are such that the patient should strain their neck by twisting it so that the vein appears;"
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	"then take the instrument called 'the borer', which is shaped like this:"
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	"And place the point on the vein and press down with your hand or something else, and let blood flow out according to the amount you desire;"
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	"then release the patient's neck and tie off the vein until it is emptied of blood, using a wide flame."
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	"However, make sure the flame is not too large; and cut across the vein, for the bone is close by, and sometimes the flame may break if it is too thin."
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	"The purging of the two veins located on either side of the nose helps with nosebleeds, tinea capitis, redness, and eye inflammation, and facial diseases."
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	"And its qualities are such that the patient should strain their neck by twisting it in any direction, just like before;"
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	"then make the cut across the vein with a slightly long and wide flame, for there is little flesh present."
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	"And if the flame is too thin it may break; then let blood flow until you have enough, and then apply cotton and tie it firmly."
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	"The purging of the nasal vein is useful for treating colds, feverish insanity, and facial diseases,"
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	"especially for treating headaches and redness that appear on the face, especially when they are chronic;"
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	"And its qualities are such that the patient should strain their neck, then pinch their nose with your left hand,"
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	"and take a thin, long flame and insert it into the space between the two nostrils;"
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	"for the vein does not appear well there, and blood will begin to flow now."
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	"And do not go in too deep, and let blood flow according to your needs, then tie it off for one night, for it is quickly restored;"
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	"This is the shape of the flame:"
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	"The purging of the two glands helps with the swelling of the glands, and the onset of glandular fever, and many diseases, including eczema, skin erosion, and herpetic sores."
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	"And its qualities are such that the patient should strain their neck beneath either side, as we have said;"
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	"and let the master stand on top of the patient's head, and let the patient lie on one elbow;"
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	"then cut the vein along its length slightly widely, then let blood flow moderately, or until enough is obtained;"
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	"then repeat on the other side, then release the ligature and gently squeeze both veins;"
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	"so that the patient does not strangle, and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed."
De la sainie des leivres	Of bloodletting from the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bloodletting of the veins above the lips helps with colds in the mouth, gum decay, cracked lips, and the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	"And its qualities are such that you should make the patient sit before you, and strain their neck as I have said;"
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	"then turn the lip and look for the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left;"
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	"And recognize them by their dark color, and by the small black veins around them;"
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	"then cut both of them, but if you do not know how to do it or are uncertain,"
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	"then cut the largest one on each side, and likewise cut both of the veins above and below, for it is the same method."
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of bloodletting under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bloodletting of the veins under the tongue helps after the bloodletting from the head, and it is used for swelling in the throat, diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth."
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	"And its qualities are such that the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun, raise their tongue, and look for a black vein on each side underneath;"
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	"then cut both of them, but do not go in too deep, for the arteries are located underneath."
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the arm that are commonly bled are let according to two methods:"
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	"either with one wide, round flame, or with an olive-shaped thin flame like a cutting edge, and it is called 'anesil';"
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	"And they are wide and thin according to the size and swelling of the veins."
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the round flame is very well-known, and it is wide as you see:"
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	"And one must use for opening the hairy veins filled with thick visible blood, which contain thick and turbid blood;"
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	"and it is the form of the olive-shaped flame:"
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	"And it is more subtly pointed and is for cauterizing the subtle veins where there is subtle citrine blood."
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	"The cautery of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen;"
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	"And it behooves the cauterizer to cauterize skillfully and to beware of the artery that is underneath."
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	"And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow, then it behooves him to cauterize it immediately as I have said;"
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	"And the flame must not be sharp, but cutting like a knife."
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	"If the basilica vein does not open manifestly, then it behooves you to extract it and change another;"
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	"or wherever you want any branch of it, or you cauterize in place of it the vein that is in the arm; it opens manifestly."
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	"And cut it with a knife-shaped flame as we have said."
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	"And if you wish to know the place of cauterization, then it behooves you beforehand to extract the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse;"
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	"then mark the place with ink and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a knife-shaped flame."
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	"And beware that you do not strike the artery when you see the place distended, for it is of the artery; avoid it therefore."
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	"And if you see something like urine coming out above, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is arterial blood:"
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	"then quickly place your thumb upon it and remove it if the bleeding stops, for this happens many times."
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If you bind the arm thus, leave it like that and do not move the limb of the sick person; let him be quiet in fear, and do not move it until he is healed."
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	"And if the blood does not stop and it is flowing freely, and there is no physician present, then cut the artery if it opens, for its source draws back; and cauterize the blood."
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	"And take a fig-wood bark, split it open, take one half of it and bind it firmly until the next day;"
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	"If the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then cauterize it with powders that stop bleeding as we have said."
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	"And cauterization should not be taken lightly in many conditions because of the smallness of the wound and the power of the ligature on the arm."
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	"The cauterization of the vein in the middle aids so that it draws blood from above the head and from below the body,"
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	"because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic veins as we have said;"
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	"And the surgeon must beware of the nerve that is underneath, and if it is not too deep, he will find the nerve,"
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	"and if it swells and the saint suffers harm, then perhaps he cannot heal;"
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	"And this nerve opens frequently and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then you must cauterize it with the knife-shaped flame; and avoid the nerve as much as possible."
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	"And if there is a vein between the two nerves, split it lengthwise."
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	"The cauterization of the cephalic vein aids so that it draws blood from the head and helps also in other ways;"
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	"And it is necessary to cauterize in a puncturing manner with the olive-shaped flame or the myrtle-shaped flame, for this is the safest of all veins since there are neither nerve nor artery beneath it."
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	"Nevertheless, one must seek out the easiest place and not worry if one fails the first time; one should begin again;"
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	"And sometimes the places swell in some men when one fails the first time, but it does no harm."
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	"The quality of cauterization depends on your skill."
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	"The first thing you must know about cauterization is that it is not introduced except for the sake of preserving health,"
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	"and to avoid future illnesses;"
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	"And let cauterization be done in one of the three veins that are on the forearm: namely, the cephalic, the basilic, or the median cubital."
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	"And one should cauterize at the beginning of Lent and in autumn and winter after meals when the sign of repletion appears;"
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	"And one should cauterize on the first or third day, after two or three hours from noon."
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	"Cauterization that is administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but rather whenever there is need on a certain day or night, at all hours and at all times;"
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	"And one should not cauterize children until they are fourteen years old, nor women during pregnancy except from the fourth month until the seventh."
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	"Nor should one cauterize the elderly who have passed sixty years of age."
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	"And when anyone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, they must cleanse the bowels with a light enema,"
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	"especially if there is much retained feces so that the veins do not draw out the impurities from the bowels which could harm the principal members;"
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	"nor should one cauterize anyone who is too salty from eating meat or who is drunk, until they sober up, nor anyone with dropsy;"
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	"And one should beware of cauterizing after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent urination in women, hard labor, sleeplessness, fasting, or any weakness of body, whether caused by an injury or by some other cause."
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	"Then refine the humors if the blood is thick, through diet and drink and medicine, if you have the ability;"
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	"then take a bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood;"
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	"and cauterize the vein on the arm around the third hour, as we have said;"
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	"And guard yourself that day from hard labor, overeating, lust, and similar things;"
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	"and be calm and happy, and let the cauterizer be taller than the person being cauterized, and rub the arm two or three times;"
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	"then remove the ligature from the middle because if it is too tight or loose, then the blood cannot flow properly;"
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	"And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt;"
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	"then let the cauterizer wet the flame with a little old oil, and then place his thumb of his left hand on that vein below the place where he intends to cauterize;"
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	"So that the vein does not slip or move during the cautery."
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	"Because there are veins that flee like ropes during cauterization, and some are so full of windiness,"
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	"That when one puts the flame upon them, they retreat from the flame and cannot open the vein, and this is how it is with some people;"
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	"And if he opens the vein, then the wound will be too narrow, so that the cauterizer must be skilled in these matters."
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	"And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that is good. But if not, then begin again a little below or above that place immediately, if the area is not swollen;"
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	"And if the place is swollen, and the patient fears it, let him wait one or two days, without binding the arm:"
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	"Perhaps an abscess will appear; do not enter a bath, then resume treatment if he wishes."
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	"And if the hole is small, or the skin cuts finely and you doubt that there might not be as much blood coming out as you see, then apply fire to that same hole directly."
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	"And work hastily, before the place becomes swollen; for this happens often when the wound is small."
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	"If you see the place swollen, do not resume treatment and apply a little oil mixed with honey; for it lightens the body of blood and is moisturizing in this place."
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	"And thus apply the mixture of oil and honey at each treatment that you give to veins, so as to stop the flow of blood."
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	"And this same mixture also works well for dropsy and bowel obstructions when applied to the place; for it thins the blood and disperses it when it is too thick."
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	"And if there appears a large abscess which happens often, especially when the vein is not treated but at that single time when the wound was small,"
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	"then be quick and apply to the place a sponge moistened in warm water mixed with salt, and keep it on for an hour."
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	"And you should do this after the bleeding from the vein has ceased; and if there remains on the place some blackness or greenness for several days afterwards, it will not harm."
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	"And if you see that it is necessary to apply something made of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastich, or similar substance."
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	"And often there occurs an abscess and appearance during the treatment of the basilica (the great vein); therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft under pressure from your hand, then this is a bad sign."
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Therefore be careful not to apply any of the things we have mentioned, for it might happen that it will cut into the artery without notice; but rather make a dry poultice to harden the place and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed."
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	"And draw from each according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood."
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	"For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if it appears thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool."
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	"And it is necessary for those who are full and fat and have need of bloodletting to make the cut larger and to use a wide blade."
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	"And for those who are weak, do the opposite; they should be bled little and often, and they should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking."
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	"And this manner of bleeding saves from loss of blood and from injury to the nerves, and is better than a long or wide cut."
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	"And for those whose body fails from bleeding, it is necessary to give them bread moistened in pomegranate juice; if they are heated, let them bleed three or four times."
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	"And if they are of cold temperament, let them eat before bleeding bread moistened in thick syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a fragrant syrup."
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	"And if they faint during bleeding, after the flow of much blood, it is necessary that they inhale broth of meat and a fragrant, subtle syrup."
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	"and use the other things we have mentioned in the section on syncope for evacuating veins."
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	"And if he wishes to empty one arm and bleed elsewhere another time, when he is weakened by much bleeding, it is necessary that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his continued strength."
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	"And whoever wishes to empty one arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong body, should bleed again 24 hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour."
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	"And whoever wishes to bleed elsewhere should bleed on the second or third day."
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	"For there is much blood in the body which is already heated and causes fever; therefore it is necessary to draw a large quantity of blood and widen the opening so that it flows easily."
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	"Then when you have prepared all the conditions for bleeding and placed your hand on the pulse as it bleeds, make sure that the mouth does not come into contact with the opening."
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	"And this happens very often when the bloodletter is negligent."
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	"And it should not be done when you wish to release the arm and cause blood to flow out a second time, for then the opening is closed, you should press strongly upon it."
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	"nor if he is curved, let him extend his arm quickly, for this would be harmful."
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	"But let it flow until it bleeds the second time; or you may prick with the tip of the blade so that the frozen blood which blocks the vein opening flows out."
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	"And place a little bit of fresh moss in water and press upon it lightly."
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	"And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not compress it until the swelling has subsided."
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	"And if there is need to draw blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein or in another vein or in the other arm."
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	"The veins of the arm are bled instead of the cephalic vein because they are composed [of many small veins]."
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	"And the manner of bleeding is that the patient places his hand in warm water until the veins appear red;"
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	"then let it be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, and then bleed across, not wide or long."
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	"And let the opening be wide and bleed close to the joint of the hand; if blood cannot flow out, then place the hand back in warm water and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have enough."
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	"And if it is summer, do not place the hand back in warm water, for this is done more often in winter than in summer."
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	"And bleeding from this vein is safer than from all others because there are neither arteries nor nerves there."
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	"Bleeding of the basilica vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it should be done:"
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand steady, and immerse it in hot water until the vein becomes visible.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	If the vein is swollen and if you bind all around, then there will be no injury;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	"And do not cut too deep for beneath all flesh lie nerves."
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	"And then immerse the hand in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot flow out."
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	"And once you have removed as much blood as necessary, then place oil and lint on it to seal it quickly, and do the same for each wound."
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	"The urine from the left hand is good for treating mousse disease, and do everything as I have told you regarding the right hand."
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	"Sphenoid bone urine is beneficial for all diseases that occur beneath the body."
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	Such as marrow disease, retention of flowers (possibly referring to menstrual disorders), and diseases of the reins, thighs, and old legs, as well as similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	"And its urine's property is such that patients can soak their feet in warm water and rub the wound until it becomes soft."
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	"Then place their foot on the knee; the wound is at the ankle, and many veins run from there to the foot;"
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Therefore, treat it where the largest vein or at the ankle.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	"And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath it, and cut across just as when cutting meat; let the blade be sterile."
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	"And if blood cannot flow out, then immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to empty well."
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	"If the cauterization does not succeed on the first try, then begin again a little higher up because the area is already burnt;"
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	"do not hesitate to cut the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the other sphenoid bone on the other foot equally."
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	"The scar of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle, and its urine is beneficial for treating hip pain when it's due to hot blood."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	"And its property is such that the patient enters a bath and strains four fingers while twisting over the ankle;"
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	"because otherwise the vein will not open, and if it opens, cauterize it in every way that you can, including across it."
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	"And it's better for you to cut it because the scar is smooth, and it's very responsive to many people."
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	"If you cannot find it, then cauterize any vein that opens on the back of the foot and towards the little toe, but beware of nerves;"
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	"And do so until you see blood flow, then untie the bandage, put cotton on it and bind it again; now it is cauterized."
Des sainies de ventouse	Regarding the treatment of varicose veins
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made from horn, glass, or earthenware and there are two ways of applying them: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this application without pricking is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And the application that involves pricking and blood extraction is performed on fourteen parts of the body;
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	namely, one is at the top of the head, another in the neck;"
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others on either side of the neck; and the one under the chin;"
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and those on both shoulders, and that above the elbows;"
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and those on both arms, and those on both legs;"
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and those at the ankles; and cupping does not draw blood except from small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh."
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And therefore it does not weaken anyone, unlike cauterizing veins;"
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered with or without fire in any disease that comes frompletion until the whole body is emptied."
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if it becomes necessary to apply cupping because of illness or custom, we will administer it at each hour from the beginning to the end of the month, and during every season;"
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need cupping, have heavy heads;"
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and others findpletion and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness before the eyes;"
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have an enlarged tongue, and spit blood;"
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And there are those who dream and see things like blood, wounds, death, and similar things."
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially during the month of May, we order cupping to be performed after three hours of the day."
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The cautery for the temple helps with headaches that occur in certain people, and it should not be performed after evacuating the entire body;"
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this cupping is a substitute for the cautery of the temporal vein;"
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and those who have cold constitutions or phlegm should not use it, as it causes them great harm;"
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore old men and those with cold conditions in the head should not use it."
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often cauterize themselves become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping jar a little further down to avoid forgetfulness."
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Cupping on the neck is equivalent to cauterizing the head and the basilica veins, and it is particularly useful for chest congestion;"
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and for coughs, asthma, andpletion;"
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	But it should not be placed too firmly, as otherwise it could cause forgetfulness or harm the stomach or heart."
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	Cupping on both sides of the neck is beneficial for headaches, eyestrain, migraines, chest congestion, and toothache;"
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is a substitute for cauterizing the basilica veins. Make sure to tell the cauterizer not to cut the artery or cause excessive bleeding."
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Cupping under the chin is beneficial for mouth diseases, gingivitis, and similar conditions in the mouth, and it is a substitute for cauterizing both lips;"
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Cupping on the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses caused by heat andpletion."
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	Cupping on the elbows is as effective as cauterizing three veins in the arm;"
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins;"
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and tell the cauterizer not to pry too deeply, as this area lacks flesh and has nerves and arteries underneath."
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping jar placed on the buttocks is beneficial for hemorrhoids and lower abdominal diseases. The jar should be large and made of earthenware to draw well without breaking and causing large wounds."
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping on the legs draws blood from all over the body and is particularly beneficial for treating chronic back pain, sciatica, bladder problems, and gout. It serves as a substitute for cauterizing both sophenes veins and ankles, but prolonged use can weaken the body and cause paleness in various conditions."
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	To apply the cupping jar, you should first place it empty on the skin and suck temperately until the skin turns red and inflamed. Then quickly place the jar and move it evenly without stopping until you see the skin turn red with blood. After that, remove the jars, being careful about the condition of the person's body, as some have thin skin and fair pores; in such cases, it is best to cauterize only once, making wide and somewhat deep wounds, and sucking gently."
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	"And if the blood is thick, then one must strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood."
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	"And if the blood is very dense, then one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out just a little blood drop by drop, then once will suffice."
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	"And if we wish for much blood, let us strike often; and if the blood is dense, then strike deeply, ensuring that the heart is pierced suddenly,"
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	"And those with thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, must anoint the places for the cups with oil that is aperient and dissolving:"
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is inflamed, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or gourd seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is in a cold state, use mustard oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, then take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	If one has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied there.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But after the application of vapor, one should wash it with rosewater, or cold water, or cranberry juice, or gourd juice, or porcelain juice, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who are very moist should rise using myrtle water, sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large swellings should rise with old wine, or buckthorn water, or decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	And one should not apply cupping before or during the bath, but rather afterwards for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after cupping.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And they should be careful to warm themselves both when applying the cups and when being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	Beware those who are being treated have a choleric complexion, and whose skin is too dry and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	"If it is necessary for them to take cold things, such as pomegranates and endive, lettuce, and similar things."
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and drink chicory, roasted pork meat, moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion should take honey syrup and moderate perfumed wine that is between old and new, and eat chicken and young birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day when he goes to vomit, he should drink more than he eats
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and sometimes it is necessary to give certain people three times the amount of treacle or muscatel before vomiting, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	Let the breath be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The cups that are placed without striking are those placed on the liver, spleen, kidneys and ankles, stomach, belly, loins, buttocks and thighs, for these members do not suffer being struck upon.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and this is only done to draw blood from member to member
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	just as we place cups on the breasts when there is a damp heat, to remove viscosity from the member, so we place cups on the stomach and belly to reduce the member
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and relieves pain when there is congestion or stone, sometimes removing the congestion or shifting the stone from its place through its attractive virtue
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	Thus it also does when placed on the liver and spleen where retention of wind exists
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these cups are administered empty merely to suck, sometimes they are administered together with fire, and at other times filled with hot water
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	just as in cases of pleurisy, and so that one fills the cup with warm water alone, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of administering the cupping glass with fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and on the side around the middle there should be one small hole, like that for inserting a needle,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	"Whether made of brass, soften it first so it does not burn the patient when placing it on the limb;"
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	"And let there be in the middle a transverse rod of brass or iron to hold a candle."
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	"[Let them have] both large and small ones, according to the diseases and the size of those who wear them."
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	"For the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the elderly, and those for the thin are different from those for the fat."
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	"And so one should place this cupping glass onto the limb:"
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	"Light the candle made of wax or linseed oil, and insert it into the cupping glass through the transverse rod that is inside the cupping glass,"
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	"So that the flame reaches the bottom of the cupping glass without burning the patient;"
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	"And then place it onto the limb, ensuring that it is over the hole we mentioned earlier so that steam can be released when desired and the cupping glass removed."
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	"And then apply the liniment as before, repeating this process frequently if needed."
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	"In the case of the cupping glass used for pleurisy or acute diseases, there is no transverse rod nor hole. It is only filled with water when it is full, and it is placed onto the limb alone."
et c’est li forme:	"This is its shape:"
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	"Sanguis cupping glasses are used only in places where regular cupping glasses cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar locations."
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	"And in areas of flesh devoid of hair, such as the scalp, eyebrows, and other similar locations;"
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	"The qualities of using sanguis cupping glasses are that when you find them without any apparent holes or damage, use them;"
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	"And place them in warm water for a while until they become soft and have nothing inside them;"
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	"Then clean the cupping glass and sanguis cupping glass, rub the limb until it becomes red, and place the sanguis cupping glasses onto it;"
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	"And when they become full and begin to droop, if it is a location where a regular cupping glass can be placed, do so, as this is very beneficial."
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	"If not, then lift the limb gently and then rinse it with warm water, and finally squeeze it out;"
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	"If the limb is too dry after removing the sanguis cupping glasses, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the area to dilate the blood vessels;"
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	"And if there is too much bleeding, apply powdered vitriol or salt and similar substances to stop the bleeding;"
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	"Or you can place half a handful of peeled fava beans onto the area and leave them until they warm up against the skin, which will now stop the bleeding;"
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	"And if you need to use more sanguis cupping glasses, take additional ones."
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	"And if the sanguis cupping glasses will not adhere, rub the area with fresh blood or prick it with a needle until blood flows out;"
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	"Then place them onto the area and as soon as they sense the blood, they will adhere."
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	"And when you see that they are full and dripping, apply a little powder made of ground aloe and salt or ashes to make them droop."
Ci comence li livre des brisures	"Here begins the book of fractures"
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that foolish physicians neglect this chapter, having neither seen any of the ancient books nor read a letter about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And because of this, knowledge in our land is strange, for I never found anyone good with this.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	"And I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of old books which I have studied so much that I have written about this science, and through experience, and through the practice of my life."
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	"I have described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are arranged, as I have done in these two chapters before."
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	"It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of words and chapters where the wise puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are skilled know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	"I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain occurs to anyone, it is necessary for you to hasten to heal the sick on both sides, if possible, except in cases of weakness of body, childhood, or old age;"
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	"unless the time is very hot or too cold; and eat cold foods, that is to say cold drinks, and flesh of fowl and hare, and do not drink wine nor eat fatty meats, nor fill yourself too full with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about a hot aposteme, nor expansion of matter in the limb; then bring back the sick person to their previous regimen that they had used."
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that you feed the sick person with foods that promote growth and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, milk, wine, and similar things."
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	"For with this nourishment muscles are rebuilt more quickly and the fracture heals sooner."
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	"And know that the bones of the elderly and those who are decrepit do not heal well nor fuse according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children;"
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	"but take care and attach a splint made of one large beam to the broken bone, joining it together so that it strengthens as it was before; do not remove the device until the work is complete, and for this reason they must be nourished with fatty meats, as we have said."
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	"And know that fractures are diverse in many ways."
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	"For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the arm or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways that fractures can occur."
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	"For there are fractures that go to the bone and others that do not affect the bone, such as cutting off the tip of a quill for writing."
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	"And there is fracture with wound, and fracture with just a small crack."
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	"And each type of fracture has its own method and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes into place;"
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	"and a fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the site is twisted and clearly visible through deficiency, and it sounds hollow when pressed with the hand;"
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	"and when there is no twist nor sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture."
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	"But it may still have twisting, cracking, or a small fracture."
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	"So do not move the limb by hand, but apply the medicines that are mentioned below and then gently immobilize it."
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	"And know that fractures which affect the bone and consist of two disjointed parts must be set back in place evenly before any inflammation occurs;"
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	"and if inflammation has already occurred, leave it alone for a few days until the inflammation is reduced;"
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	"then set it back in place gently and smoothly, and know that restoring this fracture is easier than restoring those with broken pieces. Then immobilize it as needed."
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	"And if the bone has broken into pieces, then grasp it with two hands if it is an arm or leg, or use one hand for smaller limbs, or use two cords or one cord and your hand;"
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	"and place the limb according to its natural shape so that when the broken pieces are aligned, use all means to attach them in their proper places without causing injury or pain to the patient;"
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	"And join the two ends of the bones together with the best possible alignment."
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	"And you can tell by feeling if it is not properly aligned: straighten it gently and do not immobilize it too tightly or apply pressure as some people do to cause inflammation and contractions in the limb, as we have said many times."
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	"And once the limb is properly aligned, instruct the patient not to move it while awake or asleep, turning or in any other way;"
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	"and make sure that the limb is well secured so that the patient feels no pain."
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	"For if the patient feels any pain, then it is not properly aligned, and you must reposition it so that they feel no pain;"
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	"And make sure that it is placed correctly so that there are no twists when it is restored;"
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	"The condition of the broken limb is according to what I tell you."
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	"Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, length and shape."
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	"For there are small limbs such as arms, legs, and similar ones which should be wrapped with soft and thin linen cloths;"
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	"And those that are thick such as the thigh and leg should be wrapped with wide and strong linen, for wide linen wraps around the entire large limb and immobilizes it evenly so that there is no leakage."
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	"Then tie it around with light bandages, three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand gently on all of the linen. Then go above the fracture and tie less tightly so that the fracture can move a little away from the fracture;"
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	"And loosen the bandage bit by bit until you grasp a large part of the healthy area. Then take another bandage and wrap it again around the broken area;"
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	"then go back to the part below the fracture and tie it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first section above;"
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	"then place linen bandages or cloths between the layers of linen until it is all even. Then tie everything together with one bandage, and finally apply well-made splints if there is no inflammation or swelling."
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	"And if there is inflammation or swelling, apply something that reduces heat and draws out the swelling. Leave it on for a few days;"
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	"then apply your splints and they should be half the width of a smooth rod or made from wood used for stakes or palm reeds. They should be shaped like this:"
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	"But the splint placed over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others;"
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	"And it should also be as long as needed for the limb's size or length;"
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	"then tie it over the splints just like you did in the first section. Then tie everything together with a suitable thread."
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	"And tie it more tightly above and less so below. The thread should be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;"
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	Because if the threads are thick, as in some works of foolish people who tie their bindings with twisted linen cords, which is a great error; for the binding cannot be even if it's too thin, nor should there be less than two spans between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the stitches after they were placed in the healthy places, then put pieces of linen or wool gauze underneath them so that they do not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to stitch all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, one should not put in stitches until after five days or six, or more according to the heat of the inflammation appearing;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take some flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs; then use this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and it is the common way of plastering to restore fractures in many positions, especially in women and young children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: Take aloes, ladanum, enula, asafetida, gum arabic, mastic, myrrh, and aloë wood, each three ounces; and make them into powder, then mix them with plenty of eggs. If the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and it's useful for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plastering that is useful for twists: Take mastic and bdellium, each three ounces; myrrh and aloes wood, each seven ounces; gum acacia six ounces; balsam of Armenia ten ounces, and grind them well, then mix with water or plenty of eggs, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way of plastering for joints and bones dislocated from their places, to ease pain appearing, and the swelling of bone and fractures: Take new flax and soak it in warm water and oil, then put it on the place. This plaster does not restore, but it is good for easing inflammation and removes pains properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and earth wormwood leaves, crush together, make plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to soften the swelling of the bruise. Take root of mallow, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; crush and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix with coriander water or water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of plaster stronger than the first one for restoring a member with hard swelling. Take roots of mallow, linseed, balm, melilot, and savory, violet flowers, and camomile flowers, all in equal parts; crush and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should only apply on the broken limb for restoration a cerate made of wax and oil, nothing else more. He says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen agrees that one should apply on the broken limb for restoration dry things somewhat warm, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster that is good for wounds and pain: take male pigeon droppings or human hair cuttings, or chicken feathers, and mallow, mix equally, crush them, make a plaster with the liquid.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then wait a little while afterwards, and take care if the patient feels no pain, nor if the bone has moved from its place; then do not remove the plaster for many days
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain or itching comes to the place, with restlessness or swelling, then hurry and remove the plaster immediately; take a light cloth and damp sea sponge, dip it in water, and wipe the place until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry linen soaked in rosewater or warm oil, and bind it tightly with a bandage until you are sure that the swelling is hot.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and let the pain be gone, then begin again the gentle binding, and a little plaster, and do not bind too tightly as before; continue until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the swelling is hot and red and painful and swollen are all gone, and you need plaster and binding again, then begin again gently, just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if there is nothing of what we have said happening to the limb, then do not remove it except after three or four or five or seven days; sometimes leave it on for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is healed, and the joining of the flesh approaches.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then tighten the bandage more than before, and let the flesh grow thicker, as I said earlier. And if you see the place becoming too dry, know that there cannot be any suppuration there.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then apply warm water gently to the limb every time you remove the bandage, once every three days, and loosen the binding a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this treatment, then the suppuration will come out of the limb, and quickly heal what foolish doctors do wrongfully to limbs twisted: that is evil, and they are doing it incorrectly; I see nothing else but letting [the bone] rest and operating correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of diverse kinds of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of fractures, with diverse appearances, and their causes differ:
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	"For there are fractures that are caused by blows from a sword, and the collarbone breaks the entire bone down to the syfac, which is beneath the bone, like wood or firewood; and for this reason this type of fracture is called 'haichure'."
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	"Or if the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called 'absolute'; and the wound of these two fractures may be large or small."
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	"And if there is percussion that strikes in, or cuts into, the collarbone of stone, or from falling onto stone, or other similar ones."
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	"And if there is a persistent fracture, approaching close to the membrane that is under the bone or over it, and this wound is large or small."
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	"And if there is a wound that has healed within the bone so subtly like a hair, and the crack is small, therefore this fracture is called 'capillary';"
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling, or by something similar, and causes the bone fragment to go inwards, and the area is raised like when coppersmiths strike on anvil; then the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often with young people who have moist bones at the head of their shoulder joint, like that of a child's.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and occurs in all manner of fractures where small fragments are dislodged like stars;
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	"And we know all kinds of fractures by their retraction upon them, and detection through probing, and by the corrupt flesh that is upon them."
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is known by this: when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on top, then the fracture opens black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, beware of accidents to the patient. And if you see no evil accident such as vomiting of bile and loss of consciousness and extension and paleness and intermittent fever and eyes coming out black and red and other signs in various conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any astonishing accident and hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded person first comes to you, if it is in wintertime, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summertime, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the flesh under the bone becomes corrupted and the accidents that we have spoken of occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone comes to the flesh that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part like this: and take hold of the head of the wounded person and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the surface of the wound more gently than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone or a black abscess forms, then help with what is necessary. And fill the place with absorbent cloths moistened in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest until the black abscess is appeased and you are sure that there will be no more bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, which can be done in two ways:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is that you have many different incisions made, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made of soft iron; perform them gently so as not to cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	If the bone is prominent and hard, then it must be perforated around before making incisions with trepanes, not too deep so that they pierce through the outer bone layer. Each trepan should have a margin or circle above its point to prevent the point from protruding beyond the bone; you should have several of them so that each one fits in its proper place on the bone's edge. This is how the three kinds of trepans are shaped:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for perforating around the broken bone are: place a trepan on the bone and twist it with your hands until you feel that the bone has been pierced. Then move the trepan to another spot further along, and repeat this process all around the bone. Then use chisels carefully and gently (as we have said) to remove the space of bone between the holes made by the trepan, so that you can grasp the bone with your hand or any tool such as pliers. Make sure not to touch the brain or the sinews.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	Once you have perforated and removed the bone, you must then remove any remaining sharp edges with another tool resembling a chisel but thinner and more delicate than regular ones;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	If any small bones remain or scales, remove them easily with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way to perform it is what the Galien says, which is easier; he recommends it strongly and this is his opinion.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place underneath the head of this lens-shaped chisel, its shape is shown here:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut on one side only, but make it sharp at both ends so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer until you have easily cut around the bone and be careful of the tissue underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is adherent to the bone, remove it gently because it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the tissue and the bone is only cut on top with small pieces remaining, then remove these roughnesses using a fine file that you should have in various quantities to prepare each area according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Then use coarse files first, followed by finer ones until it is smooth enough.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other types of capillary fractures and fine breaks, you must adapt your approach according to its direction; this is something that is not easily learned by someone who has dedicated themselves to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sinew is exposed, you must take one piece of linen according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil and place it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another cloth doubled in two or three and wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can so as not to weigh down the side, then apply another linen above and do not pull too hard until it touches only the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and let it be so for one or two days until the swelling has subsided, then remove it and apply medications such as lily roots, vey flour, incense powder, aloe, and similar things; grind these things into a powder and apply it to the wound, and apply medications without biting.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and make sure the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment or let bowels gather on it, because when bowels accumulate on the cloth of the cerebrum, they corrupt and carry it off, causing great harm to the patient; for when one puts something irritating on the side, it necroses above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, beware if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, that it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness appears on it due to the medication that was applied, such virtue having it, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and put it on a cloth, and place it on the side.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then follow the methods of treatments which are necessary until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You should know that sometimes both of the two parts of the shoulder above are broken, or just one by itself, for they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is struck forcefully or twisted, then it can heal.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should place your little finger or thumb on the opening of the shoulder and put the break evenly under your index finger and press gently on it until the shoulder returns to its natural position.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	Do this gently, making sure that the patient does not feel pain due to your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the shoulder and the arm cannot be moved into place, you should put it against the head of a slightly thick stick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, do likewise, and try to reset it on the first day if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then apply bandages of linen cloth to the head of the shoulder if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you should bind another bandage on the other part if there is a break there as well; and the bandages should be thick enough to fill the openings of the shoulder.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Some physicians say that the bandages should be moistened with butter and changed every day. But it does not seem to me that this is good, rather the bandages should be moistened in a mixture of oak bark powder and egg whites, then leave the bandage on until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they use goose feathers in place of bandages, with one soft cloth around them to hold the break in place and relieve the patient's suffering. Do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if swelling comes to the shoulder while you are working on it, put cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil or a little diacodium upon it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if swelling does not come to the shoulder, apply a plaster of powdered sesame flour and frankincense mixed with egg whites, then place light dressings over it without binding the shoulder.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the break in the shoulder is small and broken into little pieces, extract the fragments with appropriate instruments, then sew up the wound and treat it with healing substances such as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside the shoulder, treat it with bandages and apply splints made of lead until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Regarding the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured underneath and there is no wound on the outside, and the break is only on one side with no other fragments inside, it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side of the jawbone, insert your right index finger into the patient's mouth; if it is on the left side, use your left index finger. Gently push the break inward and hold it in place with your other hand from outside, making sure to keep it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is offset by two parts, you must provide traction on both sides to ensure that it is aligned evenly.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement or fracture of the teeth, use gold, silver or silk thread to secure them. Then apply cerote on the broken jawbone and cover it with a double cloth. Place a well-made splint or a piece of leather shaped according to the jawbone on top of the cloth, tie it under the chin that you can reach, and tell the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the jaw is misaligned, untie it on the third day and then reposition it correctly. Remove the cerote and apply a plaster made of flour from the mill mixed with egg whites or sesame flour. Then place a light linen over the plaster. If the plaster becomes dry and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; it often takes about three weeks to heal.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if swelling occurs, use the treatments we have mentioned many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, make sure that no fragment of bone has been pushed out. Then carefully remove the fragments using appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your needs.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing all the fragments, if there is no more remaining, sew up the wound if it is large and apply healing plasters until it is healed.
de la forcele	Regarding dislocations of the joint
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The shoulder dislocation often occurs at the front and is broken in three ways:
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	"And the work is thus when there is fracture without wound, that you have two assistants: so that one holds the arm that feels the broken force; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then place the fracture evenly on your two hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor shortening."
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	"And if you need to extend more, place under the shoulder of the patient a round spear of cloth or wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the arm, and constrain the spear with your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly as it should be."
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	"And if you cannot draw the head of the arm forward because it is too deep, then the patient must lie flat on his back and place under the shoulder a medium ear-pad, and push the shoulder backward until the bone of the fracture rises."
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	"And then align the fracture with your two hands, and if you find it displaced, then you must cut; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to some obstruction, then cut one of the incisions that you have; but place this instrument under the fracture to guard the soft tissues:"
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	"And it resembles a spoon, and is not raised, and let it be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two prongs, as you see, one wide and the other narrow like the route of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones;"
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	"And when you are sure of having hot swelling, then close the wound, and if the route is small or you doubt there will be hot swelling, fill the wound with lint and bandages according to its quantity."
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	"And if hot swelling comes, wet a piece of linen in rose oil and hyssop and wine, and put it on."
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	"The bandaging of the bone when it is without wounds and cuts is that you put on the bone the plaster made from the powder of millstone and egg albumen, and place light dressings on top, and place a spear under the elbow if necessary;"
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	"then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then place a double drapeil on top of the dressings and plaster; then take a subtle splint of three fingers' width and length, and wrap it around this bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down;"
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	"and place the splint on the fracture and twist the bandage up over the neck, and under the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder; and the corners of each part, and when you see that the wrapping holds the fracture firmly in place, and you clearly see that the splint does not move on top of the broken bone, then rewound it every day, and when the wrappings loosen, tighten them;"
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	"and make the injured person lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the elbow when he sleeps to raise the arm support; then align the fracture by raising the shoulder with the help of the bandage that ties the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless some mischance happens, for up to twenty days;"
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	"then recommence the plastering if necessary, and tighten it and leave it like that until it is healed; and it heals in at most twenty-eight days, and sooner for some people."
de la brisure de l’espaule	"Regarding the fracture of the shoulder"
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	"It happens sometimes that the shoulder blade breaks or is displaced but not moved from its place, and it cannot be seen except by touching; then arrange it according to the shape of the fracture, and align it according to its natural form in every way you can; then put on the bone powder of millstone with egg albumen, and light dressings, and place a double drapeil on top; then place a wide and subtle splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there is any convexity under the splint in some part of the shoulder, fill that concavity with linseed dressings so that the splint lies evenly; then bind it tightly with a wide bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the wrapping every day; and whenever it loosens, tighten it, and make sure the splint is in place if it has moved, and have the injured person lie on his side; and the shoulder heals in twenty days or twenty-five at most. And when this number of days is completed, then untie him, but be sure, for it is not a bone that moves easily."
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	"And if a piece of bone sticks out in front and not under the heart, then cut it off, and do what we have said regarding the fracture of the arm to appease hot inflammation."
de la brisure dou pis	"Regarding the fracture of the wrist"
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	"The wrist is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks down and the injured person feels great pain, loss of alignment, weakness, and dizziness, and sometimes vomits blood, and you can see the convexity on the broken bone."
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And the restoration is that the injured person lies frequently on his back, and place a cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders down and bring together the ribs of the two sides with your hands, aligning them subtly in every way you can until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then place plasters and dressings on top of a subtle splint of salt or another light wood, and wrap it in a drapeil and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; then twist the wrapping around the back and tighten it firmly, and rewound the bandage every hour and tighten it if it loosens; and if it needs to be untied for corrosion or pruritus that comes to the place, or pain or inflammation, then hurry and untie it, remove the plaster, and address what has come from the methods of treatment; then align the plaster again and bind it until it is healed."
de la brisure des costes	"Regarding the fracture of the ribs"
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	"Know that rib fractures only occur in large places on the back and at the top inside, and they only bend because they are hollow; and you can feel them well with an examination of the back."
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	"And the restoration is that you align the fracture correctly. Then place a plaster and bind it with a splint if necessary."
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	"And if the rib fracture sinks inward, then the injured person feels very great pain and stabbing pain like pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lung; and coughs, dizziness, and vomits a lot of blood, and it is a serious condition, and the ancients used to apply much effort."
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	"And there are those who say that one should administer foods that inflate the belly to push the fracture outward."
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	"But we do not do this, lest boils come if they have not already done so."
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	"And if it comes to this, then heal it."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	"And some said that one should apply cups there to draw out abundantly, and this seems reasonable. Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cups may attract the excess towards the joint due to weakness."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	"And some said that one should cover the joint with moist wool soaked in hot oil, and apply bandages between the ribs to make the binding even. Then it should be treated with the cure for pleurisy, meat, and medicines."
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear because of the bone sticking out through the flesh, there is doubt as to what the patient should do. It is necessary to cut open over the broken rib and place something underneath to ward off the stomach. Then one must break the bone and draw it out gently, after which the two lips of the wound should be sewn up if it is large, and then dressed with poultices until healed. And if hot inflammation comes, one should put moist cloths soaked in rose oil on it and place them on the joint; treat the joint as for inflammation, and have the patient lie constantly on the side that they must lie on until they are healed."
de la brisure dou col	"Regarding the fracture of the neck"
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a bone break occurs in the neck, rarely does it bend;
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and numb, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that they are mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when the joint is strained and pricked, know that the bone's articulation is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied there.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it will recover or not, take heed if the feet are softened, and if the hands are affected, and wind and excretion pass involuntarily from the back; and when one lies on their stomach, excretion passes involuntarily. And when they lie on their back and try to rise, they cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to them, then the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is: if there's a hot boil, apply rose oil or goosefoot oil until it cools down; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on the painful area until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone becomes dislocated, it should be immobilized immediately. Remove the dislocated bone and then sew together the two edges of the wound if it's large; then apply a poultice made from healing herbs until it heals. But if the end of the bone is broken (which is called the "knuckle"), you should place your left hand on the injured area and use your right hand to gently realign the bone, then apply a splint and bandage it securely if needed; then compress it, and if there are any dislocated bones, reduce them and set them back in place, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It may happen that the thighbone is broken, and if it does happen, it will cause some dizziness in the head. It feels long, and slopes toward the knee, causing pain and soreness at the fracture site, with swelling around the break.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the treatment is: extend your hand over it so that you are directly above the fracture. Identify where and how the break occurred. If the break is only at the top of the bone, gently align it until it is in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or slopes inward, make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can easily see and treat the fracture.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And once you have aligned it, apply a splint made of wood or bone, and secure the fracture so that it does not move. Then elevate the injured area on pillows to keep the limb in alignment during healing.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And tell the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if any inflammation occurs around the break, do not touch it until the inflammation subsides. Then apply the splint as mentioned earlier, and continue to treat the fracture as needed without causing further injury. This is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder blade
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder blade (adjutoire) is located between the rib cage and the head of the shoulder. If it is broken, it should be treated in one of two ways:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie two joints together with two ropes, and hang them upwards, and have the patient sit on one seat; then throw his broken arm onto the wood, until it reaches the elbow and has its middle in a curve of wood, then hang some heavy thing upon which the assistant extends downward; then the physician places the break evenly between his hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his hatchet-blade, and he holds his hand to his neck, then orders two assistants: one takes what is above the break in his hands, and the other takes below at one link, and each extends to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then tighten one link below the break and another above it, and let each assistant extend to his part. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to put one link in the middle below the elbow, and another towards the side below the break; likewise, if the break is towards the side, then it is necessary to place one link lightly without labor until the break is even on the level and on the side; then set the break even as it should be, and tighten it so that no fracture comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if swelling comes about, then do not tighten for at least twenty days, and put on a wet linen cloth moistened in hot rose oil until the swelling has subsided; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening is as follows: place the splint upon the break, then assemble the arm onto the support, and put your hand upon the shoulder or upon the chest; and put the bandage on, and tighten onto the support and onto the arm so that the arm is in a straight line if nothing prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, then use splints and place one wider and stronger than the others upon the break, with two spaces between each splint; let each splint be so large that it passes the break three spaces on either side. Then tighten onto the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter regarding the break, tightening more firmly and less widely apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the position of the splints and the tightening as we have said when restoring the broken member, and you doubt the heat swelling, then leave it alone for seven days as we have said; then look every three days at the bandage to ensure that there is no itching or inflammation or that the member cannot move due to being too tight. Then adjust it as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands upon their stomach; place one cushion filled with wool evenly beneath the support, and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the position of the broken member does not change or that the bandages become loose. Then adjust it by means of medicine, and give the patient the food that we have mentioned earlier, so that the first food is subtle and when they begin to regain their strength, let it be thick. And it is customary for the support and the leg to be removed after forty days in total; then one should remove the bandage and administer baths and ointments to straighten the limb properly. And if the stiffness is ugly and distorted, it may take ten days or two months to remove the bandage.
de la brisure du bras	Chapter on the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones called the "humerus," one of which is small and forms the elbow joint, while the other is large and lies beneath it towards the little finger; sometimes only the larger humerus is broken, or sometimes only the smaller one, but sometimes both are broken together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the smaller humerus is broken, restoration is easy, and recovery is also quick; but when the larger humerus is broken, recovery is difficult and more painful than when both are broken together. If it is only the smaller humerus that is broken, then it must be extended slightly and set evenly in place.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the larger humerus that is broken, then one must tighten more firmly; and extend it upon one cushion, raise the hand higher than the other, lower the little finger below the others, let the patient cross their legs beneath them, and place another cushion in front of them to prevent any discomfort. Then a servant should extend their arm at the part beneath the patient's hand or with a bandage, while another servant does likewise above it. Then the doctor must set it evenly according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are any fragments in the break, then put each one back into its proper place; and if there is any excess that cannot be grasped with your fingers, then press upon it lightly as we have said earlier.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is also a wound along with the break, I have spoken about that in its own chapter; so treat it accordingly.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if hot swellings appear at the beginning of the restoration, then take one sheet of rose oil and white wax cerate, neither too hard nor too soft; fold it finely and bind it lightly enough that the swelling is alleviated. Then remove the cerate, apply a plaster made from wheat flour with abundant egg whites, place the splints on top, making sure that the splint over the break is stronger and slightly wider than the others. Know that there should be six splints on the arm in various arrangements: whether the break is in one bone or two; tighten more firmly above the break rather than elsewhere, tightening less widely apart every day as I have said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the bandages over the break be soft and moist, neither hard nor harsh; let the linen thread used for binding not be too thick or too thin, as we have said. Finally, check on the limb and the bandage after some days have passed.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad accidents occur to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must wash the limb with warm water until the itching is alleviated; and allow the limb to rest without being too tight. Then begin tightening again; but if the bandages have become loose or the bones are out of place, and similar situations arise, then adjust them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And beware that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight; if so, then loosen it slightly and leave it thus for a few days until the nourishment arrives, then tighten again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of the things we have mentioned occurs for the patient, then do not remove the bandage for up to 20 days or thereabouts; then when he can bend his hands to his neck and his shoulders are even, beware of movement and dislocation, and let him sleep on his back. Know that this break will be restored in 30 to 35 days, or perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	This is because on the back of the hand and in both hands there are few breaks, but rather many dislocations.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or dislocated, then it is necessary for the patient to cross his legs and sit upright facing forward; then place his hand on a flat surface, and extend the broken bones by the surgeon's hands until they are properly aligned. Then apply the dressing and compresses if necessary, then apply a splint according to the size of the area; and wrap it with one cloth of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is on the inside edge of the palm towards the belly of the hand, then make a splint of cloth and command the patient to press it against his broken palm; then wrap it with a long cloth strip, and let the splint be soft enough and as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it tightly so that it fits properly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside edge, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap it all around the hand, and secure the tie between the two sides.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in any of the fingers, if it's the thumb, then align it properly and bind it with the palm, and if you see fit place a small splint to hold up the fracture so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, like the index finger or another, then align it and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after, or bind them all together in one bandage, whichever is better, or place a splint above like on the thumb. And be careful about the restoration and position of hot compresses, and treat any inflammation that arises as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Here is the text for "de la cuixe brisie" (for a fractured thighbone):
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The thighbone is often broken, and it can be clearly seen when the leg turns front and back; the treatment for this involves tying one bandage above the break and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each assistant extends their bandage to its respective side evenly; this is done when the break is within the bone itself.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is near the root of the thighbone, then one bandage should be placed towards the ankle, and the other below the break. And similarly if it is near the knee, the bandage should be placed at the knee and extended downward; then the doctor puts the bone back into its natural position with both hands, and then applies the splint and ties the bandage, making sure no infection occurs.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an inflamed wound, allow it to cool down first before returning to your task and treatment; the bandage should be tied in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap a hard doubled bandage around the break, removing any excess material, then turn the leg so that the heel is at the root of the thighbone, and insert a long thread between the thigh and calf near the knee below, with both ends coming out on top; then wrap the bandage up the leg and thigh again, placing wedges over the break and one wedge on the shin bone, then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to ensure equal tension, then begin tying firmly with three or four turns above the break, decreasing the tension as you move farther from the break; then tie the two ends of the thread that were inserted between the leg and thigh to the three wedges placed on top, then return to the bottom end of the thread until you reach the foot, pulling tightly so it doesn’t move from its place, then leave it like this until no infection or inflammation occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if an infection occurs, untie it and treat what has occurred, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, they should be removed if possible; and if not, then the space should be opened up and pus drained; and the treatment should continue as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thighbone may break in such a way that wedges are not used, as in the case of the arm; nevertheless, with this treatment there is no impairment to the patient's mobility.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone takes about one month to heal, give or take a few days depending on individual constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Regarding the kneecap
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that the kneecap rarely breaks but often dislocates. If it does break, it is usually just a fissure or hole, which happens with and without pain, although this can be well felt.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to place what was dislocated back in its proper position as best as possible, then apply splints and possibly a round wedge if needed, tying it securely. Then follow all the instructions given for other fractures regarding infection, heat, etc., applying whatever remedies are necessary until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Regarding bone fractures of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that the leg has two bones called "fibula" and "tibia," with the same types of fractures occurring as in the arm. Therefore, treatment is also the same, using the same techniques for reduction and splinting.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken at once, turn the leg in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is broken, so turn [it] forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, so there will be great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and turn [it] downward. Therefore prepare an extension, and place [it] evenly, and bind the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, then make the extension smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, then take two strips of wood smoothed that wrap around the leg on either side, and are the length of the leg from the knee downwards; then wind around them twice with a bandage above and below, and tie them in the middle likewise, and at this tying the leg will not be able to bend to the right or left, and so it is well. And some people provide one splint made of wood that is the length of the leg, and place the leg upon it to prevent movement, and this is properly done at the site of the fracture where there is a wound; and move the leg each day to see if there is any hot swelling or other accident; so care must be taken until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	About the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	In the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a bone in the foot is broken and in two pieces, and there occurs only quassure in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bone in the foot, and you see these bones protruding one over the other, then put your foot on the ground like someone who wants to walk, and then place your foot upon his where the bones are raised, and press down until they return to their places; then put splints and bandages on it, and place under the instep of the foot a small table with two holes filled with plaster, and strap it firmly against the foot forwardly, and then wrap cloths around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the toes broken, then restore them as we have said for the toes of the hand; then place on the broken toe a splint according to its length, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot that table which I mentioned, and strap it firmly against the foot forwards; and if there are two or three, or more, toes broken, then place on each toe a splint according to their quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and strap the table under the foot; and let them be standing upon the top of the table so that they touch well the sole of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, and take care of each accident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	About the fracture of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the thumb is broken in a woman, then make her sit upright, then incline her towards the back and let her be held by someone behind her; then fill the thumb with cotton, and put in it as big as one walnut; then raise the woman up little by little, and now the cotton will come to the entrance of the thumb, and the bone will return with the walnut; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do so for about seven days: then the fracture will be restored. And if you see, take a bladder of a sheep, and tie a tube at the opening, and put the whole bladder inside the thumb; then blow into the tube strongly until the bladder is inflated inside: then the thumb will return to its fractured place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, then restore it as we have said for the bone of the heel; and these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and use in it, and understand my book. For the fracture indicates in many ways the right way to restoration: therefore, pay attention to it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose neck and put it around the penis; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three or four days around, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	About fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	He who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the arm or similar, must be healed now, so that the healing that we have mentioned proves it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then rinse it with vitriol, if you don't have anything else, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, if no inflammation occurs.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if inflammation occurs, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the inflammation is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring bad accidents upon it.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing above the exposed heart, then it must be put in place lightly with your hands, with slight traction.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not convenient for you to put it in place with your hands, then use this instrument which is made of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the surgeon to prepare three or four, according to what he needs in each case of fracture. And let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your operation, and let it be pointed at the front, and thicker towards the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called a "palainche," because the curved bone must be placed on top of the exposed bone; and push it in at once until it returns, and let them be equal one against the other. And if the fracture is slight, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then cut off the end of the bone so that the instrument can have hold of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then cut off with an appropriate instrument such as the chisel or saw according to your ability; then scrape what remains on the bone with sharpness and small scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is put back in place and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. Then do whatever is necessary to put it back in its proper place, then moisten one cloth in black styptic wine, and apply it properly if it is in summer; and do not put on the wound cerote or anything else with oil, for it will bring corruption and decay. Then apply bandages when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be sure that the wound is not constrained with the fracture; and many times foolish surgeons have done this and brought death or corrosion upon the patient. And let the binding be softer and more gentle than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents will come of it, as we have said, and you find pain in its place, then one should not put on bandages; but wrap it around tightly with hard cloths, and tie them. And when after one or two days you see that the wound begins to heal, then remove what you have placed there, and put on healing ointment such as tetrafarmakon and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	You must wash the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is solid and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	The limb should be placed in such a way that the wound drains easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and the wound does not heal but continues to suppurate, know that there are small bone fragments present, for which reason you should cleanse the wound with tincture and remove all these unwanted fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula appears in the place, or some other type of corruption, then you should treat it according to what is said in its chapter above. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the hip bone or the shoulder blade, and others like them on large limbs, do not pull it out for many times the flesh follows it; let it remain until it rots; perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	about the burns that come on top of the scab
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the fracture has healed, burns can appear on top of the scab, especially if it is near the joint, and the appearance of the limb is unpleasant; and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, beware if the bone is fresh: have the physician administer medicines that are astringent, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocol, acacia, and similar others; so that you take any of these things or all together, and confit them with wine that is astringent or with egg yolk or with oil; and put them on the bone in bandages, and tie it tightly and do not untie it for many days; then remove it, and start another one again until the inflammation is gone; or you can bind it to a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from the limbs. And if the inflammation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut off what is on top and remove the excess; or have a barber shave it until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	about the limb that is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When bone fracture is healed,
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is thus: you should make the patient eat, and stretch the body so that blood multiplies within them; the servant should give baths, and bring joy and laughter; then place poultice on the limb so that it attracts to great nourishment, and repeatedly wash it with hot water until the nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb twisted after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone breaks openly, and the form of the limb is misshapen, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: thus do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb again anew, for many a foolish physician has done this in our land; and such operations are blameworthy, and great evils result, and sometimes even death. Nonetheless, if the dislocations and distortions are recent, they should be bathed with hot water or mollifying herbs cooked therein, such as fig leaves and roots, and mullein, and like substances; and make one mollifying poultice, such as well-made diacere, and take the mucilage of figs and cook it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply the poultice thereon; or take ripe figs and grind them with coltsfoot, and like medicines that soften the union.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the dislocation is removed by continuous rubbing for a long time with moist hands. And let the limb be moved each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twistings are old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove them with iron, then one must cut down to the bone, gently with a sharp lancet; and put care and skill into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations are when a joint leaves its place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and the sufferer feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, they should try to reduce it immediately.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the place becomes inflamed, and perhaps it will not be set back in its proper place. Therefore one should not attempt to move it when it is inflamed: many times this brings about spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	When this occurs, nevertheless, wash the patient, then leave him until the inflammation is appeased; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each limb as it comes back into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws become dislocated upwards, and their dislocation occurs in two ways: either they are a little displaced from their places, and softened somewhat; or they are entirely dislocated, hanging towards the chest, with saliva flowing out of the mouth so that it cannot be held back, nor can the mouth be closed, and speech is impeded by the tongue.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When dislocation is slight, it returns spontaneously in most cases.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and total, then you must reset it quickly without delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in this manner that the servant holds the patient's head, and the physician places a pouch of his one hand at the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands should be free to keep it even; and instructs the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physician places it back until it returns to its proper place
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the dislocation is severe, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then raise them with hot water and oil until they become slightly softened; do not force the repositioning, as we have said
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are repositioned correctly, and the patient closes his mouth without softening, then place wet cloths made with a salve of rose oil and wax on it, and bind it lightly with soft bandages
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient should sleep on his back with two pillows under his shoulders so that he does not move to the right or left and does not attempt to chew but takes only soft food until the pain is gone and the jaws are at rest
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then he may chew what he wants easily, and should not force his mouth open while eating or drinking until the jaws are fully healed and strong
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if both jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their proper positions, then fever and chills may occur, sometimes with diarrhea and occasionally vomiting of clear bile
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see these signs, know that it is a loss of life; many times the person dies within eight days
de la forcelle	of dislocation
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The dislocation cannot be dislocated from the inner side of the cheekbone nor from the breastbone; sometimes it is dislocated backward and can be felt quite well
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the reduction is done by having the patient lie on his back with arms extended, pressing firmly on the cheekbone with the palm of the hand until it returns to its place, then placing the emplastrum and binding it tightly
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the chin which is towards the face cannot be dislocated; if it can, then it should be repositioned as we have said, then place the emplastrum and bandage and bind it tightly, and tell the patient to rest until healed
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and so too is the chin of the shoulder repositioned when it has been dislocated from its place
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Chapter on the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated outward in three ways: firstly from the lower part of the socket, secondly from the side of the chest, and occasionally from above, which happens rarely
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And the shoulder does not dislocate backwards nor inward towards the nerves; often it dislocates downward toward the socket, especially in those with little flesh, for then it springs out quickly; but in those with abundant flesh, it barely springs out and scarcely returns
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there occurs a blow or fall which causes the shoulder to swell with a hot hematoma and the person believes that it is dislocated because of this
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must examine him closely until you are certain; then begin treatment
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known when the dislocation has occurred downward toward the socket, for there will be a noticeable difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, with clear manifestations in between
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder and beneath the socket a touch like that of an egg, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck nor move it in any way
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and likewise if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden but can be felt distinctly upon touching
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation cannot be reduced except when it is new or if the patient is a child
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the practitioner to raise the patient's hand upwards, then place his fingers beneath the socket and forcefully raise the joint upwards into its proper place, and then lower the hand downwards
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come back as we have described within several days afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and given softening and soothing remedies to drink, such as a decoction of mallow, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and he should be treated accordingly
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then have the patient lie on his back with a piece of cloth folded into a roll placed beneath the socket, not too soft nor too hard, then place the practitioner's heel upon the cloth and gently raise the diseased shoulder while pulling the patient's hand in this way
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another practitioner should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downwards; then the shoulder will return immediately into its proper place, and you may reduce it in this manner
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and have present one man who is larger than the patient, standing on the diseased side with his shoulder placed beneath the socket of the patient's arm and raising it upwards so that the patient hangs in the air
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another practitioner pulls the patient's arm downwards towards his belly. And if the patient is too light, have him hang with some heavy object and the dislocation will return into its proper place
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And it may also be reduced in another manner thus: take a long stick and fix it firmly into the ground so that its end is as high as a man's fist and neither too thick nor too thin
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then place it beneath the patient, but let him have soft cloths underneath to prevent injury, and have him stand upon the end of the stick, then extend his arm downward forcefully on the other side and the joint will quickly return into its proper place
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it will not return by all the methods we have described, then do this treatment: take a stick two and a half feet long and four fingers wide with a rounded top to allow easy entry into the socket beneath the arm in this way
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place soft cloths upon the top of the stick to prevent injury to the patient, then place it beneath the socket of the diseased arm; extend the patient's other arm upwards along the length of the stick and tie the elbow to the stick with a bandage, then place the forearm upon a support made from a piece of wood about half an inch thick; let the hand hang downwards on one side and allow the body to hang freely on the other side: the joint will now return into its proper place
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it has returned into its proper place, however this may have happened, then you must place a bandage of wool beneath the socket, sprinkle the whole shoulder and surrounding area with powdered mallow leaves mixed with incense and egg-white, then draw the bandage tight beneath the arm and tie the ends securely around the emplastrum; fasten the hand to its collarbone and let it remain in this position
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he fast for a few days until the member is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then after five or six days he may eat again and move about, and if it remains firm without becoming softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come into it, or for another reason, then you must administer cauteries at three points, as it is set forth in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do everything, and it remains dislocated after seven days, and the shoulder cannot be raised above the arm, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never again be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that occur toward the chest or back are caused by pushing or pulling with great force, and bandages should be applied to support them until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing there is stiffness in the limb and difficulty in movement, then let the patient exercise many times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original condition.
de la dislocation dou coute	of dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the neck is easily dislocated and easily relocated; and if it has been completely dislocated, both front and back, and the dislocation cannot be reduced because it is visible and palpable in every position.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly because the joint is dislocated and the arm cannot be bent nor touched to the shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reduce it before inflammation comes, because if inflammation should come, reduction will be difficult and perhaps the dislocation cannot be completely reduced, especially when it is on the back; such cases are worse than others and cause greater pain, and sometimes the mouth becomes twisted.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And reduction is when the dislocation can be replaced so that you grasp the patient's hand with both of your hands; and extend their arm, placing your hands around the neck above and below, and push the joint back into place at the wrist or root of the palm until it returns to its proper position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is on the front, it can be reduced by doubling the hand onto itself and pressing the root of the palm against the dislocated neck.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong traction; and this is done by two ministers extending the arm, and holding it tight with two cloths so that it does not move during traction. Then twist the arm on both sides, having wrapped a long and wide cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the physician has joined the joint with their hand, they should oil it with some oil to lubricate the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns to its place.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, apply a dry compress with egg albumen and press it firmly. Then wrap the arm around the patient's neck and leave it on for a few days before removing it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly fixed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it alone. But if you see that the joint is not yet stable, then begin again with the compress and bandaging, leaving it on for a few more days until it is securely fixed, before removing it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if the patient feels pain after reduction of the dislocation and it moves again, then bathe it and rub it gently, pressing firmly until the pain subsides. Or you can apply a poultice of fresh sheep's wool, leaving it on for one day and one night before removing it and immersing the limb in hot water.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it sweats, rub the joint temperately and then reapply the poultice and immerse it in hot water. Repeat this process two or three times until it is healed. And if necessary, apply a moist cloth heated with butter and press it on the joint for support.
li dislocation de la main	Dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is easy to reduce, easier than other joints. However, it should be reduced as soon as possible after it occurs, before swelling sets in or inflammation comes.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And reduction is done by placing the affected hand on a table and extending the ministers' hands. The physician then places their palm over the appearance of the dislocation and pushes until it returns to its place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	However, you must ensure that the reduction is complete by having the patient place the back of their hand on a table and then extending and reducing it again.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, the patient should place their hand palm down on the table and the physician should place their hand over the appearance of the dislocation. If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply cold compresses to calm inflammation and leave them on without starting again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if the patient cannot tolerate it and you cannot reduce it after a few days, the joint will remain dislocated;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	"And harm nothing to the patient but as long as the hand is weakened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves or arteries are cut; so there is no other remedy but to squeeze with a fire cautery near the case, and perhaps nothing else will help."
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	"And when the hand is in its place, put on the dressing that we have said, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and let it remain thus."
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then make him warm water compresses, and rub him until he is free."
de la dislocation des dois de la main	"on the dislocation of the fingers of the hand"
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	"No fingers of the hand are dislocated on any side, none at the back of the palm or belly."
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	"Then grasp the finger, and press on the joint until it returns, then hold the head of the finger and push it towards the part where it is dislocated;"
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	"and leave it for two days, and then put it in a bandage that day; and do not tie it too tightly, as we have said, and untie it the next day, and make him move it, and bind it again loosely; and do this often until it is healed."
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	"And do likewise if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and do as you have done here until it is healed; and do likewise if it is dislocated elsewhere."
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	"on the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back"
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the sciatica of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are many dislocations, there is no treatment, for the patient hastens his death.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that evacuations occur without volition, and cannot be held back, and many times some limb is softened, such as both thighs or both arms or one
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the sciatica moves in four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gibbosity":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment for gibbosity, if it has come from childhood, is that there should be no hope of recovery or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from falls, blows, or similar causes, the ancients prescribed various treatments with great words, but they had little benefit in all cases.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed diverse instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in gibbosity which comes to the chest before, there is no remedy nor healing
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and likewise that which comes directly into both sides, and one cannot cure it except for that which comes properly onto the back, as I say
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and that the patient should lie on his face on one level surface, and have a blanket under him so he does not hurt himself
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then drive one stake into the ground firmly at the head of the bed, and another at the feet, and tie a rope around the waist of the patient, and another at the hips, knees, and ankles
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and let them be tied firmly, with the stake as we have said, and the doctor put his palms on the spine forcefully until it returns to its proper place
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three feet long and place it under the patient's back while they are on their side, then insert the end of the board under the patient's spine, then place the middle of the board onto the spine
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and let the doctor put his feet on the other end of the board and press firmly until it returns to its proper place; and if you see that it does not work, then do it on the other side which turns towards the hand
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you drive two stakes into the ground at the head of the patient's bed and two others towards their feet, with a space of one palm between each stake, both above and below
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and each stake should have a hole where the rope can be inserted, and they should be firmly in the ground so that they do not move, and between each pair of stakes there should be one turning stake upon which the rope turns, with two small stakes of one palm length on either side to turn the turning stake
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the rope that is between the shoulders to the turning stake towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other turning stake, and each minister turn their stake with all the rope, and the master put the spine back into place as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is aligned, then put on a dried plaster with egg white, then the poultice, and then the iron plate three fingers long that covers the area of the gibosity and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it on with a rope as we have said, and let the patient rest until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if any other problems arise at the end of the healing process, then one should administer softening and soothing medications along with the iron plate that we mentioned earlier, and sometimes one may also administer a piece of lead
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and sometimes the appearance of a displaced spine in the lower back may arise, and one might think that it is a dislocation; but it is only the bone which has appeared, so one should not make assumptions about this: for it could lead to death
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder only suffer dislocations, unlike other joints, and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back, with more dislocations on the inside than elsewhere, and few dislocations in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the sign of an inner hip dislocation is that when the diseased leg is placed next to the healthy one, it appears longer and the diseased knee joint opens wider than the healthy one, and the diseased leg cannot bend at the knee.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the location of this dislocations is indicated by the presence of a hot swelling or abscess near the hip joint
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one that comes on the outside is that it is opposite to those that have come before
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of one that happens in front is that he walks well with his leg completed; nonetheless, he cannot bend his knee without pain, and if he wants to walk forward, he cannot do so, and he retains his urine, and the angle swells, and when he walks, he walks on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of one that happens behind is that he cannot straighten or bend his knee, and his leg is twisted compared to the other one, and the angle is softened, and the hip joint is located beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment of this type of hip dislocation is that you should ascertain whether the dislocation is recent or old, and if it has remained in its position for some time, then there is no need for treatment; but one must not make assumptions about this.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case of a fresh hip dislocation, which can occur in four ways, you should quickly put the joint back into place, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right or left; perhaps it will return to its proper position, and no other treatment is necessary.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return to its proper position in this way, then you should prepare one strong assistant and stretch the leg strongly with both hands or use a rope tied above the kneejoint
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another assistant places their hands under the shoulders and then ties a soft rope around the hip, while another holds onto the end of the rope
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and all pull upwards and downwards at once so that the patient is lifted off the ground and remains suspended
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of stretching applies to all four types of hip dislocation, and if the dislocation has returned to its proper position as we have said, then that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	But if not, then you must treat it according to its type. If the dislocation is on the inside of the hip joint, then you should have the patient lie on their healthy side, put a rope around the root of the thigh and below the angle, then pull the rope up towards the angle and the groin
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then another assistant should take the patient's arms and embrace the large area of the diseased thigh and stretch it outwards forcefully: now it will return to its proper position, and this type of dislocation is easier than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot reduce it using the method I have described, then you should tie both of the patient's feet together with a soft rope around both ankles and both knees, and stretch the diseased leg two spans further than the other one
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then he should be hung from the head of a beam, and let him hang two arm-lengths above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient embracing the thigh tightly, for the joints return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	"And when the dislocation is at the thigh, let the patient lie down as we said for one with dropsy, and stretch one leg properly upon the sick limb, and also upon the foot."
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	"Then place two pieces of wood: one at the head and one at the feet, then insert one piece of wood between the thighs of the patient in this shape:"
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	"And place moist bandages around to prevent scorching the patient, then each assistant extend towards him, and let the physician put his hand evenly on the dislocation."
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	"If it returns to its place, that is good. If not, place two boards on top of it and press down as we said in the case of dropsy, then let the patient lie on their healthy side."
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	"And when the dislocation is anterior, it is necessary to extend the sick limb quickly, and according to what I have said; then let the physician place his knee upon the angle of the sick leg, then press with his other hand and stretch downward towards the knee."
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	"And if the dislocation is posterior, it is not necessary to extend the patient downward or lift them up from the ground, but rather they should be positioned as if their hip had been dislocated backwards, just like we said about childbirth on two hips."
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	"and they should be lying on their face, and the bandage stretched out as we said earlier, and one must press upon the joint with the board."
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	"And it will be known that the patient has recovered when they extend their legs and they are even. Then adjust the thighs, place the splint, and fasten with a bandage so that the hip does not move."
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	"And let him rest for three or four days, then remove the splint and place it back on. If you see that they are even, then fasten again as before and leave it for another three days. Then remove it and let him go gently until the member is comfortable."
de la dislocation dou genoil	"Of dislocation of the knee"
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	"The kneecap can be dislocated in three ways: inward, outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward."
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	"And the sign is that you tell the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not articulate with their thigh, know that it is dislocated."
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	"And the reduction of all these types is that you make the patient sit up straight and extend their leg if they can. Then place your back against their face and put your foot on theirs."
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	"Then take their kneecap in your palms and draw it between your thighs, then bend both sides of the knee forcefully. Another assistant should extend the patient's foot until the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign is that it articulates easily with the thigh."
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	"And place the splint on it and keep the leg articulated with the thigh for three or four days, then remove it. The patient should not walk until the member is comfortable."
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the limb is not well placed, one must extend it forcefully as we said in the treatment of the hip until it is healed."
de la dislocation dou talon	"Of dislocation of the heel"
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	"The heel can sometimes be dislocated and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	"And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it points forward towards the part where it is dislocated:"
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	"The reduction is easy, and one must extend it gently with both hands when it is only sprained."
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	"And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit up straight and have one assistant pull them forward by the leg above the ankle;"
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	"then pull the foot towards your right hand and then your left hand twice, then extend it upwards and gently put the foot back in place;"
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	"and do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good. If not, start again, for it may return;"
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	"and if it cannot be reduced in this way, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground and firmly stick a peg in the earth between their thighs. Then tie the straps around so that they do not hurt the patient;"
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	"then have one assistant hold the thigh and another extend the foot with both hands or with one hand holding it at the ankle;"
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	"then each assistant should extend equally, and the peg should always be between the patient's thighs to hold them down when extending;"
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	"then the surgeon must gently push the dislocation back into place with both hands while another assistant holds the healthy leg below. The dislocation will return quickly."
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	"And when it is in place, put on the splint and bandages and strap the foot to the leg tightly. Be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle joint so that the straps are not too tight;"
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	"then leave it for two or three days and if the straps have loosened, tighten them. Then remove them on the fourth or fifth day, but do not let the patient walk for four days;"
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	"and if they walk before this time, there is no certainty that it will not dislocate again."
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if inflammation occurs afterwards, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed."
des dois	"of the fingers"
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	"When the fingers are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and this is an easy matter."
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	"And if the dislocation is at any knuckle of the hand, you should make the patient sit on a low stool or table with their back straight. Then place your foot on what opens from these joints and press down hard until it returns;"
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"and when it is equal and nothing opens, place a two-legged table under the sole of the foot. Then extend it forcefully and leave it for three days before removing it. Let them rest until they are healed."
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	"of wound and dislocation together"
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to reset it,
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	"If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate, merciful, and careful, not hasty."
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	"And at the beginning of the treatment, use soothing remedies for hot inflammation, and leave the patient in God's hands if there is no hope of recovery."
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	"And when you see hope, then set the limb back in place before the hot inflammation comes."
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	"Once the limb is back in place, apply remedies to cool the inflammation and treat the wound with drying ointments as needed."
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	"And if there is also fracture along with the dislocation, and small bones are dislocated, set them and do what we have said for simple fractures."
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	"And guard yourself from taking the path of fear, as I have said, for it is better for you to die according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and body. Amen."
Explicit le romen de fisique	"The book of physics ends"
