Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the tail of the science of medicine, and I have brought it to its conclusion with the explanations and declarations made by him. And in my vision I came to know that I have completed this work with this treatise, which is part of the old book of hands, namely "chirurgy".
And because the book of hands is well established in our region and has been transmitted to every part of it, if that science dies out, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions found in ancient books written by the hands. And from this comes the error and arrogance, understanding is closed and the science has been separated.
Or it seems to me that I have revived this treatise by following its path of exposition and declaration, abbreviation; and bringing together the forms of instruments used for cauterization, and other tools from the old book, along with their application and preparation as is proper.
And for the reason that no good master of hands has been found in our time, the art of medicine is turned aside. And it requires someone who will immerse themselves in the science of anatomy, as Galiens says, so long as they know the judgment of bones, and their forms and combinations, and are acquainted with the bones, nerves, muscles, and number of limbs, understanding their movement and resting states, and from where their issues come.
And for this reason Epicurus said that it is not much with the ignorant and little with the old work; and therefore in the art of hands.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that who is not knowledgeable about what has been said before, he will fall into error and harm others; therefore I have often seen many like those who involve themselves in this science and abandon it, lacking understanding and experience.
For I see a foolish man who performs an abscess operation on the backbone or the side of a woman and cuts her arteries, so much blood flows out that the woman dies in his arms.
And I see another man who betrays a large stone by piercing it with an arrow, and the stone was big; he carried away part of the bladder with him, and wounded him within three years.
And I would have already been called the traitor for this treatment of the sick and the size of the wound, and I know well that if his condition had deteriorated further.
And I see another man who treated Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break he had an open wound; the doctor's ignorance restricted the break in the wound as much as possible by bandaging it tightly, and left no room for drainage from that wound, and ordered him not to drain it; and remained so until his leg was completely amputated and he died.
I came to him and hurrying up to see him as fasten the leg; and when I saw that he did not feel any pain.
C'sainte en ire de lou maunde paroles parlez ilmeant ite: ententende in olden parlement ofiours, aurobeautes.
nichement.
Because a sore, when it is pure of black bile, does not require that we touch iron on it unless part of the body has opened up, which allows everything inside to be destroyed.
And for this reason, cutting off a fillet, it is necessary that you know that work of hands is designed in .ij divisions: namely, whether the heart or it has danger in several positions; and I will show in each chapter of this book where there is fear and risk.
For this reason you need to be careful, so that the old physician does not speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in defense, and engage your ill-fated limbs hastily and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may be saved and honored; and leave to suffering spontaneous diseases their proper remedy; and weaken your weapons so that no doubt exists about you, and make sure that through all this world you can come back with glory.
Galen made it clear with one of his admonitions: "Do not treat the bad illnesses, lest you call the wise physician foolish."
I have divided this treatment according to .ii chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cautery and bloodletting, and the chapters are ordered from head to feet; and concerning the forms of incision, and surgical strikes with cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered with respect to the forms of incisions.
The third chapter is about the repositioning of dislocations and twisted joints; and it is ordered from head to toe as well as the forms of incision.
So since our memory of old, it is required that I mention the quality and harm of each constitution.
I say that the quality and harm of help is the longest word and most subtle science and secret replies; from which various surgeons spoke about it, and agreed to it, but little pleased them with my words because I fear being prolonged.
I say that the aid of cautery is universal to all constitutions, for it has matter in two ways: namely hot constitution with dry matter and cold constitution with wet matter.
In the combination of hot and dry matter, no one decided and they said that cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery is only good for diseases caused by heat and drought.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used as a treatment for diseases caused by heat or drought; and those who said otherwise stated that cautery provides great help to such heat-and-dry diseases coming from within the body. For when you compare the body and its moisture to hot constitutions, you correct the body's alignment.
And I agree to this word. Because I have found it through experimentation.
And all ways, we avoid them not unless they have tried it themselves, know well the chapters of cauteries, and the variety of constitutions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and remedies for the times of the year; as for other constitutions we do not fear, especially in cold and wet illnesses. And all those who are great joined together and agreed upon the use of cautery.
And you know, my son, that in combination with fire the secrets of cures are found, and more benevolence than hot medical preparations.
Because fire is simple and does not come from the limb that is cold; it only affects such a limb and harms no other member very much.
The medicines coming from another member causing when it separates them and bring about disease to the patient; and occasionally they cause pain.
Laet siens tote dexpressé à mains parler in this 14th century vatims aisin theures.troisame tounce of theu (Latin.
suregachute.  alex:give:ceterfeu isseverre haste,regements. The text andesculumbreatck Iescription. Andre of thevexacme:nce:troi, without (instrumental.
And you must know, son, when during that time they agree on how to perform the cauteries, and apply them immediately afterwards.
And I say that caustic is always appropriate, because the pain caused by its application with aids of caustics is borne within the time; and especially when cauterizations are necessary for essential pains or hurts which cannot wait until greater harm does not affect the limb.
And you never think, dear son, about how the foolish man acts; for there is no return on a disease healed by caustic treatment; and they say so in this way: however, it's not as if they cure with them since cauterization does not affect complexion or dry the humors which are the cause of pain, but rather it serves to quickly remove value from the body and its work and dignity.
And the choice lies that disease does not grow according to the constitution of the patient or the essence and virtue of the illness and its excesses are gathered within it through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauterizations are performed therein if there are few excesses and moisture, as with caustic for pain relief and similar effects, so that hardly any returning pain; but this rarely happens.
And many do not understand why caustic treatments are referred to as the "backbone" of medicine, but it's seen; however, they don't believe that caustics are worth after medical treatment because their understanding is false, and caustic treatments are considered the backbone of medicine for this reason: when we administer cures for any disease, these cures do not hold value, so we apply cauterization, and it holds. And although caustic treatment is considered the backbone of medicine, it does not necessarily align with the understanding of the people (folz).
The ancient doctors said that caustic tools made of gold are more valuable than those made of iron, and they spoke only about the quality of the gold and the height of its substance; and they claimed that the tool of cauterization does not cause erosion, but this is not seen because I have experienced it, and in some people, and caustic tools made of gold are more useful than those made of iron, as they said.
And in everything where you heat an instrument of gold, you do not see it heated by the color of the gold, and if it is suddenly cooled; and if it is heated too much, then they burn at the fire, and thus there is enough impediment.
And for this we use iron cautery that we have made apparent in our work.
I have ordered this chapter from the top down, so that the text is easier to find.
Iron oval-shaped cautery
These cauteries are made of moisture and cold, placed on the head, and in them there is caused by a disease called "soda," as well as by many humors descending to the top of the skull, ears, etc., due to numerous dreams and pain of density and throat, and most of all for all diseases that come from cold so similar to paralysis, stroke, and other similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that it clears the patient's pain by medicine resolving the third or fourth cause, according to what the virtue and effectiveness of the treatment on the malady allow it to withstand; and then they go back to the top of the malady.
And then it fits between your hands, and put your hands on the pieces of wood; after that you place one palm's root over the other's root between its two fingers; when his blood comes out, ward off the cautery called "olivare," for from this form:
And the ink is put on his hand signifying writing, and you pull out your hands little by little, tearing them off; then let your hand rest, and reward the wound as much as it becomes an ivory fragment; and if you do not see any bone, you must continue using the cautery until you can see a fragment of bone like I told you; after that take some sinew, wrap it softly inside, and place on his hand; let it be for three years; afterwards put butter wrapped in cloth on it; allow it to warm up until the bone heals, as long as they call "tetrapharmacy."
And they said the old ones that as long as you stay longer on the wound, it will purify more; and for this reason it is useful.
And none of these say that you should relax the iron cautery enough to bruise it softer; and then treat him who has a bone fracture, and care for this bone.
lore
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be very good in every aspect, fire that no man has ever had a reason to fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the shoulder joint is weakened by continuous moisture, as we have witnessed in other limbs; and regarding my own malformed shoulder, which is naturally feeble, and the first signs of cautery are more safe and flexible for me, and therefore I use this method.
The principal pain from the incision
When in the whole chief comes chronic pain that lasts long, and uses the malady's remedies called "cock-shells," and cleansing of the incision site, removal of oils and dressings; and if one does the cautery we have mentioned before, it is not.
Take care that the patient's shoulder is of strong nature, and it not be too cold; otherwise, we will cauterize on top of the already mentioned cautery a little bit as we have said above.
After performing cauterization under each bone of the incision site as we have said before, and placing a few "wattles" or clamps; and keep your hand away so that you do not see into the bone: the maladies feel much greater pain from this cautery than with other techniques, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary for those who perform cauterization on the horns to be more subtle than those who cauterize most of the incision site, which form is:
double cautery of the incision When in one part of the incision comes sudden pain that spreads the disease further into the oil (tissue), and the shoulder is purified by universal medicines; and it has been done all other treatments I mentioned regarding the division of diseases, and none of this helps at all; therefore, make cauterizations according to two methods, which are medicine water and fire.
The cautery of medicine water if it requires a dozen days for the scab to fall off and expose the bone; then you dole out one or two times as much as the shoulders, and treat the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can reapply the dozen days' poultices under the skin so that it rests well and leave it during twelve years. Then remove them and put cotton wool submerged under burnt oil; and then let it be left for three or four, as long as this text is:
After the purification when he is healthy; and if you find any of the burned remedies that I have written about or treated many burnt remedies.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the iron cautery until it takes on this shape:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cross or with little curvature, and placed on the painful spot; and take your hand and restrain the fire slightly, so that most of the heat does not escape the wound; and let your hand be such that the burn does not occur elsewhere, and circulate abundantly blood.
After applying linen cloth to the wound and placing it for three years; then I apply moistened cotton in fat and treat the purified wound until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellate," at all points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
of the migraine
When curing migraines as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not yield any benefits, and you see that the cultellate cautery before mentioned in medicine deals with fire but cannot touch iron; therefore, heat the cultellate cautery until it is white; then place a straight line half a dozen spans long on the next lower spot, and hold your hand once, so as not to cover the artery and let it move along the bone; warn against a silent jaw when moving that does not make noise or tremors in the patient's face, and protect the nerves from being affected by muteness and spasms in a maladjusted state. Also warn about the drainage of blood from the artery once it is opened, or opening with great risk and concern; let me leave you to your way; but I will tell you how sanguineous substances are handled when the artery has been opened, and I will show in this book where such a sign appears on the page.
And if you see that this cautery does not affect the disease, and the patient suffers from it, then cauterize as we have said previously in the same context, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, apply the cautery that we or the chirurgical barber have mentioned for artery extraction, with a cautery equipped with two knives; and this type of cautery is better than any other and most helpful.
of the pain in the ears colder parts.
When pain arises in the ear due to cold, and it has been treated with remedies that we have discussed in this division of treatments, and the pain does not cease, therefore heat this cautery called "pokes" until its shape is as follows:
After poking all the maladies of both ears, and then remove it slightly above the ear root; and make it so with ten poins on each ear until it is healthy. Then treat the purified wound.
Of cauterizans. Seur leu emmeintes, et ceux les pele cueillent chefeil t’est curé de la pei:ment. It is toche.saint lesbien ayeitre pei desormen the French.
i:cause:
When you treat this deafening torture caused by the flow of yellow dust and secretions from the head, and since it doesn't amount to much, then you must cauterize the patient with .iij. (two) cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little further back in the temple, and the third on the alignment of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that is still healthy, and apply it to the head's upper part above a little from the hard core of the head, and another one in the temple just as far outward as some poke, and let the cauterization last until the moisture dries on the wound; this is how you should use the cautery.
And it is the subtler form of the cutlass that we have used before, but it should be slightly larger; after curing the wound as I have previously mentioned, until it heals completely.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said before, there's no benefit to be gained, nor does the sick person have a fever; nevertheless, you must perform .iiij (three) cauterizations: three on top of the two hard cores, one under the head, and another called "wattles" in our previous discussion, as we mentioned before, and treat it accordingly. And treat the wound there below the mouth of the stomach; do so as previously described.
Of antimony (litargiria)
This disease requires you to give the patient long years and potent pills that will cleanse the brain; afterwards, he treats the head of the patient completely, and places the spine implant made from black pepper (written about or described in plasters) on the back of the skull; and this is how you should perform cauterization: as I have previously mentioned.
If the wound is healed like that, it's good; and if it isn't, then you must perform .iij (three) cauterizations on the sides of the head, descending just above the collarbone, with a space of .i. (.one) fistful of thick material between each cautery; and treat it as for other wounds, if you find any additional discomfort in the patient, then perform another cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, others on top of the two horns, and continue treating until healed. And this is called "olive tree" cautery, as I have previously mentioned.
Of coldness at the head (froidor dou chief) It requires that the head be purified by years and everything we have previously mentioned; after treating the patient's head completely, then he places the cautery on top of the head, under each horn, two in the spinal cord at the neck, and if you have more skill, and the sick person is moist, and the disease is very severe, so he performs .iiij (three) cauterizations on the spinal cord of the back; and let his hand. And then treat it until healed completely; and this one called "olive tree" cautery that we have mentioned before.
s :twitchime: httpsighreis.cestiqu56:2000e (theuppeurge: and itacount:sesque, assobtique:se:trolet:suforange;lore:nagre aye deiticlex proucheinti.
The lice should not use fiery cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first clarify the brain of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division where the malady is large and suffering from medicine treatment.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, he shall make gargling and chewing to clarify the brain often with tender meats; after that he will apply .i. cautery as we have said before, and .i. cautery on his thighs, and on every horn; and if the malady is very severe and suffering, he shall perform cauterizations as I have described to one who has paralysis and muscle weakness in the spine and neck, and apply cautery olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
And if the malady is an infant, he shall perform .i. cautery in this subtle way:
When due to the cause of melancholy there are excess or corrupted moistures and thick phlegm, accordingly the piece-cauterization we have mentioned to one who has paralysis.
And if due to the cause of melancholy there are declining excesses towards melancholy and the wet corpse is weakened by it, therefore he gives drink for the brain to be clarified according to what has been said before in this section.
After the head of the malady; after making an iron or linen circle like a circle, so he puts it on the chief; and if the maladies are twisted, they must be well held in all parts; then the linen covering, made from old goat's burnt wool, is applied to the head of the malady at constant heat, so that it can suffer it. After removing the circle part by part around the chief and letting it cool down, he does this treatment once a week with other beneficial governance as long as the maladies are cured.
Or if you see that the head of the malady is subjected to more than one piece of cauterization, this method softens the brain much; and then he puts cotton wadding in linen and lard made from a hedgehog.
from the nails When the first signs appear as I have said in this section; and then he begins to drink water for the malady, and it is forbidden to him and he does bleed several times on an empty stomach.
ses cecele (which.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and cutting the caulis, as you will squeeze them; and never have we done a cautery or piercing behind those two bones.
Corner of tears
When tears from the eyes are ancient and customary and are under the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the face's surface; and we see it is superfluous cold humoral fluids, as I said at the beginning of my lowering the eyeballs: first cauterize the head, and then two cauters on the temples, and then three cauters around those two bones; and if there is a need more, they will cauterize above the suture with every small cauter.
Corner of tears between the eyes
When the medicine as we have said in the division does not benefit at all, but rather causes harm to three naughty children; afterward he lowers the head and makes a bloodletting with one or two sticks called "ovilear", and then performs three cauterizations of what is called "clavicula" under those two sutures, and warns you from the artery that you must not touch. And it is the shape of the cauter that is called "clavicula":
When the oil paper is softened by disease and moisture, therefore, the bloodletting with this cautery called "olivare" that has such a shape. Because of which there it is:
And if you see making two cauterizations under those two sutures as well as the sutures themselves; and do not let your hand go without keeping it there until three-quarters of the paper has been burned, according to how I have said before.
Two hairs which indicate the oil Never has the hairs of the oil turned red and burned, and they hold it with fire; and he does it thus: that is to say, whether by fire or fierce medicine.
ge esle (Ice:age. Ages comfaire. Ilte.combrein.
When they are born and equal in size, then the doctor puts it on your health; after that he writes on a paper above their ears a figure as if the little flame had been there or began the sign next to the hairs; then he wets cotton moistened with oil and musk near the skin, then shapes the fire cautery accordingly:
After the cauterization of the figure you have signed and signaled little and often, so that it remains red in place; and the signs of your health are that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for two years, then moistened cotton is placed on burlap until he warms up completely. Afterward, bathe with warm water so that it becomes healthy.
And if afterwards the hairs come back and the paper becomes soft again, then repeat the cautery on that spot as you have done before; and if the hairs are gone, continue to cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, is even and does not prick at the oil.
The hot cauteries of medicine command that you let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of paper from the sheet of myrtle; take one-and-a-half spoonfuls each of soap and fine brass, grind them together well; do it hastily so it does not cool down, then sprinkle it on top of the form made with the myrtle leaf, and place it over the paper where you put the hairs; and if the disease is in only one oil, then treat both at once; and apply cotton moistened with wax to the oil; and let your malady be healthy again and show on the medicine two finger widths, and press a little bit every time when you feel a sensation of heat from the medicine, as it also feels like fire. When you have done that for a long time, if the medicine has taken effect on your need. And when the sensation of heat is no longer present, lift up the oil layer as if it had been lifted by the force of fire or incision; and if so, it is well done. If not, you still put medicine on your oil or the medicine has not worked yet, as long as your limbs are equal in size and the hairs are at a point; then place cotton moistened with burlap until the redness arises again under the layer of warmth which is called "dafenis" and others, so that it becomes healthy.
And if you have learned that you must care for your work well so that it does not reject the medicine in the hairs. If the paper becomes soft again, and the hairs prick at the oil, then resume the treatment on that spot as they are mollified with the paper; afterward, bathe until he is healthy. And this is the shape of the fire flame:
And knowing that the size of men varies greatly in height and smallness, and according to this, it should be determined by the constraints set upon him; and not necessarily restored to the right path for those who study this art.
The treatment of a fistula using cauterization.
When curing a fistula as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not yield results, yet it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Command the patient to place his head in your safe position; and hold him upright with your hands so that he does not move or get hurt, afterwards put moistened cotton inside a clean cloth under his arm or on top of olive oil; afterwards perform cauterization according to this technique: and the patient's head is shaped like an arrowhead, gather it together if you apply the cautery; if you see any contact between one side and another, and if you see a patchwork-like appearance; but in all cases, such treatment holds value for your work.
After pressing the fistula when it is open and removing its exudate, and drying it; if it is closed, perform this operation and remove any remaining wound sutures; after applying hot cautery resembling a needle's head, hold your hand at the part underneath the oil where your hands should not act foolishly; and apply the cautery in the oil fat, which you will corrupt.
If you start the cautery right at the bone, it would be better. If not, then restart the cautery once more if you have experience in doing so, and leave it for 2 years; afterwards apply moistened cotton wrapped in cloth, and treat the drying oozing wound as long as it remains healthy, and for another 40 years until the bone is exposed. This procedure follows what would come according to your chapter.
And there is a method of treating a fistula that none of the ancient doctors mentioned. When dealing with an abscess, and opening it up; after creating a small incision in the cavity where its shape can be seen: and apply the quantity of about .З. of molten wax; hold your hand or small camahan tightly so that no painful nerve moves at all, because the melted fat does not return to its oil; it is necessary to place moistened cotton in a clean cloth undernee his arm or on top of olive oil: this wax forms the head of the fistula and ensures superb healing.
And if the fistula is healed with the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then administer a syringe to the cavity and bring back the fistula to its place according to what it requires in his own way.
And draw cracked veins. Often there are cracked lips called "hairs," especially in children's mouths.
When you heal these cracks as we have discussed in sections, and the treatment does not work, instead it worsens.
And you apply haste to those cracks while they still form; after the treatment, ensure that the joints are healed completely.
from the incision on the thigh
When the incision is made in the thigh root or on the uve (eye), or in the roots of the teeth, after there has been rot and rupture, and it becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have described in divisions, but it does not improve. However, it requires that you use a scalpel according to the size of the fistula; after opening the fistula'e sore, hold your hand firmly until the bone heals at its base, and where the lower leg is; and perform these steps once or twice more after curing what we have described in treatments, until it has healed completely. And if cured as such, it is good; but if not, you must discover the underlying bone and remove the diseased bone according to what your chaplain finds.
movements of the teeth roots
When the gums are softened by moisture and the roots of the teeth move, you cure them with medicine, but that does not suffice; therefore place a tight band on your head. After removing the cautery which forms after this treatment in part like how you would apply a pack to the tooth, hold it firmly during application, and keep your hand there until the painful heat from the root of the tooth reaches out. Release your hand then, and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after that fill the mouth with saliva, and let the inflammation last for an hour or so before removing the packs.
And in the manner that the moving teeth roots are confirmed, and the softened gums restricted, and the corrupted moistures cleansed.
from the pain in the teeth roots
"cautere d’un maundr'eveignement des'aivres en l'estatifs par escript :et sanc com aicourtie ceu durement, et il nen:er aime ancornein itens dele neils : "Aurant,re devenentures. offeres theuccles of ittears :meintroil'sans theuere.
sainages to la 1 heurichleurs l'arouter :3oreuissevise a grewisalecekanalimenteweelies the cruignevelo
The collective fire instruments are such that you need a piece of iron or lead, and it should be large enough so that the flames do not blow away from the patient's face; after the heat, this instrument will form thereafter, and you place it on the teeth with your hand until the instruments cool down. Do this often, because the pain will then be felt either in the same day or the next morning. And it must be that the patient fills his mouth with good fodder quickly in the hurry of this instrument, and then he is purged; and this is the form of this cautery.
When leprosy is of slimy and cold moisture, and it does not respond to digestion with medicines, then you shape the cautery iron by heating; place openings on one side for the fumes to escape from the cautery; put the cautery at the mouth of the abscess once or twice, depending on how much there is, and let it move until the abscess ceases moving; and if the abscess is small, you apply the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three years; then cover with cotton soaked in wool until the arthritis has subsided.
When moisture overcomes the channels of the palate and particularly when it comes from cold temperatures, then it must first be treated with soluble medicines by the patient; afterward you apply cautery to the root of the throat, making sure not to touch the neck or cause a burn but just a little. After that, you make another cautery at the junction of the collarbone and the spine's head, which we have called "clavile"; and treat the wound as we have described previously until it is healed.
of the stroke When all diseases of the palate are moist and cold, and there is no fever in the patient, and it is an ancient disease, you make two cauteries on the muscle with previously used wires; another cautery removes a piece between the breasts; and that which we call "clavile" according to the form described above.
And if you see, apply the instrument of fire called "poin" which is here in the disease of the ears; and let these points be just thereabouts or so long as they last; after curing the wound according to what has been said above, and that it is applied for three times:
And for this reason the fire cautery is lighter, because you use .iij. crowns.
When analyzing the frequency and impact of shoulder dislocations within an occupational health study focusing on assembly line workers: When the shoulder joint is displaced due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly displacing with slight movement as we have seen, then you must first address the displacement. After the pain is pressed on his back and on his chest; after lightly feeling the lump that lies deep in the tissue between the ribs with your left hand, if it dislodges within, then you should apply a heating stick of .ij. nodes shape to this area:
And then the lump should be burned as long as it remains in the chest, and the smoke from the fire rises together with .iiij. sticks of cautery; for this is how cauterization is performed with the stick that has .iij. nodes, so these are the number of sticks used, according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of a stick with .iij. nodes:
And there is never any adjustment made on that .i. nerve, so it has .viij. cauteries:
After applying the cautery with rope and bandage; after allowing the patient to rest, and ensure that his limbs are not disturbed for a long time until he is well-supported:
And if it is dislocated above, the consequences are minimal; however, perform cauterization on the thick layer of cautery underneath the clavicle, or by pressing many sticks therein. Because the joint has been referred, and moisture has accumulated, resulting in sore pain:
Do not refer to a stick used for treating pleurisy:
According to the ancients, pleurisy should be treated with root sticks of Aristoglossum, and in this manner: take one such stick that is the largest you can find; dry it or make it as long and thick as you deem necessary; coat it with oil, apply a fire on the spot between his armor and his collarbone, and then add .ij. sticks to the area below his chin; and .ij. cauteries beneath his fifth rib, and then some more, and one each in declining slightly in his forearm; and .iij. sticks on either side of his calfes, and .iiij.
suret, lec.comme itin ate:
of moisture
When you cure the disease of dampness because we have said in our discussions about treatments, and it does not help at all, for indeed they use three kinds of heat applications that are good.
From which method do you apply two or three burns depending on the length of the dampness, and according to the size and shape of the cautery wound that we have previously mentioned; and never press your hand onto the entire cauterized area, but rather on both sides of it.
And another method of cautery is to heat the instrument with two or three notches as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of a shoulder; and warm the point where the dampness is located, either on the side from which the pain originates, or the direction it tends towards, and raise the heated point according to its location, length, and width.
After you blow the two or three notches and heat it to where they are perceived from another side, then thrust the instrument, and thereby it has three; if you see a patient who needs complete treatment of that area with three notches. Then after curing when he suffers from long-term discharge, this is considered equivalent to one of the treatments previously mentioned.
from disease (referring back to "dislocation" in previous context)
Cautery is not effective on its own for this reason because it stirs "asclytes" or fermentation within the body; when you apply our methods of treatment as discussed in our divisions, and your cure does not yield results, but it requires that you perform three burns around the discharge, one on the abdomen, one on the liver, one under the dampness, and two behind the spine, near the kidney; and place the cautery well close to the spot of inflammation.
ounsume dues, etisentre desmeinantilentures ande laisse deins tostotre thekes deignent. Aid invis-laisse thekes devellocture. Aold.
The fire cautery should have the shape of a key for the abdomen; and he who does it for the back should do it on the shoulder blade, as shown before us here.
Swelling of the joints When the joints are swollen due to ydropic (presumably "iodous" or iodine-related condition), and they are covered in yellowish spots, it is required that you perform cautery on the back of the hand between the little finger and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery while not entering too deeply, so as to avoid burns from the yellowish substance, and carry out the cauterization according to this shape:
After doing it on both legs at the tip of the cutting blade; and you perform the cautery along the length, one in front of the knee and the other behind, within the leg; and let the cauteries run over long enough for them to work out, which will drain the substance; after treating the other treatments that we have mentioned.
Of medication
When the ventricular solution comes from cold and moisture, as it impairs both retaining and digestive virtues of the stomach and in the intestines is inflamed, and cannot be treated by any means; see the patient suffering greatly with intense strength, then you make one strong cauterization on the stomach according to what he has said here before; and four delicate cautions undernee a single caution at the belly button; and three cautions on the thighs.
And if you see moistures accumulating and the patient suffering, then you perform one strong caution on the scrotum, and one small caution on each side; and three small cautions on the stomach near the large, as the cure is beneficial when it has good assistance.
Of hemorrhages treatment
When hemorrhages are the foundation or one or more, and they are ancient and large, cold, moist, rotten humors, and they are divided as we have said here beforehand, and it does not benefit at all if you perform cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, which is behind the navel point; and one cauterization under the belly button, two others.
ilumine adore le parole theuccle devisible: The French. Amenodexac's fei. Allitent. Eldes aura: "thexent's, le :er andromainde laisse of course fromage. Inbraccles. Iustin.
of the choleric temperament which is called "thélul"
If you cope with the choleric temperament, wield the scourge that appears as an iron-hot blade, and then place it above this choleric temperament in such a way that your hand remains unscathed until the blade grows from its birth; let it do so once or twice, and if it has much choleric temperament, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward perform healing rites as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great hot iron, there will be more aid.
Of wounds badly treated
When the patient cannot endure cutting or piercing, let us tell it in its own words, there comes a sickness that no one can heal except with cautery.
When there is no fistula present and it has become swollen and filled with rotten moisture, let the treatment be carried out in its entirety as much as the affected area requires; after scraping like a rake upon that quantity which entered into the fistula, continue using the scraper until those pus-filled abscesses have been removed once, twice, or thrice, according to the extent of the necessity. Then warn you against burning nerves and great cables therein; do not cause harm to such channels merely by chance; after treatment, ensure that the channel is healthy again, and if its lining is ossified for a distance, then you know it has been fully healed; and if the materials are bones long in length, and cartilage present, then you know the fistula is completely cured. And similarly to those things we shall explain later on.
Regarding kidney disease When frozen pain comes with heavy winds and it takes much from women, then you must make caution upon one part of the rains and another at the clavicle that we have mentioned before; if your causticization in general is done by means of thirty such instruments, then there will be more aid.
Regarding the bladder When the bladder is soft and weakened by pressure and moisture, so that it retains urine, then he shall perform a cauterization on the lower part above the bladder, whereby the hair begins to curl towards both sides, and each one with such cautery in its nose as they would do; and let him cauterize backwards, or if you have need of it, there are two ways: either he shall cauterize the back, or the clavicle according to the previously mentioned form.
Translation for "de la marris" not applicable as it does not appear in Old French medical texts related to medieval medicine. It might be a misinterpretation or typo of an actual line from an older text. Therefore, no accurate translation can be provided without the proper context or correct phrase. When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not permit conception, and the flowers are corrupt and their ends delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: therefore he must perform three cauterizations around the swelling, as we have said about the bladder, and two on the backside, and also cauterize the clavicle according to what we have stated.
Translation for "de la hainche" not applicable in this context either since it is an unrelated term and may indicate a typo or misinterpretation of actual Old French medical terminology pertaining to medieval medicine. It could potentially refer to 'of the hunchback' which relates more to physical deformity than medical procedure, but without further context, we cannot provide an accurate translation within the scope of historical medical practices.
When the viscous moisture descends to the hunchback's joint, causing it to move from its place and showing that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and where you find the detached part of the joint, it must be cauterized on the hunchback's joint with such a cautery as if resembling a circle, and in front of the joint within the hunchback so that the joint turns like those previously cautioned for the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present for you, then he shall perform three large cautions from the olive tree, and also shall do so as all the others have done; and let it be well-cared-for until it is healed.
Translation: The pain of the hunchback's joint, which may refer to the discomfort experienced due to a misaligned or dysfunctional spinal structure affecting mobility and causing localized pain in the region commonly associated with 'hunchback'. This text likely describes symptoms that could lead to various treatments including cauterization. When pain arises in the joint of the hunchback and it is due to coldness and moisture, and this affliction must be cured as we have said about its division; and its treatment does not suffice, and this disease is ancient: therefore he must purge the malady from these heavy humors with foul-tasting pills or other similar bones.
: le cautere cestan leu auceil XIIIe, si enlissus. Qu'on cetera XXIIj.XIII theor: Iesme. Ache sachte lix ofere,le a laisser leuillei; lorescripture.
And if you see, when he cauterizes the circle as we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hernia; but do it partially so that the circles contain all of the hernia, and all its edges are hard like iron.
And that is how it's done in the sciatic nerve when the pain is located in the hernia and does not reach down to the thigh or leg; if it reaches the thigh and leg, he makes .ij. cauterizations where the patient indicates that the pain is, and .i. cauterization above the ankle .iiij., on the left side a little; and either cuticle cauterizes, and sometimes bruises harden; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two or three inches from where it felt, then he cauterizes there for .i. or .iiij. points on the cautery called "points".
And if it is proper, he does more; and when the pain is located under the jaw toward the thigh, he makes cauterizations with a cuticular or circular cautery, ensuring that in all your cauterizations you do not let the cautery burn too much so as to injure nerves and large arteries, and cause no greater harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have heard of several who performed cauterization on the piece above the pain, and left it until the leg was completely relaxed, and also the ankle, and all the pieces were seen and rotten. After a stomach solution which he died from.
And if the pain is in .ij. parts assembled, do it on one and on the other according to this manner. // The surgeon said in the cauterization of the hernia, that's how you should make it, .i. iron pieces and either as big as a nail or slightly smaller, or by slits between them spaced by about the length of an inch; and place the slits over each other, with approximately .ij. inches apart, and they look like needles, and have one handful of iron well made; and this is the form:
And should it be heated so that it becomes all red and tender, and then place it on the sick hernia of the patient, turn it over the healthy side; the cauterizer performs .i. cauterizations repeatedly and leaves for .iij. years; and make a plaster of wax, and leave the wound exposed for long periods until healed after the treatment with oil.
Albucasim said that we use only a little of this cauterization for the patient's sake and if there are few who use it; and all in all, these are good cauteries which can endure suffering without complaint.
of two-point pain
When the pain comes out of cold au dedent de l'oreille, et au coi se liens ceaile: "ses armes ouyseigneurs desuccle encolures laissier les maltreme d’aurois entorne pasce encomprendre.
n deffle citer queimbret enceure.
naginea:decomprectiforent
When you see it and see to heal it, if you cauterize with the caustic of that cell according to this form.
If the purple caustic touches each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, cauterize along the spine with a pointed instrument in two or three lines, and place them close together. After curing it until it is sound according to what we have said, and warn you not to use caustics covered in nerve fluid.
of pain at joints
When the pain at joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each limb'e and when it comes in a cramped form they call it "podagre" properly, and when it is cold-caused and cannot be cured with medicine, then this must be cared for partially: make the purple caustic enter at the joint of the foot, and place the pointed instrument oval according to this shape.
And if there is need for you to pierce the face of the foot, and place cautery on all the caustic that calls it "point," and when pains wander down into the genitals and other joints, and this often happens, then make cautery in each one of the three or four parts of every joint, with the entire pointed instrument; and if you have to do more, but hold your hand firmly only until the arthritis has disappeared.
And if the pain descends down to the genitals and back, then apply the caustic that we have mentioned in our chapter. If the pain is in the hands, make points along the vein of two or three lines; and if there remains no pain on any joint, make points on each joint and on the hairs of the hand. And if the pains come down to the hips or shoulders, cauterize every part, and govern carefully the patient and his medicines. For if you do this well and purge mucus, it will heal with God'e help.
of the process of sycophancy
If the routine comes in anger, and the belly descends into the joints, it must be that when you see to heal him, you do not make him cry for three days; and you use things which lay open his stomach so that food may come out of his belly. Then have him sit on your back between your hands, and command him to draw a line until the joints are repaited. And mark anoint on one side as if it were a sign of three-quarters of a circle above their shoulder; then strike with the caustic in that form:
Let the hairs grow long and flat until they shed; then reset them to their place; and the attendants color their hands so that they do not return to their original position; and work well on the thigh of the patient, and put an iron pin and a strap under it, and another one beneath it which paints his hands; then apply the cautery over all your hand, and the right side and the left side until you touch the bone, and if you do not touch the bone in the first attempt, he may return to it several more times while you are still with the bone; and warn subtly that the hair does not rise when you apply the cautery, or else burn him, or else harm him.
And you must know that when the cautery does not touch the bone with it, your efforts are worthless; and it is necessary to cauterize children's ears gently according to their size, and large people also large according to their size; after three years treat his ear with a burnt cautery until he has scalded the ossicles; afterwards treat him with other ointments so that he becomes healthy again, and rest for forty days on his back until the wound is well set. And it is necessary for them to lie still long enough so that the hair does not rise when they get up from bed.
: and thearumbrein versail. Of the journey of the stomach
When other dislocations come into play and are known, and you see that they no longer increase, he does some fire cautery according to its quantity, and either one-third of the heat; after curing as we have mentioned; and none of the ancients said it must be cauterized at three angles following this form:
But the first sign is at the entrance and make a line above the route for its width, and another below it; and hold your hand near all the fire cautery. But the initial cauteries are heavier and more vigorous. (Note: This translation interprets the Old French text as describing steps in treating dislocations with fire cautery. Without full context, this interpretation is speculative.)
of ancient pain in no limb. When pain comes in no limb, or from a fall or injury, and that pain lasts long, and the treatment of medicine is not worth it, therefore it must be cauterized with the "pins" (a type of medical instrument), and make the fire cautery according to the length, size, frailty, strength, location of twists and sprains, as well as its pain; if it's healed after the first cautery, that's good enough. However, it is customary for it to change in the limb close at hand, so you must continue making the cauteries until the patient feels better.
of mediation
.i'amende deuin aiains :ainsi curant :l'itge, siat. AI'a litter written. Old French ita theit.comme inca.nobtains :all :iatient. In English: The Old-olden. Icelike inatominum asaprise in theithes ail fromage.
iere:sseuille the thiscipher so 13usther to the
And you know that the more I perform cauterization, the more help I give, and he benefits; and you know that the painless burns do not hurt the sick as much as healthy people feel, because their bodies are already corrupted. And it is required that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you find in the methods of working iron. After treating his body with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until he is healthy.
The text "de enfleure" does not provide enough context or content to translate into a meaningful English sentence, as it appears to be either an incomplete word or phrase in Old French. Please provide additional information for translation.
When swelling comes to no limb and is treated with medicines and oils, and it's not cured according to the size of the limb; and sometimes they do a small incision near the edge of the wound where there is an immobile nerve, then treatments are given until healed. And never made a cautery on the hand or foot or back, at the site of the nerve that makes the swelling so, and in any case no one meddles with such things unless they know about limbs and moving nerves within the body's movement.
The text "de albaras" seems to be an incomplete phrase or word. In Old French, "albaras" refers to barley (grain), but without context, it cannot be accurately translated into a line of English prose. Please provide more information for translation.
The disease that attacks the barley is aged, and the art of medicine does not help at all, so they cauterize it with a small amount of fire according to the size of the burn, until the scorched area becomes stone-like, and then treat with flour mixed several times with lentils, olive oil roasted in plantain leaves, blood from pigs and ducks (for each part), and all together either moistened or wrapped in a cloth, or applied to the wound until healed.
The treatment of sores by cauterization: When dealing with sores treated by cauterization, it is important to consider the size and severity of the lesion. Cauterization should be used as a last resort when other treatments have failed. It involves carefully applying heat or chemicals to destroy the affected tissue. However, this method can lead to scarring and must be performed by an experienced medical professional.
When the sore comes at the beginning and you see to stop it, if you cauterize with a circle-shaped cautery that encompinas the entire circumference of the sore. And everyone said they also made cauteries in the midst of the sores; but this doesn't seem right to me because I fear it might become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen any such practice before; and more righteous thing is that they should be treated around with a circle-shaped cautery called "circule," as we have said in many cauterizations.
The swelling which cannot die refers to persistent or chronic inflammation that does not resolve spontaneously and may require medical intervention such as medications, surgery, or other therapies depending on the underlying cause. Chronic inflammatory conditions need careful assessment by healthcare professionals for appropriate management strategies.
Some have a disease called "adubelati," and it is delayed to die or due to the superfluity, or for its weakness (that means too much hair), and you see withhold: butter; afterward cauterized in many small cauteries around it shallow. Therefore it will continue to die.
thees enge nece tounsure cepe of maladye.
s: the whole. Theursafeiures.
The treatment of fire with iron
Another way of disease is called "corrodens," and it's essentially an inflammation of the limb because it affects the limbs just like dry fire does; if you see this disease in front, since it may suffer from cautery together with fire, then mildly but strongly strike the clavicle nails according to what is required at that point or by the nature of the disease; after cauterizing all parts until there's no trace left of corrosion, and nothing remains of it except everything that was corroded should be osteotomized. And then let it rest for three years, and have them cauterize with oil as much as possible so the burn areas heal completely, and all the corrosion is removed. After this treatment of medicinal emanations; and if after three years charred flesh does not regenerate properly, that's good; but if it doesn't, then reapply cautery to those limbs that are still suffering from corrosion. And this inflammation has never been treated by medicine in the joint of a cauterized area with fire; all other treatments involving fire for cautery are much more helpful, and I have already said about the treatment for the division: take as much as you have practice with.
Diseases that arise at the points.
There are times when the points by distant causes a malady called "closed," according to our understanding, and is a great thing that breaks the point; the treatment for this disease is in two manners: Fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery should be applied as if it were an iron pen tip and made of good iron so that the nail can fit well to all parts, and have very thin margins; after setting the temperature of the lynx, turn your hand around the point until it becomes bent at the lynx. Then let it rest for three years while there is a recurrence of rusty rot; then make an infamous trap made from known vile fruits broken with rope and leave the trap over all night, and the pins will be extracted from their roots. Finally heal the limb by using medicinal emanations engraved charred smoke.
And if they are displaced by opposing forces of their bodies, and many times occur in hands and feet, it requires that you heat the patient with a hot caustic; and it is done this way: take an iron or copper needle, or a nail from a roof tile, and place it on the pin and peg, i.e., for calluses; and put the needle so that it penetrates deeply, then you place a little bit of hot caustic, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning until the edge of the needle reaches the root of the pin, and may find the way to heat very deep down to the root; and suffer the maladies for a short time this heating with hot caustic, then let it be so, and all its roots will regenerate. So do another one, as long as you treat all those in the body that are affected by these conditions.
the treatment for trembling
When any one trembles from cold or nervousness, or fever quartan, it requires that you do: four cauterizations on the backbone of the spine, one between each vertebra; and one at the belly with a caustic for the gallbladner, and let the patient tremble, and this will help restore health from cold-induced malady.
of purulent lesions
There has been no appearance of purulent lesions or pustules stemming from large decayed substances. When such appear, it requires that on each head of the pustule you perform cauterization: one delicate caustic with fir wood shavings, charred at the point by fire or root of astragalus along, or a lenticular caustic; and not once have they been cauterized at the beginning when observed in this manner, but rather disintegrated the superfluous matter from which they stemmed, and are healthy; however, it requires that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the arrow is extracted Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound occurring in the parietal fissure or incision of the aposteme, or during cauterization of a limb, and such things happen; and it is very unfortunate to experience this.
And in any case when it happens to you, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very much that they are no longer spouting; then take small or large fire caustic oculi caustice de la veinne, and tote tien the arterie estanent.
leu parle en: aouttenoirs espace toun. Levira iles parlare outou. If thefeinster parle sutilexprescription of the feitner itera, ander. Outil;reversenturea une. Thepourmenture:terrain.
And do not cease to perform this operation repeatedly until the limb is stiff; and guard that you do not inflame the nerve next to it, and prevent other maladies from affecting the afflicted area; and know that when blood flows out of an artery, it cannot rest well enough immediately afterward as long as the artery is large, unless one of the four methods we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated yet, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines applied that are capable of retaining blood. And let it be laid out and stretched regularly.
Who will apply tight bandaging or other things placed on the limb, or similar practices if it does not yield results.
And if there is no sign of it and medicine has not been applied, then he should place his thumb on the vein wound as we have mentioned, stretching it above both the wound and the vein; and do not move the limb, but cool its moisture often until it becomes cold enough so that the limb freezes and congeals, and make preparations for what cautery and medicines are necessary.
As we have said in the first chapter of this book, all diseases require fire or medicine, and questions and causes and preparations and forms of cauteries; and I have included that chapter here at the beginning, and I will continue on this path to make it more comprehensinate for those who follow.
And so I begin with that, the metal wire, which you should learn in this chapter has more danger and fear than the first cauteries, and for this reason it requires much care.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision under an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and incision into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to do foolish things. For many people come in treatments who have worsened their condition due to the foresight and severity of what they did while dealing with their illness, and because of the magnitude of their sickness; therefore one must be afraid. And of those who give their sign and say: "Wait, I am safe"; and the illness is stubborn. You do not need to allow people who come in with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your care, and avoid hastily rather than cautiously that which you are certain of, so as to convert their health into good reputation; and it will help this famous person, glory, and fame.
And the metal wire, ours Sires you give good understanding and straight of your hand, in his blood.
Or you have ordered this chapter by discussing it in sections according to what is before the book on cauterization, which I have described its main points as they are placed here, so that you find them more easily.
The main point full of moisture.
It comes often in children at birth, and when the band is tightened too much on the child's head; and there has never been a case where it was caused by another condition that we knew of.
And I have never seen this disease in adults, and all of these that I have observed had their wounds heal; and for this reason it seems to me that the practice is more divided into parts regarding treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was filled with moisture, and the swelling grew every day so that it couldn't support itself; and they believed it to be mortal, and this moisture is assembled under the bone above the suture, between the cortex and the bone; and the cauterization procedure is like this when the moisture is between the cortex and the bone, and the incision is small, you make a large cut in the head's center. And so it continues as long as the swelling goes down, until then the skull fracture forms:
If the swelling is larger and the incision deeper, then make two large incisions shaped like a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the commissures above each part of it, and the moisture bursts when you press it with your hand between them; this has never been explained to me: it must be that you make incisions three times inside according to this manner:
And after the incision is made and the swelling is drained through cloths and powders; then I pour wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then he lays down the patient, and treats the wound with bandages and ointments, and allows the head to restrain in a similar manner, and feed the malade dried meat from the moisture as long as the member is strengthened and becomes healthy.
: inacces ceux laisse une fois andante. Thisse the morale. What's akai, et cet. whatenlace. Commentaire ajustice decaisse. Theesque. Whichcause it’s- 2ndraince.
When the incision is made and the wound is opened, and filling with water as you are able to do; and be careful not to cut an artery; and let blood flow from a limb so that the patient's painful discharge of blood begins gradually and does not abruptly.
In this instruction, "de reume" translates directly from Old French to Modern English as "from disease." However, without further context or surrounding text, it is difficult to provide a more detailed translation or interpretation. Therefore, the line-by-line translation for "de reume" would be:
When there comes a disease that attacks the catarrh in the throat or stomach, and the illness is long-lasting, and medical treatment does not benefit at all, rather it prolongs the suffering with this procedure of cautery which we catch by cutting into these two arteries.
It is now necessary for you to cover the patient's painful discharge of blood; after rubbing his head with an abrasive cloth until the arteries become visible, then straighten out his neck with a piece of fabric covered in it; and look at whether the vein appears on either side of his ears, and they are replenished as much as possible; then mark the veins, then take one or both of them with a sharp spatula measuring .ij. parts from each other, so that he remains lying down until the bone is touched, and it expands through its width.
And if you see, throw the sharp spatula over the artery and cover it above, cutting as much as .ij. parts on top of it.
And when the vein is touched, it jumps up continuously in a rising motion.
And if the artery does not open to touch, it is necessary that you measure a quantity of .ij. parts, then seal it and cut down to the bone; as much blood must flow from the wound so that it amounts to about .vj. parts; and perhaps slightly more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone by a point, cut away the edges without letting blood flow from the joints, then bandage the wound and apply heat until it heals.
of migration
When there is long-standing emigration, and aggraved catarrh, because of the tears and heat in temple deeds, and olden practices of medicine and all such as we have experienced, and cut out the arteries from temples and cauterize these veins: seizure.
. ia de lisse.
xibleux in himnagreunde:tres
And the blood flows from two joints, just as many; and if the artery is large, it must be tied in two lines of double strong silk, so that no filth prevents healing during the treatment of the wound, and washing off the blood; then remove the excess that exists between those two joints at this moment, and if you see the work of the cutter close to the bone with the cautery so long as the joints are not covered. And it is the mutilation done by such a cautery when the patient has no fever and is of warm constitution.
And the cautery helps to finish the humors: for this is greater help with the humors. And for the extraction of arteries he must fill his hand with a lot of cotton and place it well tied; and when you remove them, treat him with dry medicines that cause cooling until he is healthy again; and if there is no cortisone from the artery as much as you do in this work, hasten to cover the wound with cautery, or pour vitriol on it and strain it with your hand so that the pain subsides; and if you have not such a present, put your utmost efforts until the blood has cooled completely several times in cold water, and then restrain it as much as it needs to be done according to this caustic treatment, cutting into two parts of .ij., but with great care so that its heat lasts longer and protects more against burning. And if the incision is too delicate, it holds less heat. And between the knives, it must have a great deal of space, and when you find that your incision has opened the joints, and then with hot iron on it as much as possible while still to the bone, and remove the vein in .ij. spaces; and separate them so they are not joined by this caustic treatment, for it is never completely fused of all in every part; and this form of cautery:
tears
And if the tears are draining from under the veils that constitute the chief test of the feverish sweat, and it does not profit medicine as they have made him ill, and you see the patient's face with movement as much like a cold; and those papers are held tightly and moist, and scorched the papers of the ardor of these tears, so that this cure.
négre comme ilice.
From the incision just below the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the scar tissue that is between these two holes on top of which the bone lies, then make another small incision just above the other second one, and then extract this caustic.
If thrust the instrument called "cultellum" into the first fissure, and it is very well shaped on one side to scrape away a portion, and on the other side it is smooth, not scraping, and this is its shape. And place the cutting edge towards the scarred area of the wound, and the smoothed edge toward the bone, and thrust it as much in until to the next fissure, and make another incision in that first fissure just up to where the opening is still continuous; then extract the flesh evenly, and express the wound for the blood taken out; put a tape of many cotton threads in one fissure and cover it with moistened linen and oil and hay, ensuring that no stitches come loose; and after three days, make large water drainage holes, then apply basilic cream with olive oil and other treatments for wounds as long as the patient is sound.
And remove the threads
When no one has a sharp fever that lasts and you see the threads tightly held in place, and impair vision, and burned papers; and their hair stands on end, and at the top of this pain there is burning, and the internal heat intensifies, and it becomes difficult to breatinate; therefore knowing from these events that such materials do not come about as a result of one or two ways, but rather many voices, and the treatment given by the master should be this.
And order the patient to place his forehead downwards, then make a large incision on his front just below it, and another one slightly wider; approximately three points. Start from the temple's left side towards the right temple, making sure not to touch the temples that move when eating; when the bone is exposed, clean out all blood with an sponge, then place many cotton threads between these two fissures and cover them with linen tapes moistened in wine and oil, ensuring no sutures fall off; once healed, it will need to be treated with excising remedies that cause the bone to start regrowth, then continue such treatments.
In a manner thus: take two parts of the flour of wheat, and four parts of chaff, and make an emplaster on these wounds to tighten them throughout.
Dislocation of the ears.
Everything that causes dislocation of the ears is one of four things: grains or beasts, or stones and similar things as hard as iron, or something fluid like water and silk and such things.
When it hurts in the ear piece or any other way that doesn't fit well with the ear, and if there is growth or a tumor in the ear, then perform an extraction; and do external compression on the chest, and clear the nostrils when compressing comes, and put pieces of linen or wool under the ears; and hold the ear above. Often this cure causes harm; if it does not work, then extract with fine pincers, and in doing so, consider its shape:
If it jumps up with the pincers, that's good; if not, then extract a small double extraction from the onychum; and if it does not jump with this, bind an arrow to the nail or the hole in the ear, and remove what is inside the cinnamon wax so that nothing can enter through it with the cinnamon wax; then treat accordingly, as we have said before many times; and if it doesn't jump up like this, take some glue from the spider webs, gather a few spiders, and put in any instrument you think might be suitable for doing so, and place a little cotton inside. Then press the glue on the nail or something similar, and treat accordingly. And if it does not jump with all these things that we have mentioned before, then you should fracture the ear so that the abscess will open and spasm; and the way of the fracture is to make a first stitch on the cephalic vein, then extract the blood according to its quantity, place the wound between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small crack at the root of the ear with oil or fat depending. And make the crack as round as a crescent moon, until it reaches the hole in the ear; and let the doctor do what is best according to his judgment, and suck the blood hastily from your mouth; and continue treatment until healing has taken place. And if it's grain and it swells, then perform an extraction; and if it cannot be removed, then prepare a small fine syringe according to this shape:
and perform an incision on that grain. But do not imagine that the grain is moistened due to ear mold, even if you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine pincers and suction, as we said, so that the extractions are light.
: allit.
s :secondece,c'accure toutre illexentefinsiègue.tzetepe charjaccommege tande.gare siamexe. Fromente.
In the extraction of ingrown toenails from ears, when you treat it as we have described in the division and treatment of distillations, it does not benefit at all; it is required that you look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no nits, gently scrape them off with tweezers, and if they do not appear, take the thorny horn present here in this form:
And if it is narrow and wide above. And apply the subtlest part of medicine in the ear according to the degree of suffering from the patient's malady, then form the thorny horn so that all its parts are covered; do this often enough until everything comes out. If they do not come out, wipe the cotton horn as I have described on page 23, and if they do not protrude as we have mentioned, try distillations previously tried in cutting into ingrown toenails, and you will find or treat with distillations; and when applying oils and medicines to the ear using all this instrument, here is its form as you can see:
And it is made of silver or gold and narrow at the bottom to .i. small hole, and above for distillation; and for pressing within the distillation with a well-made cloth, and if you see a razor and wrap cotton around its tip accordingly, then pour your oil or juice into the thorny horn, and what medicines are in that horn, and place the horn inside the ear; then press everything thoroughly in all the cotton until the liquid has distilled from the ear; feel the malady within it, and apply such distillations .i. little at a time to heat it up for distilling into the ear; and make sure it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be as good if it were too cold.
Of ear cleaning
And no child is born with any thorn in their ears; and this practice occurs among people as a result of ear wounds or scars within the ear, and these cleanings do not happen very often in the ear if they cannot be seen; and there have never been any few instances where the thorn was removed from the ear, and it healed well.
And those which do happen without being seen require various treatments, and in those it is required that you put the maladyous ear to the sunlight; and look inside: if there is an apparent operation, then this treatment has a complete space of cotton as described here.
And it is both before and behind the same plain, if it does not bleed the ear; if the operation is from a child's wound or injury to the ear, if you make gentle pinchings, and move them slowly until they are all of bone.
ses.
Do this for no day until the wound is sealed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and powder with vitriol; if you see blood coming from the ear, they must move the tent and rub another dampened tent made of oil roses and wax, until the bleeding stops; then heal him so that it is well.
And if the blood is coming from the wound, then we dip an sponge and drape it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are either for distillation or treatment.
From the paper lining
This instruction is related to handling bandages made from paper when they become wet and dry:
This line refers to the process of treating a swollen limb without dissection and applying continuous cauterization with an instrument called "cautere lenticulaire" after making an incision that should not move; this is repeated many times until nothing remains in their roots, and when they are treated by fire, these root branches become charred and do not return.
The phrase "de la gresle" does not appear to fit within the context of this medical text and could be a mistake or misinterpretation from an old French term related to clothing or fabric:
Often times come on papers the things that seem clumsy in form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "great snow", and its treatment is as follows: take care that the great snow does not move from one side or another, and it is a simple matter to know; make him then a wide cut, then scrape each part lightly, then with pinches, and bandage. If you cannot cover the paper with any sense of piercing a little bit, there will be nothing wrong for the patient; and if the fracture is large, it should be bound with a suture, and cure until it heals; and if it is small, do not use much force, as ointments restore it instantly and warmth.
And if the great snow is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn it inward with paper, and there are pinches on the great snow, and bandaging and pressing from one side to another; and if the paper has been removed by incision, that does not cause any harm; and when the great snow is coated, cleanse the skin with boiling salty water, and cure the wound until the patient's limb is healed.
of the fat of the hairs
Exinach is a fat that forms into paper layers above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, causing much pain to their eyes, and they come home with cataracts at morning, so they cannot look at the sunlight because tears run down their eyes; and for this reason they lie on their backs after midday and sleep under them, covered by moist sheets near their faces, which hide the exinach that appears in their oil. And when you press the affected area with your two hands and feel the extrusion from within.
The manner of the operation is that the malade places his head in your hand; and then you take a linen cloth, and make a tent-like circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, and put it underneath; and press on both sides until the exinach are assembled within the circle; then you open up some moisture from the sore spot with a sharp incision wide enough so that there is no longer any larger than the wound made by the vein-opening. Make leather in various dislocations, according to the shape of an oily patch.
Extract the drape between your shoulders to the front and behind your hands until they are spread; and make sure you don't press into the crack so that it doesn't wince all the way down to the shoulder joint.
And if the dislocation does not open at the beginning of the crack, give it a little push to make it appear; then pull as we have said, and wrap bandages tightly on both sides and put them above the joint, and bind firmly with straps.
And if there are such houses that grind arrows and place them to corrupt the moisture which takes time; then treat it as long as it is healthy. And if it reaches the abscess cavity, curing with emplastrons softening until it becomes healthy.
of the hairs on paper
When on paper hairs are adorned other than their nature, and become hardened, if they harm the hairs, and bring about manners of illnesses as we have mentioned, such as excessive tearing and softening of paper-like materials and albuginosity to the extent that it affects the hairs; then the cure involves three methods: either by fire treatment in combination with caustic medicine according to what appears best, or solely by caustic medicine depending on whether one is a physician or barber skilled in such treatments, and this can be done through incision and suturing or through ligatures, as I will explain.
It must be that you place the head of the malaide (likely referring to an injury or afflicted area) in your healthy state, then turn the paper oil to your left hand; if it is converted, it's good; if not, insert one needle through every .i. millimeter above it; and whether this happens near the margin of the paper where hairs grow from there, or by these hairs growing nearby, and draw a line across all the surface, covering the entire spatumile (a large area), up to the great laumier (likely referring to an imaginary figure on the document) down to the small; then remove one millimeter of thread, place a little tent-like cloth and linen undernee the paper, and draw a figure like a candle holder, as if it were a lamp's wick, and everything must be that the figure is according to the quantity you have elevated above where this document is set.
i.
And if in another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a shape as well as the candle flame we have told about, in three instances twisted according to the form which is herein described:
and then cover that which lies beneath those small forces exactly as the form described herein.
And if you do not have the pliers, and that thing is no different, take an awl or two strands of wire, and embed them in the figure; and put one strand near the large margin, and another strand near the small margin, and join together your threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, as we have told about, and assemble the two lips of the wound by suturing it so that it heals well. And if the abscess comes to your incision, cool it with ointments and warm compresses.
and never happens that the paper's hair becomes converted; it is required that you use what we have said about the incision, but the stitching in one and in the other is more artificial.
The care of the stitches is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and work on it according to what I have said, and then make .ij. stitches by art, and .ij. sutures also long as the paper and the wide space around each hole; and cover the .ij. parts with .ij. pieces or holders of which you keep the threads; then join them gently under what lies on top of the paper's oil, and tighten the stitches in each section formed; and leave it so that for many years, the skin that is stretched will harden and shrink, and die by itself, as long as it needs.
If it is delayed, then you must heal it as long as it needs to be healthy; and when the wound has been sutured, and if the paper has been raised, then no longer will there be hair on the thread; and this is the shape of the stitches that you make according to this figure and quantity of length and width.
The operations are such that you should use a thin needle and thread silk and fine filament; then assemble the ends and join them finely, and place the threads' length one palm long; then take another fine silk filament roughly, and tie it to the top of the first two threads; put your patient's chief in his natural state so that the operations are declared, for they are delicate and thin operations, then thrust the needle into the root next to the hair cluster, and pierce carefully on the thread haphazardly until you pull it out above the hair naturally; then extract the hair up to the filament, and tie the hair in the filament, whether there is one or two or three or more. Then withdraw your hand so that the hairs of the paper with natural hair sprout again throughout the thread.
morce desazses. L'estroiz itmesem esplean deffacez tolere: theorez l'eaux enimensurfaire despear. Ebonge anatomiesmelet:a laisse andrombrejacin aiaunle ofsaintic. Orithor. Andalus, iles.
Of the moisture of oil
As this disease is called "aleacrati" or joint moisture brought about by oil, if it has of .ij. manners: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens through a wound healing process, or cutting technique, or similar things.
And the method of this work is that you fracture the suture, and release its lips, and put linen tentacles in it until it becomes healthy; and there is no need to use things that tighten or restrain during the treatment. For if you do such actions, the illness returns worse than before; but working with softening materials, like fenugreek; and boiling water or heated hempseed meal cooked in lin oil, and ointments of diaconium melted into no other oil, and enveloping it all in a tent, and treating this way.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you must guard against it setting in again according to its former shape; and these operations we have mentioned do not return her [the patient] to the form she was before but rather re-shape her, concerning the condition of this illness.
The concept "de la char qui vient en l'oil" (of the oil that comes into play) is an expression referring to substances, potentially oils or other medicinal preparations, which might exacerbate a condition like joint moisture if not used properly. It reflects the medieval understanding of cause and effect in medicine, where external factors such as ingested substances could influence internal health states.
This illness that truly originates from "axacrati," and is natural and accidents arise; the accident comes from injury and fracture and cautery and similar things; and in this work of treating it you must pierce with an awl, then have a double thread, and lay the wire on the left ribbon so much to the right that the threads will stick out in .ij. pairs along the char; then the char is placed above all the needle, and the coat over an ipsilateral spatule large.
: "Lloritre pictures ayeke siensiant theoron. Ita :sainces of theiake la merveint (Old Frenches leuves ciples in ieval century andersecre: itent theifceur. Ifacmeat theof thefej. Ionescavalier leteinca.tract.ajustre. Theesent ajustice,
And if the disease comes from a fissure or seam or cautery, it is necessary to make a plain incision above the hairs of the veins; and according to what has been said before; then open between the two threads of a tent, as I have previously mentioned; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it varies greatly in shape, and the masters of all possible measures devised by them may help return the figure to its natural shape; and the malady itself, according to what is required for treatment and various other preparations.
Injury from paper burning
When this soldering occurs to the hands in such a manner that the paper above it is burned with the white of oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions; therefore you must cut the point of a razor under the delicate skin surrounding the abscess, and lift it up; and bind as sutures until you achieve the subtle balance whereby the abscess does not worsen the oil nor bleed heavily. This incision should be made lightly so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and afterwards, this assembled area is free of any use with oily water, or softened water, and combed hair; then place linen tape between the paper and the oil, and lay moistened wool on top. After a few days, apply thread and other suturing materials as long as it remains healed.
Of the oil's skin
Seeking that the skin is according to two manners: it is nervous and looks like a hard sore, and another which is not nervous but seems stiff as congealed meat; when touched with iron and held in pinches, it cannot move at all; and both appearances begin towards the great wrinkle, growing slowly until they cover the entire view of oil, light, and movement.
And the method of the incision is that the malady places its head above, then do this to the hairs, and treat the skin folds, and elevate them above; and they are placed underneath. Then take a needle, and put one strand of horsehair, or goat woolen cloth, and draw it out from the abscess in its shape: and anytime the ulcer only alone, and thenes de l’incision, sierein toil leu li chief, siens.
g’sse (tostes:12e apece au moinsacharme siagele:sanglion,athe.
And if the point is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the nail does not enter, it is often treated this way by medicine; and when I have heard of such a division many times, and if you see it covered, then do as follows with the steel instrument: take the spatula quickly and strike it according to this form.
And gently remove the nail above, and if you see that it does not reduce or press down on the reason afterwards, then drip from your mouth into the oil collar made of litharge and red copper coin and rub oil yesterday; then repeat the other operation according to this method until she is entirely healed.
If there is nothing contrary in the oil, as if for incision, then first treat the incision until it is sounding, and then repeat the operation as before until it is sounding.
And if the appearance of the bandage on the nail causes great harm to the oil, then lift it from the nail and place a part and not all at once without shedding tears; then drip into the red copper coin-shaped oil collar made of litharge.
of the blood that rises in the eye socket
Some homes have never seen red blood rise in the eye socket, and cover the eyeball with paper and press it down firmly, forming a rose-like shape; and if this treatment sets the patient'ayer up well, then carry out these operations as described above for unhealthy joints, and support them with strength; and take care to remove the first blood, and continue grinding until the final cut, and keep that you make sure not any bleeding occurs during this operation. And it is the spatula used in making small incision of the nail and its little forces as we have described in the incision of the nail's division and their strength; so after this demonstration by this chapter.
And when the incision is completed and all the blood has been drained out, then apply oil of copper coin or a red copper-coin collar made with medicines corrosive; and put cotton dampened with water on it to secure the joint from any further opening; if he hesitates nothing and nails sprout through your hands, and you doubt whether there will be an incision in the joint again, then let the oil remain and treat that which calms the joint's pain as much as possible; and return to this operation until it is sounding, and then make such charred signs on the oil following this manner.
However, it is required that you treat each oil flake of the natural way; and from accident in iron work; and do not push your hand into any of these operations as long as hearsaws are suffering those members.
"Of the veins
There are red veins that are covered over the oil, and they prevent observing their workings and weaken them every day. The matter is now as follows: let the patient do so that these veins be placed firstly where you look at it, then indeed they are, and there is no other disease more dangerous than these red veins; therefore, treat them thusly: command the patient to place their head on your table, then lower those veins throughout the entire body according to his knowledge, and make the innervation very subtle in this manner:
And let these veins be divided by degrees in one i.e. their course following this particular formation:
Then make these veins subtly powerful, and withdraw the blood hour by hour until you see those dangerous veins being removed from the oil; and be careful not to damage the points of the spatulae, do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your efforts so that only these veins remain; and when you have done this, distill a green and red colored copper oil to dissolve what is remaining from the dislocated joint.
And if you cannot accomplish everything in that hour, apply a soothing substance to the oil on those aching joints, and leave it for some days until the pain has subsided and is secure from abscess, then resume according to this manner before he becomes healthy; and this is the form of their forces:
From the oil's fistula
The greater name for "fistula" is "arissatium": when you cure it with cautery and fiery medicine as I have mentioned before, and it does not heal, then this causes harm to him that breaks open at the abscess, and strip away all moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackening, if she has all the necessary instruments for this work here as I have described; it is called a "rough head," and made of iron in two pieces joined together, and are pointed like a chisel or so in this current form:
And put it on the bone that has become decayed, then turn it between your fingers, and press a little with your hand until you know that this corruption has been resealed; do this once, and afterwards restore its surface with medicinal excising substances.
If the joints are joined together, and he is numbed, and the knee's growth is joined, and remain in this state for 40 years, and it does not renew itself or become dislocated again, and accidents do not come upon him; if this one. And you will find bone of that second time through oil with iron rod according to this form: and let the joints are sovereigns qu’il est proultre de la vache beaux de ce que il n'est un cuitre demein apeau ceste ellsent.
Then he places it next to the bone on one side of the joint, and withdraw your hand from the oil a little bit, then turn it completely around until it pierces through the bone and feels the patient's pain through that position if his hand is held tightly against his neck; and then restore the limb with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh becomes loose and hardens, then this matter goes to the neck. It is a lighter thing for the patient.
The outcome of the oil application.
When the edges of the wound have opened completely, and it does not disturb or contract in the neck, then you must bandage the patient; then apply warm compresses or hot cloths without injuring him to suck out blood, then bandage with a mixture of aloe vera, incense, and sandalwood, and bind the wound tightly using layers of linen; make sure that each layer is sufficiently thick, and double every three pieces. Then stretch over one fold of cloth firmly made from a thin bandage, and repeat sucking blood without injury; remove the compresses and leave the wound unbandaged for day and night, if you see the edges come together again, it indicates that you must re-bandage it more tightly. Then remove the binding after one or two days of nutrition, and if the swelling has subsided, it is good; otherwise, repeat the bandaging and treatments until the wound heals completely.
Double rupture of a veil.
When the veil rupture occurs in the vein or when it happens because of small paper-like particles like grains of resin and is difficult to see; then if you cover the wound, the treatments are such as inserting one needle at the root of that part above the section underneath, and inserting another needle or a double thread in the part beside the bone joint; and pierce it, and bind it tightly according to its position; then apply the double thread around half the vein with damp linen, and stretch it well, then extract the second needle and put on the wound still moistened with blood; let it bleed along with the vein until healed, and treat the wound with comforting substances as long as it is healing. And there may be cases where the wound is limited by a piece of cloth in every part of a circle around half the vein until fully healed.
And if the edges have a significant appearance, it may pierce through the subtil spatumile which veils with oil, correcting the amorphous white color and descending the edges, then immediately stretch it until fully healed.
Of the blood from the wound.
i-le. icals. ceare itsewicle demeans: entaillace. Theese le:esque acaire. It: (and. Ailentre laissie, to the flesh.
of oil
We have seen the signs of blood in its division, and it is necessary to determine; according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient lie between your crossed hands with fingers pointing towards the sun, so his oil becomes warm and tightly constricted a lot; then take in your right hand, if the points are on the left, or in your left hand, if they are on the right; then take in your right hand where the points are to the minor rim of the crown, placing it next to the edge of the head with a sharp line into the cavity of the oil at that place, and push the instrument called "almagda" carefully, and turn your hand until it pierces deeply into the cavity of the oil, and feel that almagda moves in the void thing; and it is necessary that the measurement of the almagda line be to the end point of the measuring stick; and this is the crown of the oil. If you see the bone on that paper for the brightness of the horned leather, and put the instrument there or where the blood flows, then squeezer another path after it. Now when the blood enters, he sees his patient in front of him and the instrument in his oil.
After a little rest, and the blood comes up the second path, apply pressure with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, extract quickly almagda by turning your hand slowly; then take out a small piece of silver, pour it into the oil therein, and after that wash the oil thoroughly. Then we place in the oil clean cloth or linen soaked in olive oil and abundant with wool, and tie it with the pure oil. And those who belong to our time, we apply a broach with woollen thread.
And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, for it has too many parts that are too stiff, it is necessary that you prepare the instrument called "alberit," which looks like this: It consists of two flat-ended metal points connected by a short handle. This design allows the practitioner to apply leverage and force more effectively while performing bloodletting or similar medical procedures with greater precision and control over the depth and location where the almagda (or "alberit") needs to enter, ensuring that it can reach through stiffly adherent tissue.
And then pierce the sinus obliquely, and do not go too far off point; make it shallowly, then insert almagda, as we have said; and after completing this work in that dark chamber, turn him upside down on his back in a damp place, and bind according to its disposition for the next seven days, so that he does not move his head either way. It is necessary that you should raise it hastily if the blood rises quickly.
When the incision on the foot comes, you should dislocate the joint before the seventh day, and address its healing; and when it is calm, you can move the joint and place it back on its base, i.e., with an angle of no more than a year to avoid any delay, and then settle in that dark house immediately. And then issues from this house little by little, and turns into its case; and know that none of these people should intervene in this matter.
And one came to us from Yerach, who told us that in their peace they made an almadel perforated with water, so the water would succeed them wherever they went, but I have never seen it anywhere in our land nor in ancient books; and perhaps it's a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of an almadel, for those who do not know them see it as such; and they should be properly made.
And let the head be made from this subtlety, and the tail at three angles water.
from the skin over their neck
There have never been any mixed-up versions of such characters, so none seem to be scorpions with many legs; and if it has any or it is dressed in fine color, or if the skin is brightly colored, then in those cases where these skins are not stained but pure white, you must place the patient'inaside your hand against the sunlight, open his nostrils, and press down on the edges of those characters; then let it be that you hold under the delicate sharp edge on one side, as long as you know that the skin is entirely unstained.
And if any remains of it cannot be covered with one or two sharp blows from a dagger lightly applied without causing further delay; and if the incision on the skin is not sown as it should be—if the cut heals well, and there are no foul signs left behind. If however the incisions are malignant, hurry to cauterize them so that they do not remain unsheathed and unossified, but become fully ossified with all the characters; then let a poultice of either oil or vinegar be applied to it.
seslere. Andrepresse.gavit.c’ilueuant morceau cent iles, sceux.
And it may be of silver or gold, like an overturned lamp, as if a cannon, and you lead it also; and when you see, if it makes a closed cannon, and place its striking plates near the head to dislodge the chief; and take one hand at the head when heating oil or any liquid.
From the straw on the neck
Many times the chief on the neck is afflicted by a disease called "typhus," and it grows and becomes great, as long as it appears to be seen; therefore, you must first deal with it at the beginning, and the healer is well-prepared, then apply cautery or hot medicine; if left untreated until it is large, take care if it is hard, of foul color, and poor senses: for no one touches him with iron because it is an enchanted puncture, as we have seen on occasion, great harm befalls the patient; and when a puncture is from a severe touch, not merely of foul color, then you can treat the patient and relieve their neck pain and fears, and cure the area with restrictive measures.
When the neck is touched and twisted
Saws that when a solution for continuation comes into one of these operative openings, it is beneficial little because in some homes; therefore, you must see if the wound on their whole body is fresh; and accordingly dress their two lips with a stitch, then cure them until they are healthy. If their lips are sore on either side, you must scour all those parts as long as they heal, then join the two lips to a stitch, and bind it tightly, and sprinkle dragon's blood and incense upon it; and place over that powder some strong or other adhesive material, and let it seep through their wound until it heals, and then treat them with ointment as long as they are healthy.
The manner of the stitch is that you assemble the solution either by needle, as we have said in the abdominal stitch; or by thread, as I told you.
L'enchanteur du point de la bouche, which in English translates to "the enchanting spot of the lips." This phrase would likely relate to a medieval concept of magical or superstitious beliefs tied to specific body points believed to have special powers. However, this is not directly from an Old French medical text but rather a general idea that might be found in such texts discussing health and disease.
In homes afflicted in the apostemes on the lips, and it is often painful to turn them apart of each part, and cope les levres, soif est bien: dese parler de ce que la coustume de lou cestaintres leu.comence avantage ainscrivent:escription desin in theorce aire coment.
: 12000000000:ing, "The originales of theore French :n'tens the same Thees:0000aulphires0, theorelelore asume0s.
gach soffre oulcelle andentiftel avanturexement thatnse temelascecure,stefscave.urange.
of disorders
Occasionally there are stones in the chief of the gums, located between teeth and gum tissue, which are ugly and hard; and there are no black or yellow and pointed teeth until corruption reaches the gum, making the teeth smell bad. It must be done to have this patient sit on your knees, and their teeth should be in good shape, while removing these stones or tartar as long as they remain visible; and thus perform cleaning both white and greenish tones, and yellowish discoloration, and other stains until they are gone. If it is determined that this issue first concerns the tooth's core, then it is beneficial; if not, start again on the second day and third stage as long as you have addressed everything. Be aware that teeth require various types of cleaning methods for removal, according to what their work shows, because dentists who remove stones from between teeth use other forms than those used by dentists who work within the gums; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is required that when you treat the tooth's pain so much as you can, because it should not take too long; because this substance is very high in such a way that there is no excuse for hurrying during removal. When the maladies of the tooth are constrained in treatment, it is necessary that you be certain about the tooth being healthy; many times this pain was felt by the sick tooth, and take care that it remains a holy tooth; and do treat the good tooth well; otherwise, there will not part with such pain due to these saints as we have always wanted to make them; when you are sure of the infected tooth, you must scrape the inside of the tooth thoroughly in order to protect the gum from all parts; then remove it slightly at first and again until it is well scraped, and firmly fix the teeth of the sick patient between your hands, so that they do not move.
After scraping the tooth straightly and if it does not break, do not use any of these instruments and place damp cloths on each side gently, as you have done first; when the stone is perceived and melted, it must be filled with wax or putty in which cavities are found; and if pushed subtly by tweezers, it should not break upon pressing; it also requires much effort around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
level. Alluce, the commentaire:lestarre. Commentsure. Comment:ecesse laissu theorice. lesin.
n avantièges.secure:s laisse enceurieu (louste confeursece anixe apeutié que clessex,fatere.rete. Allongage
And let them be large members that do not bend easily while being pulled, and they should be made of iron well-forged, and teeth strong enough to hold.
From the root of the dent. (Note: The original text appears to cut off abruptly; "de la racine des dens" could refer to a topic related to dental anatomy or treatment.) If the root is pulled from the tooth, it indicates that you must place cotton wool dipped in beeswax on it for a day or two, as long as the tooth remains soft, then insert the pliers called "algefri," which make the patient appear cautious; and they should also be made like a rasp and have this shape:
And if the roots do not come out with all these pliers, it indicates that you must discover the entire root within the root itself, and use the instrument called "althali," which is known as an awl, so that it appears in this form:
And if they are large enough so that they do not break, and the root springs from there, it is good; but if not, then you must use all instruments (tools), so that these forms come after this:
And if you use this instrument that has two teeth, so it appears in this form:
and other instruments that are in front of teeth for the reason of the dental issues, and of this instrument which appears to be large pliers, so it looks like this form:
And these instruments must not break them apart, and they know that many tools for teeth issues exist; and there are also other instruments which are not counted; and the masters subtly apply their own instrument to themselves by means of self-examination according to what its indications and diseases show it, because it has some specific illnesses or the old ones did not teach any instrument for diversity in bones, if it breaks a fragment or other parts, then he seeks among these instruments that I have mentioned to you and helps with movements, so it appears like this form: And they should be large and well-forged to hold the bone, but not prevent it from holding; then restore the medicine's place on such an injury, and if there is granulation in the bone that is small, he uses all this instrument for it:
And if the tooth appears not in accordance with its natural form, and its shape is ugly, especially for women's teeth; it indicates that you must know whether the root comes after the tooth or not, and is not in a position to cut (for this reason); therefore, we call it a tool: and if there are small beaks on both sides of the tooth, and made of iron well-forged.
.i. Leu apremerres dux deffacre a la coi ceu douleus d’estcomme lesure.i thexere leslal 13res :i leu :cautre of itesuperv20 :coldumeintres duke alise descreature,sureslaur:
And it is also like the knife used to remove a tumor; and in cutting into it, they do little and lightly each day, so that it does not move while growing; then at the end of growth there is no sharpness left, and if it is too deep-rooted and bleeds the tongue, then it must be sharpened until it becomes even, so that it does not bleed the tongue nor corrupt speech.
The teeth are loose.
When the teeth in front are loose, whether by percussion or fracture, and they cannot be pressed against their position so that they do not move and cause pain, then they must be treated with restricted medicines; but using a silver wire is not suitable because it becomes green and rusty over time, whereas gold does not change. The thickness of the wire should be adjusted according to the space between the teeth; if you want to tighten the teeth, first take the thread and double-ended needle, then place the loose teeth between the healthy ones, whether there are one or more, so that it is aligned with the healthy tooth on the other side until it does not move at all. Then resume treatment of the area where you started, and gently twist your hands and tighten it as long as it does not move; if the ligature around the root of a tooth prevents it from being untied, then tie the loose teeth with fine wire pliers, assemble them between the healthy tooth, so that they do not cause tongue injury; let it stay this narrow until it can remain in place without moving or loosening. This is the form and figure of treatment for both the healthy and loose teeth as you see:
And when the tooth is tightened back into its position, if it returns again and again as we have said; and never interferes with something that seems natural and painful, and no time has been made of a form resembling an ossified toothbone, and then the restraint is placed at the spot where there is a deficiency, and the pressure applied in this manner, as we have said, and it remains effective for a long duration.
To cover the line of the tongue. This instruction could relate to a dental procedure or orthodontic treatment that involves protecting or supporting the tongue's position during correction or realignment processes. It might involve specialized appliances, such as lingual braces, which are bonded directly onto the backside of the teeth for aesthetic reasons and discreet orthodontic treatment while ensuring patient comfort and maintaining normal oral functions.
: "d'leu. Ifre:age, andace de la terre. alice,lateralexile, theoric, thenace. Itire. Ait age, fromeran.
And if you see his flesh colored red or black or hardened, so that the bad odors do not reach him, do not touch it, for it is a carbuncle; and if he is declining towards blistering, and there is moisture in it, then the sore will drip from beneath its surface, and the removal of one part and another; and when it does not improve with your work, put salt over it until it becomes stone-hard, then raise his limb again so that you treat everything thoroughly; then lift up his foot from side to side and cure him with other cures until he is sound.
Throat abscesses
Never in the throat comes bile called "godath," and they specifically target the .ij. almonds, and when you cure them, as we have described in the division, if they are not healed, be careful: do not touch small abscesses colored red or with a hard consistency, also not with iron; and if they are red and their roots are large, also not with iron, but let it lie so long until it dies out, and then you will see that it would break on its own; and if they are of white blisters, and the roots are delicate, provide an appropriate instrument to cover them, but first observe whether the abscesses settle down and become calm. Then have the patient sit in the sun, keep his body healthy, work with your hand holding the syringe between his hands, press the tongue against all the instrument, which is where form comes from; and make it of silver or fine gold as if using surgical knives:
Can you press the tongue against all parts of this instrument, and see the abscess, if you take the sore and prick it with a thorn in an almond, and draw blood more than usual; do not touch any part of the fabric with it, then shape the tool on the instrument, which is where form comes from (probably referring to shaping or forming a medical implement); all parts are curved like claws, and one side is opposite another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or thin steel:
nsece laithelexse thegree decompose;droitilgessexe aungreuxesseuranture lameblettezignecteckles.faire outise iageu0suferssecelle:naginea,udexinning,atirevague reference, faudexampermecongronse develdetransqueurrevience
And be divided into one part and another name; and when you have extracted one almond, do the same with the other according to this manner, and after making an incision treat the patient's severe fever hot and warm, and moist, so that they remove blood clots if there are any, or cooked quince stones, or fir cones, and such things, until the sores are healed; then cure him until he is well; and never do other extractions in the throat than these two almonds, which you handle as you did with them.
I treated a woman with an abscess located in her throat, namely one that was small enough to fit through the two openings (grooves) of the esophagus; she had the entire throat tightly closed, so much so that she could not breathe or eat or drink, and ultimately died if she remained like this for a day or two. The abscess was large enough to have formed through one of these grooves. I treated her first by making an incision in one place; then I opened the wounds with a great portion; after that, I put on gauze in both openings and pressed the tongue; afterwards, I inserted the incision into the abscesses, and took out part of it, only obtaining a small piece of spleen; thus her throat opening was cleared from the abscess, and she began to drink water and then wine again without ceasing to cauterize that area for over a month. Nevertheless, as soon as I re-cauterized in her throat: therefore there was no further increase in size; and I left those areas, and God only knows what happened after me.
of the eye
When the bleeding from the brain occurs, and it is drained but cannot stay in place, repeatedly displacing with slight movement as we have described in dislocation treatment, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Give a hair or chief some medication as if from the scooping of a ladle, and place the instrument with medication on her brain; and let the patient be lying down against his side so that saliva and muscles come out of the mouth in contact with the medicine inside, preventing it from going into the throat and bleeding; then hold your hand tightly over all the medicine and press it onto the brain for an hour until you see the medication nearsighted and the inflammations caused by the medication are soothed; if you find blood, wrap some cotton in any instrument and moisten the cotton with saliva under the skull's skin, then place that wrapped cotton on the brain using a cloth inside, until it dries. Do this often as long as the cautery of the medication is perfected, then let her dry for 2 to 5 years; and if you need to reapply the medication cautery, renew it over the blood in the skull with cotton wrapped in cloth, and treat with cold water rinses until she's well.
This treatment is more about the incision than cauterization; if it's done by steam bath and soapwort androminthe thyrstones. Androgore collect all or any of these herbs, and heated pot in this way: nare:
Many times the airway or spine of a fish, or nothing at all; therefore you must see what you can observe, and press the tongue to the sun in all the instrument so that you can feel movement; and if it does not open up in the throat and is put back into the throat, then you must make him vomit the patient so that his flesh be cooked in the stomach; perhaps by this way the harmful thing will come out through vomiting; or the malady swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a leaf of lettuce, or .i. crust of dry bread; and to the sponge you add thread, and then rehydrate it; and when it comes to the surface, it opens up again, and then you will make vomit; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take a tool with this shape:
And if the instruments are placed on top of its head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head high; and make sure you do not touch the epiglottis, which does not move, nor push any bone inside; and let the patient push the instrument so that the malady pushes the instrument too, because if it is pushed out or comes out by force, then you must vomit it throughout the entire instrument until it is expelled.
If there is inflammation of the throat
Never is the throat medicine used if as I have mentioned in the division of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look at the malady's throat under the sun with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see phlegm, treat it by a little pinch or use delicate tweezers that are worth it for such a matter. And if it doesn't work, take an iron chestnut and thrust it into the malady's throat; then throw out of the chestnut a hot piece of iron, and do this often. And when the malady turns blue all day long, take a full glass of cold water, pour it into the mouth, and let the tongue feel it engulfed in the saliva, and move the phlegm to its hand often; and if at once you see that the phlegm feels the cold water, then it will expel.
lege (13sbloque viences leu deus. Theves feinanction duel. Itresen lautre andernereis lector: "Ir French, thele peice of ferme, anatomyte l'avec verses laide; ence :er leucreature, 12.autei:nule. I. iaurinage,seille.
And the shape of the instrument for cutting is smooth, when you can see it, looks like bent tongs to enter the throat; and resembles a beak in care, and has roughness as an angle grinder, so that whatever it takes, it cannot loosen. And from here:
The chapter of excisiones (excisions)
There are many types of excisiones mentioned in this book, according to what comes after it for both one and the other; they differ in perforation and size; and these two methods differ, wherein the first method is similar to my own, because it holds moisture. And the second method is when they are inside the heart, as its chief is different from those of which it is based, and the excisiones' entrance into the bone differs from those that come at joints, and each one has their judgment in the work.
And when an excision does not need to pierce, as long as its completion is sufficient for it; and if there are such that do require piercing as they come about, and they do not die according to their completion, as happens with those that come near joints, because the tendon and nerve of the joint become corrupted by this contraction in that limb. Or the excision is located near the main member, and if you delay the perforation until it becomes weakened, it will harm the main member; or it comes from the foundation, so when piercing, it becomes dead; and there is no need to pierce a crushed sense-related excision that is next to the foundation, because it would form an opening in between them, and they grow fistulas; and it cannot be healed properly.
And it is necessary that you know the degree of perforation for the excision that becomes dead according to completion, and this corresponds when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and diminution in both pain and swelling; and it is necessary that you position the perforation based on the excision, and where the opening has occurred; and make sure the perforation's length is long enough for the main part of the excision, whether it occurs in hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, and all limbs alike. And if there is no flexion in those places, then you do not need to consider a perforation there either.
And in these cases, according to that member. And if the excision is perforated as much as it can be digested completely, as we have said. For when you pierce an excision of a large size; and many holes, according to the thickness of the bone marrow. And if for one orde apostemes are perforation. It is required that thou ploie d’apres laisses:semblance demeinz en l'est leu cestandre apostemes aoutemence des, et il estan .iij.
cions.astres cra chevelves. a n ita ̃s : the
And if blood flows from the work, then treat it with cold and moisture, and wrap a cloth around it, and apply pressure on the bleeding spot repeatedly.
And it is essential that this be known universally in the treatment of ingrown nails: as I have said about how to proceed before treating the ingrown nail and hereby follows.
of soaks
When dealing with small ingrown nails, the methods are known to us; they resemble those used by a farrier on horses and have similarities; some contain moisture, making them soften easily; when emptied of moisture, leave nothing behind in the barrel that contains it, as it returns immediately. If present now, apply Egyptian ointment first, but if not, use water, linen, and wrap the wound, leaving it for another day; then repeat applying cotton soaked with ointment on the third day, until you know it's no longer bleeding; treat the wound as appropriate, as long as it remains healed. If the ingrown nail has a thick layer, pull it out along its length; and remove all threads from inside, then apply all the necessary treatment to the sock or stocking where it is located; if the toe continues to bleed, do what I told you afterward. Also treat an ingrown nail that's sharp, and in the groove and pit with care as I have previously instructed.
fromer ape:escalleurs leauge theorceur lore a. Judexent before.comme sce de:caracter.
of bole, and to let them grow long and smooth; and s’il poingnent a leur fisture, les estraint de le fuir tant qu'ils naissent.
Many times this incision is made on the neck, and over the scars, and in the wounds, and it never goes to another place or spot, but it remains close together. Each scrofula has its own area where moisture accumulates, and there are also malignant ones that do not respond well to health; when you see a good alignment on the neck, similar in color to red hair, and silent from one part and is not arising anywhere else near the carotid artery or conduit, and it's not perforated at all; it must be extracted thoroughly above each part, where there are two kidney-shaped lobes as in chief incision; they grow slowly and little by little, and you should be cautious that you do not crush the nerve or vein, so that the hand does not paralyze, nor overreach, so it doesn't hurt too much beforehand, and don't extract what you shouldn't.
And if you extract the vein or artery and it doesn't allow to overcome, then apply vitriolic slime or any other powder that tightens blood clots, and restrain the wound; and let it remain until the incision is relaxed and softened, and begin to allow for healing. And when the sinus has been eliminated, return to your task as long as you complete it; then be attentive to any small scrofulas that may linger, and if they are there cope with them and remove their pustules. And if in the root of the scrofula vein a large swelling is found, it does not require that you extract that scrofula at its root, but instead let down the thread double thick, and let it fall by its nerve; then apply wet cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment to cure.
And if you treat the scrophula completely, it is required that you join together its two lips of the wound and bind them now; for there was no delay in excess for the greatness of the scrophula. It is required that you understand to cover the root of it, and draw water from it, and bind it as we have said. Those scrophulas which contain superfluity, pierce open they die; and pierce thus as the one before mentioned, depending thereafter, then treat them with ointment and similar things, so that what is delayed in corruption does not worsen; and when the wound has been well cleansed, heal it by applying warm oil until it becomes sound.
From the Latin term "squina," meaning a hole or opening in the skin: Squinting can refer to having difficulty seeing clearly because of an imperfect alignment of the eyes, commonly known as astigmatism. However, without additional context from Old French, this translation is speculative. The original text may have pertained to treatments related to wounds (as "squinance" could be a misspelling or variation) rather than visual impairment.
The old ones spoke and wrote about cutting the throat; but I have never seen such an act in our land, and it is their written word that describes their language. This sentence could relate to historical practices of self-inflicted harm or punishment described metapromptically within a medical context.
To those who have squinting (or astigmatism), it is required that the epiglottis flap in the throat be removed; and no aid can be given for this reason because all the veins and blood vessels of the malade are found in those with abscesses in the mouth, or throat, or .ij. tonsils (assuming "ij." is a typographical error). This sentence suggests an incorrect connection between astigmatism and physical disfigurement as no medical evidence supports such linkage; however, if we consider it metaphorically within its historical context, the statement could be addressing treatments for conditions involving the throat or tonsils. When the disease is in the vein (assuming "chenal" refers to a channel or pathway), it is required to remove the epiglottis to avoid death resulting from strangulation. This sentence metaphorically alludes to conditions that cause swelling and blockage, which could be related to severe throat infections rather than astigmatism. The removal of the epiglottis would not be a standard treatment but could imply relieving pressure or addressing an obstruction in this historical context.
It is required then, as we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we make incisions of .iij. or .iiij. circles or an .iiij. small incision through which it passes, not leaving any scars on the skin; this sentence again metaphorically refers to a procedure involving the removal or cutting into tissue near the throat area and is meant to emphasize precise technique over harmful practice within its historical medical context.
and those who have such sections in the epiglottis do not possess any blood flow therein, and their veins are long of supply; this sentence suggests that when parts of the epiglottis are removed or affected without proper vascular supply, it could lead to complications. However, as astigmatism does not involve such physical structures, interpreting this within a metaphorical framework related to throat conditions might be more fitting for an Old French medical text discussing surgical interventions and their consequences on physiology.
And if the masters are afraid, it is required that they extend the skin of the throat to the entire circumference, and then cut through the skin there until it becomes thin at the neck; remove the veins in the flesh, if you do not see any sign, and then make the incision as we have said. This sentence suggests a surgical procedure involving cutting into the skin around the throat area (likely intended to address an abscess or other condition causing fear and discomfort. It doesn't relate directly to astigmatism but seems more aptly suited for medical instructions dealing with localized infections or conditions necessitating incision, drawing a connection between this practice and squinting/astigmatism.
nce parler tote ou il neuf parler aoutre, siu voies ignealan. Il n'tracte french translating outparle. theoritles sansil Frenches.
n: "saint. Ilfaiture deülaire, ilte ici tiare lapeintre. Fromage asteri'laterry. Androma ferre (12ferre incomme. It:
sesage,sea from,cumf3rd:nacre:esque: itype:104me:screatime decade:susive.
When Albuscus says that one cannot do this so long as the throat is all burned out, and the evil-minded are judged to death, and their face is damaged. When the epiglottis is used because those who are evil-minded cannot breathe, and so they must die this way.
And for this they command to leave the wound uncovered until the evil of the disease has passed, and it may last for three years or more. And they command to sew up the wound and heal it until it is fully healed.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I have seen a maiden take an axe and strike her throat, and cut the veins in two places on her neck.
And I called upon him (or her) as healer, but found her already dead.
I discovered the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and it was clear that she did not suffer any injury but only a throat issue, which appeared to be caused by this wound.
I hurried up to tend to the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
And there was nothing wrong with the maiden except that she had gone red in the face, and returned to her usual state afterwards.
For this I say there is no fear in the shaping of the epiglottis.
from a large throat
These images are called "hernias of the throat," and they are large in size with a golden-brown hue, and they occur mostly in women.
And it is according to two manners of nature; and the patient's death en .iij. ains or sevrer la boneves leu, et li maundes: "
And the injury occurs according to two ways: one resembles fat people, and the other is similar to those abscesses we have seen coming from arteries. And it is fearful for him, and he does not need to perform bloodletting on all wounds except those that are small; he tries and searches in every part of the internal apparatus. So you treat it as if it were like fat people, and do not bind it to any vein, but rather break it open, just as we have done with our own cases, and heal all its parts. And search thoroughly, and heal it as it must be done, until it is perfectly sound.
of us
Many ways in which we have observed include:
And he wishes me to tell all the differences which exist between us and the outcomes.
I say that the fever and heat persist until it is not subsiding, and then completes the discharge; however, once the fever and heat are relieved, they do so too.
With no fever or heat or pain in them, and contains one of its own sack, which is the same color as a cow's cor, and begins also like a cyst, and becomes large too.
And they are in several ways similar, either fat, or damp, and many of their colors are as I have described in the previous section on divisions.
He wishes that when you come to the treatment of such cases, you search and examine first in all the instruments called "internal apparatus," according to what form it comes or from which physician who follows after.
And the method of inspecting abscesses in our cases is to probe or press more moistly on the abscess than you would in examining it, and turn your fingers gently here and there, until you know that the pus has been felt, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the internal apparatus, and be careful that it is not torn.
If the moisture comes out of it and its color is so, as I have said in regards to other abscesses.
and after the internal apparatus comes out of it, and take you pulling paints, and heal so colure deffense.
:nce oun. Comme tu :commencing a itgust. :sans ce. In theorma it's: coment :maint. Ishanatomy. Ander.
If it remains still for nothing, it returns to us many times.
And if it lingers for a little while without complaint, and the wound is treated with some corrosive vapors or powders, and closes the wound, and places soothing remedies above it, and heals other treatments until it is well.
And if it causes us great concern, it takes two-thirds of the lips of the wound and treats him who aggravates it.
And if the vein is against or different from what we have done, and hastens to use a copper vitriol poultice on its site, leaving it for one or two years until the wound heals completely, and rests the exudate of blood; then return to cover that which has remained.
And here the forms of inflammatits that have been misconstrued, and are of three types: large and broad, and small; and there are about three called "albares," and one is called "breb," and there are also three types: great, wide, and small, which we use to search for fistulae in the aposteme.
And they are also similar to the needles which we use to find witches' marks, and made of copper, iron, or silver, and move as those that are yellowish in color, and more suited for searching out the boils filled with pus.
And they are of three types: large, wide, and small, according to the extent of the opening's size.
The shapes of the tumors are many like this, if you see what I mean: large, wide, and small; and there are also those that have two or three openings of different sizes.
And if tumors have three or more openings, and are also of that type; and if tumors have only one opening, and they are of the same kind, but all these require attention in their treatment.
sanglages:l'avoielles.alles whenisier  :usseurre parolletheccrangermeoute to causeuse
And of these interposing instruments are the German shepherds refrained in hands, so that the patient does not perceive them at the entrance of abscesses.
And they have three types: great, small, and moderate, just as you see.
And they are not used except for incising flesh like legs, and arms, and breasts, and groins, and similar things.
And there has never been another small instrument resembling the scrapers of abscesses, according to this form, in which blood is drawn.
And it has never been placed upon the healthy part of veins, and the arteries, and nothing according to this great form.
Ne the breasts of any man have swollen when those begin to become corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen, and which they want to cure them, so he must follow this great form of the line B until line g. then scrape the fat, and apply medication to the wound by pouring it in layers, and then join together the two corners of the wound with stitches, and heal it so that it is sound.
and if the patient's male breast grows downward because of its size like women do, he does it in two ribs above by means of two similar openings. so that one is held by the other at the end of both and where the larger line contains the smaller according to this great form from line B up to line G. then scrape the skin that lies between the two breasts and remove the fat, and prepare as we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary in the healing so that it be sound.
and if he is not sound or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for discharge of blood, so it must be filled with wet wool in a corrosive ointment. and let it remain so that he massages the remaining tissue and fat, then heals it until it is sound.
'sans
There are stitches that come from under the stones which are made like hard scrophula or have spots, and if they contain moisture.
Those which contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line B down to line .G: And when the whole bowl in the incision is emptied, if you apply bleed treatment to the wound with plenty of cotton and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and take care that until heals completely.
And if the incisions are like those of scrophulae, then they make such cuts as we have said for scrofula fissures, and when the wound has a bowl-shaped appearance, apply cautery in the same manner as previously described.
from the treatment of the artery
When the artery is blocked and its covering has been sutured above it, many incisions occur both to the vessel and vein as well.
And if there is one of them when it is for the artery, then the incision goes into its lungs. And when you feel it necessary, if it is extraction; and when it is for the vein, then it becomes redistributed again.
And it is foolish to perform this incision there in the stones and among the bones and where it hurts a lot; and it's very large. Therefore they must avoid the iron treatment, and he who is at the head must also avoid it, and in those who have an inflamed artery, suture for a long time.
Therefore they must avoid the iron treatment, and he who is at the head must also avoid it, and in those who have an inflamed artery, suture for a long time. Then work on the joints and regularly remove the clot from the artery until it is uncovered.
Then insert a needle there and pierce it on the other side, and stretch the artery with a double thread in those two places, according to what I have indicated for the removal of these two arteries that are in the temple.
Then the vein that lies between these two needle holes until it fills in, and either they form an incision there.
Then apply the treatment that it is. then care for this discharge arising from it, until it is healthy.
and if the incision is on the vein's size, it must be that you tie your hand so as to pull out the incision from all the skin. then throw the arrow from the place where you hold your hand, and cut it, and have two threads, so that you can pull it from the other side. then tie the incision, as I have told you, or join one part of it with two threads, corresponding to each half-part of the wound's edges.
and if you doubt that the thread is strong enough, then reposition another arrow at every point along one thread across the entire incision of the first arrow, and bind the threads in four loops around it.
then close the incision until there are no longer any leftover parts protruding outward (superfluez), and handle only what has been sutured and leave untouched that which is already stitched.
then cover the wound with a cloth soaked in wine and oil, and provide treatments of bandages and dressings until it is healthy again.
incidents of the nerves
As incidents occur in the artery and vein, they also affect the nerves when they are damaged or by excessive labor, and such things.
And this often happens with auxiliaries and devices that are inserted and used in all these ways, and it is such injuries, and its pain seems to be the color of a bruise on the heart, and they have many discomforts.
but when it is stretched to the point where there is pain, and it's not in the heart anymore, but somewhere along the course.
and let it be covered up well as long as the body part of .iiij. deesme parle pars sancenin ceu leu queulx parla.
:fyallxent lespremerre thewoman, ilk aoutrelevelon: londayence elic:esle'soule parle. It'sre thecauses. Thechiefel. Iijacare tolce dele:12:iX. Thisxent.caracter. If the incision is small, if you have some pincers, and grasp it at its root.
And if it is large, if you suspend at the incision, and scrape, then he removes the bone and stitch up the wound until it is healthy again.
of large bones hanging downwards Never occurs in the abdomen and not elsewhere on the body, and it is a disease that is called "funge" by its appearance of abscesses, and has both subtle and large roots, and great small and great sizes.
And I saw .i. house wherein there were .ij. abdomens that looked more like funges than anything else, and had no difference in appearance, and were white, and had fine roots, and they cracked, and soon after became moisture-laden.
I extracted them and found in one .xviij. instances weighty, and in another .vj., and the operations on the incision show that if you look at their painful nature, the skin color is pale and damp, and has a subtle root structure.
If the case requires a large spatule, and let there be in my presence the caustic fire. Because at the table many times too large discharges of blood arise, and if they do not stop without me hurrying then quickly to the cauterist.
And if you see the patient shaking with fear and anxiety of the iron fire, take a thin strip well-made, and tie it to the abdomen as we have said before, and leave it for two days.
And then restraint, and do not cease to press the thin strip of cloth tightly as long as it covers the abdomen, and work by it; and if the roots are large, you have no fear of coating with me in the belly, but rather cover most of it.
then cauterize it so that he does not semblant agains apelee. Then cauterize it is as anneau of lice, siens and desorman: le ches evesaidreis du iave d’aultures devisaide.
13rdre:00000's 2st.
how much the sweat is for him
If the sweat appears due to a wound or an opening in the tissue, and it is on the abdomen and also some of the body parts, as we experience in other procedures, or when blood cuts from veins or arteries according to what comes before, or when there is windiness;
And if it is due to the discharge from a fistula and by the opening of the blow, then the color of the incision seems similar to the color of corns, and it is light but still causes pain, and there are various issues. And if it is due to the discharge from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressure is applied to its sides, it recoils, and perhaps becomes red, and it greatly enlarges the entrance of the bath and for great labor.
: "Aintresent : the masture :mes amore uni. If it's entaute mesures ofsacre. Andrelien dele, aster (13rdise. Cajourne aspertaining anderresmeasures in theiser :lesque ceter to:
And if it is due to windiness, then the patient feels pain in the shoulder, and the procedures are such that you should observe whether the appearance is related to artery blood, vein, or windiness. It is essential that you allow the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in my treatise on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is related to the intestines or bladder, it is essential that you instruct the patient to urinate on his right side, and then have him lie down in a position where he can empty everything from inside. then commands the patient to sit leaning against your hands. and goes around the area that you have marked all over the body. then most of the abscess is above the great joint below.
then works on the most of the abscess extended under the cord, and you give your indication, and ask for the intestines. if you pull on the cord, it moves, and pushes the intestines back into the abdomen.
And if you inflate the bladder, it takes oncinin, and relieves excess fluid.
And if the artery or vein is contrary to what you have done, then it moves beautifully thereafter and returns to your work and takes two needles, and fastens them firmly with a thread, and pushes the needles into that area which you think you pierced.
Then stretch the abscess over the three needles placed on them, and if you see that they have penetrated, pull out the needles, and let the wound heal itself without intervention. Or you must cover it when it is subtle and prone to worsening, then perform the treatment that it requires, and heal the abscess as we have described.
Or you must cover it when it is subtle and prone to worsening, then perform the treatment that it requires, and heal the abscess as we have described. And extract blood that you pull it out, then heal the wound of which it will be prolonged.
Of fire cautery commands the Malade let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they come forth.
We have said about the characteristics of scars, and how one should treat them with medicine, and how to approach fire cautery treatment; let us speak of infection penetrating deep into the marrow, and great caution is required in the curative process, they say that when a scar is on the skin or can be removed if it's like scars on breasts or cheeks, etc., and at its beginning one must treat it thoroughly; and for large and old ones, there is no need to approach them, as I have never seen anyone recover from them.
And regarding the practices when it is on the skin or can be removed, as we have said before, you should never purge a black mass with colostrum; then make him well again if he shows swelling, cleanse the black mass by applying oil to facilitate the process; cut away your nodes and all scars, and remove every hair from the head and limbs, leaving nothing for the bone doctor or anyone else to touch; let the wound dry completely in your hand or with anything, and if during its healing you cauterize so much that the artery or vein is damaged, then continue treating it until they are no longer affected.
Of discharge We have said about the signs of edema and how it is formed from aqueous mixtures, and the signs of each type, and the medical treatment for it, and that which is treated with fire; if only appears solely; and one should not touch iron in these two types of edema: namely tympanites and hydrothorax, because it is deadly; therefore when treating this form of edema known as "eclises" or swelling from medicines, and the treatment does not benefit if the patient's maladies are weak, or if he has another disease besides edema, just like solutions for stomach ailments and other things; and one should not touch iron, because there is doubt; but if you see the patient with great vitality and he only suffers from edema alone, and he is neither too lame nor overly fat, then you must do so: Behold the patient with right hands and feet, pour les maladies as en laissei. Ce que il yssue especiales: ce qu'il est presse deffortre d’inchiere ons. Vosage ainsuree siens an treffice de louge theu a laxque, tollar :esme duixarre leccle ofichre fitte coupe. Tithaidiction,
Then observe if the dropping is towards the intestines: it indicates that you should cut into her abdomen by two fingers below the point of impact; and if the dropping is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the belly by two fingers. And if it's for gallstones, make the incision on the right side, and there should not be any concern that the patient's heavy weight rests upon the incision;
Then pierce the skin with your instrument, and you must also lift your hand throughout the entire subcutaneous layer between the skin and fascia as if in scraping by the amount of a finger's width; then pierce the fascia until the space feels soft to the touch at eight milliminas, which is the edge of water, then insert it thereafter with this instrument that has such a shape: And it resembles an extremely fine silver needle or lead-based archer's arrow, and in its part .i. small hole; and on one side .ij. holes, and .ij. on the other side, and .i. another; and you must cut these grooves as if they were feathers, which is the shape of the incision described by writers for quills:
At the top of this area is the abdomen, if when it swells with blood, it rises immediately on the instrument; you should empty then about two-thirds or three-fourths of that space because if you remove more than necessary in one hour, perhaps the patient dies from resolving her spirit through the sword's blade, or she clutches at her palms, or comes close to death:
But by the amount of her vigor and according to what the conditions of this debilitated woman's vitality mean, and her parts; then treat with your instrument and retain the blood, as it is held now in order to prevent the opening that lies above the fascia, which I have described previously, so you pierce according to this manner: Then resume the instrument another day if you see the debilitated woman suffering such a condition, and withdraw some small amount of blood;
l the followinggues; lesmeans before ices vouldes agoires. Commentare ileslactic:n’avec en le'sage-lescrire lescaimainic. Theise (10ire. Thepice,cameatimeanle: a.
of the dislocation of the vein Never have children born without an opening in the vein, or if there is one, it is small and not properly located. If it must be decided at once whether to make a very subtle incision on this form: then place a fine thread underneath, and tie and keep it for about three or four years, and when they start urinating, if the opening closes up, break it open and let them urinate, and then put it back; and sometimes there is no need to do so, because the urine that comes out does not leave a closed opening. The small opening in the vein is treated by inserting a fine thread of medicine, as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have their opening properly located are bleeding, because no one has an opening at the top of the vein; therefore they cannot urinate before binding their vein upwards, and they cannot empty the substance into the marrow, which is a very harmful disease.
The method of the work involves placing a very heavy pressure on the patient's back, with the opening at the top of the vein and also as small as the tip of a penny, so that if the opening is in the middle of movement, it must be done; and avoid letting the blood flow many times, and when it does occur, disinfect the wound and treat the injury until it heals.
Pustules on the vein Many times alate in the vein occur, and it appears to be a grotesque sign; both malignant and benign forms exist. It must be treated with a very small incision of about one centimeter, then bound and massaged thoroughly afterward. Place moistened Egyptian cotton on the wound and treat the inflammation until it heals completely. If the alate is malignant with black discharge and bleeding, it must be treated with caustic therapy. Once you have bound it, if there are parts inside the vein and outside the skin, you must remove the alate that is inside first; and when it has been sutured, then treat the wound carefully. This is because once it is healed together, there is no guarantee that the lump in the vein will not be discharged or become blackened and corrupted. It must have everything that is dark and corrupt removed, then apply a dressing of honey and flour made from grated pomegranate bark and mulberry tree leaves; treat it with other treatments until healed completely.
If blood from the wound incisio: secrete, sanc ecrier, siens: leu :n:
:ing,5en (ceutude, andredextent:secreitheidges:gift, theceptible:nature:20screwagelevexes:rue : <it:fier : itax agernex demore:cetre.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not painful like other wounds; in any case, all that we do from our will concerning this work, and particularly for children, it is the best deed we can perform, and the easiest to achieve salvation.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children in their laws because they do not practice it according to their laws, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
For I wanted the greatest part of masters and saints who practiced circumcision in various ways: by scraping away some skin with a blade, applying force, using a needle or tiny lancet; if it was pierced so that there were two holes, then they believed they could heal and let the wound close on its own.
Or it heals the circumcision and there is double pain, and in the renewal of that part where two points are made, this method does not securely unite the limb; and with the renewal of the finger by chance, iron will enter its workings, and they will bleed again, and many times are born like this without the need for renewal.
Of the renewal done by force throughout the entire length of the thread, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as cutting too high or low does not matter much in this practice.
For when you press your hand and cut evenly in a straight line of one hundred and ten units; but that the child's skin is well-treated around his body; and if done so, it makes people think about the first operation as though you are only tying the thread around the vein, not just the limb, and then you may provoke him in all possible ways. Then you have it in your hands straightly, and draw the forces between your hands or on your fingers that the child does not see them, nor any other animal; then put your hand on the vein and blow air, and make it rise as high as the head of the penis is erect. Then clean well from the accumulated dirt, tie a double thread knot on the slit, and tie around that slit another one of about two or three threads; and you have twenty-seven links by the second twine, then bind to the pouch and the indice, and leave between these two ties, then let the blood come out quickly above and cut the head of the vein.
Then you have it in your hands straightly, and draw the forces between your hands or on your fingers that the child does not see them, nor any other animal; then put your hand on the vein and blow air, and make it rise as high as the head of the penis is erect. Then clean well from the accumulated dirt, tie a double thread knot on the slit, and tie around that slit another one of about two or three threads; and you have twenty-seven links by the second twine, then bind to the pouch and the indice, and leave between these two ties, then let the blood come out quickly above and cut the head of the vein. Then let the blood bleed little and little, for it is dangerous; and place powder on top of and above the powder. Therein a cloth made from one day's work of white ox hide, roasted without water, mixed with good oil and rose honey, and he lets it stay on the other day, and treats him again and again until he is healthy.
The formation of strength for the shoulders if they are held and stretched, and are as strong as the muscles of the neck similarly.
The error of the molding if it is found in the cuts between them; therefore it requires that you stretch your neck so that it performs the movement appropriately, and holds evenly, and if you do not hold it straight, then take a pair of tongs, and squeeze accordingly.
And if they pass .iij. years (indicating a time frame), and the part that is underneath the branch is swollen, let it remain until the muscles are soothed in their position, and lightly scrape away; as you hold it similarly to how one would move, and keep it from the part of the branch, for this will not harm nor hinder.
Treat then the wound with things that are well-known and which we have mentioned regarding powders (presumably referring to traditional or historical medicinal practices), if it is done excessively, and it goes above (implying careful monitoring of any intervention), for it will not harm; treat him so as we have said, until he is healthy.
Dou retention of urine
The retention of urine may be from the operation of a hole, or of frozen blood, or arrows, or miscellaneous things, that we have said in the section on operations;
And if the urine is not expelled (discharged), and you see that retention is because of the hole which is in his groin or near the bladder, then it requires that the painful parts be laid on his genitals; and they place the legs behind the back, and compresses its abdomen above the part beyond the back, and restricts him so much as he can. And therefore, it constrains the ligaments of the bladder below the expression in the hole.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must amend the extraction of all instruments called "syringe", for this reason: and be made of thin silver lightly drawn like a bird's feather; or a thorn from half a palm long and slender at the top.
And the way of urine discharge is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head with a little wool or cotton, and put one end inside the syringe; and collect the excess cloth and pour it down into the head of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and linen or beeswax, and make the patient sit on a chair, and lift up the bladder and urethra with moistened linen and olive oil.
Then quickly insert the syringe into the penis, down to the root of the penis, then double it above the bulb; then push the syringe before the bladder and make the patient feel the urine coming out from that empty thing right away. This is not done in this order because if you insert the syringe where it goes around, then pull back the wool little by little and let the urine flow, and finally extract the urine;
And repeat using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and then retract the patient's limb.
diseases of the bladder
When scrapings or blood come into the bladder, and an accumulation is formed therein, you see it distill fluids and medicines, so make all instruments called "clyster" with this form:
It is closed, and if there are three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and it applies medicine with such a cloth in each hole that well suits the penis so that more moisture can be drawn out, and pushes out to the extent required.
And when you see the medicines flowing into the bladder, put the chief cloth in the muscle so that it is held there; and draw out the traction to where it was inserted; if you pull out the moisture from the keg, then enter it back in, and forcefully push back the traction now, and when the moisture enters again, the patient will feel the bladder.
And this is the delicate form of a clyster by which one clysters the bladder: it consists of (list specific components or design features that make up such an instrument).
And it is made of silver or gold; and at the top. And then take an uterine bladder, and put one cloth from .iij. In this cunfortune ce paien de lienblatte, et lesurne la pee, ailier:
i:lore
of the stone
In the division of surgical methods, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said about the pierced joints in rains, and all signs, and that on such a pierce it must be worked to size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will clearly and briefly tell you.
I say that the pierced vein in the bladder happens more often in children, and it is a sign that an acute jump of the bladder seems as subtle; and hurts greatly the patient's leg, and many times falls; and for these jumps there are foundations; and recovery is light until they reach 24 years old, and it is very hard on elderly people, those who are between infancy and old age; and care is lighter for those with a large vein than for those with a small one.
And when it comes to treatment, the first step is to clarify the malady with clyster therapy, for administering everything that is in the intestines; because at times this can obstruct any attempt at piercing (intervention).
Then take the malady by the roots, and lift and move downwards to the stomach, if it descends into the bottom of the bladder, and never goes up above; then lay him down with his hands on his thighs so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then pierce and touch these areas.
If you feel the pierce in space, hurry to examine under it immediately. And if it does not hurt when touched with all instruments, then take your left index finger as an indicator of oil on the hand's side; if the malady is in infants, or if my signet ring moves, meaning that it has reached maturity; and fixate its foundation, and feel the pierce, and when you sense it under your own body, press it towards the collar of the bladder; then apply pressure on it until you see relief or drainage.
And order the minister to press the bladder with his hand and command him to extend his right arm upwards towards the edges of the cuts in the area where the size is being worked on; then he will expel the spatula-shaped instrument, which takes this form:
. Latex leat's fromage. Theu pareil. Forstir (un and theer le: "paret. Thees ofges. In French:age, Leviagain. The15. :ge-later, andace : Getraie:age.
By chance the pressure is so strong that it pushes him out of its foundation, and he jumps with effort; and you know that there are joints or angles and margins: if they are tightly pressed to come out, as some have a groove-like appearance and roundness, and the exit is light.
When there are angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not move, you must stretch with tongs that are as similar to a pizza cutter at the top, so that you can force the joint out without slipping; or throw underneath this subtle scissor-like instrument. And if you cannot insert it in such a way, then slightly enlarge that cavity, and if there is no decortication, then stretch with vitriol.
And if there are more than one joints, first throw the largest into the neck of the bladder, then pull it out, and force it through, and if there are others, do so afterwards. And if it is very large, you must wrap it with silk and make a larger wound. Because these things happen to the patient: either he dies or his urine comes out again because the hairs cannot be sewn together; but in all cases I strive to remove the joints by pulling them apart piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bandage it, and cover it with a linen napkin moistened with oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the abscess; then re-bandage the patient on his neck, and do not remove the joint until three days have passed.
And when you remove it, if the joint comes out well with oil and water, then treat it with laurel ointment and basil oil until it is healed.
And if abscesses appear in the wound and decalcifications of blood clots are present in the bladder, causing urine to be retained therein, such as with a suction effect: then do your work in that spot, remove the clot inside, because if it remains, the bladder will corrode; otherwise it may become porous.
Then raise the wound with alum, silk, and catgut, and provide aid in all ways you see fit until it is healed; and ensure that all of the urine that you cure, you bind up those two legs, and assemble the medicines on the bandage.
And if the joint is small, and it is directed by a rodale de la vingledre: et si leu, et demeinche ains :sans lié :ceu que li reddaillé. Et cestres, et siens les bougé, parole ascles du, au franç à l'arbrees in the textures .i.e leu lait. French fromes:rein aire, 12ndreverses:entire. Theurs : A.
screwage:123esubartentoc medicalises,biense:ite by:gacharde toit:0representements;fracture;nascuerde.
Then take a needle and thread it around the branch above the wound, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then thrust the needle gently along the vein, until it enters the wound; and turn the needle in your hand to the wound repeatedly, as much as you can pierce the wound from another side. If at once urine comes out, then press your hand on that which is delayed behind the wound inside the vein. Then it becomes broken, jumps with the urine, and causes great pain for the patient.
And if you cannot do it for any reason that prevents it, then take a needle inside the wound and another above it, then make the vein at the location of the wound between those two points, thrust the needle forcefully, pull out the thread, and retract the line, and warm the frozen blood in the wound until it is healed.
from a woman's wound
It rarely happens that a wound in women is jaundiced, and if it does happen, it is considered grievous; for three reasons: one is that by chance the woman may become a virgin; and the second is that it becomes difficult to find a woman who can openly confess about such matters, especially when she has attained chastity.
And the third way is that by chance there may not be a woman who can understand this art of handwork; and the fourth way is that the wound in a woman's body is deeper than one in a man' Written by: [Your Name]
And if it is necessary to consider this, it must be that you choose a wise woman who understands the task well and knows how to handle an instrument properly; and if you do not find such a skilled woman, there is no subtle castewoman in life, or a woman who understands part of the art, and commands her to perform what you command from the examination of the wound.
And observe carefully whether the woman is a virgin: in that case, it must be to press her private parts or foundations and examine the wound; if she covers them, then binds her foundation firmly, and commands her to do so over her wound or with the malaise, and holds her left hand on the bladder formed.
If she covers the wound in the part of the wound. Si lace deffendut que ies le veintesson parole, et estuet sié, et cestan veneur lavergaument les plus choses qui ille auge: desusse nl' :, andreins.
Then place the rib in the waist, if you feel that it is pierced so much that the wound can be drawn out until the hole allows, and know that there are many methods of stabbing: namely small and large, sharp and heavy, long and round, and which have rings. If you know the similarities to understand the outcome.
And if it does not heal on its own, put vitriol boiled in wine and apply heat for an hour until the wound is unhealed; then return to your work until the hole is strong enough, and use the dressings I have mentioned beforehand in the extraction of the wound as others will help you with this task.
And if it does not heal on its own (if the artery is punctured), then apply powder and bandages to the wound'ited area, and do not repeat this action again, and let the wound alone without drawing blood from it; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is relieved and the bleeding stopped, then return to your work (operations), until the wound has fully healed.
of hernia, referring to the condition when abdominal contents protrude through a weakened area in the abdominal wall. (Note: 'carnose' here means flesh-like or swollen, describing the appearance of a hernial sac.)
Rarely is this not simply a moist or white fibrous layer within the umbilical cord, which contains the blood cells of the fetus (commonly referred to as "fibrous tissue" and named "white fibrous layer"), and it should not be properly woven into the body's flesh. However, if we consider this matter as a different operation, then this is indeed leather-like material between white fibrous layers that we have previously mentioned; and this does occur in some cases (referring to potential complications such as herniation of the umbilical cord contents).
And the formation of this layer (fibrous cord) consists of a delicate material that is spread throughout it. (Note: 'Generation' in this context refers to the process or development of the fibrous cord structure.)
And there is never the case of it being due to percussion upon the blood vessels, and this moisture has many colors: whether it declines towards a yellowish hue, or lacks redness, or blacks out, or appears as white aquatic (referring to possible color changes in the fibrous tissue). It is more likely.
And this is the sign of knowing that assembly (knowing there is fibrous tissue), for if it is indeed the white fibrous layer we have mentioned, then it has turned into pieces or fragments, like an operation, and does not open the blood vessels, because it has become moist throughout.
And if the tieles.iification of lee tiels.
deuconse ieu:saindeuce According to what comes after this insertion, judge what is inside there.
According to what comes after this insertion, judge what is inside there. And when we cure them with iron, it is required that the maladies be healed as much as possible and the filling of their hearts; then they are placed on their backs, on something a little high, and put many layers of cloth over them.
Then they are placed on their left side, and command the minister to place them on the right hand, and extend the rod to one of the two sides where the cords cross each other.
Then take the spatula in hand and scrape off the cords among them until near the thorn, and make a straight incision to see whether the cords are white up to that point, and scrape gently according to what is possible.
Then pierce the white patch with water in one large puncture, and draw out all the water, and then put onions upon it, and let the white patch protrude above; and do not touch the thorns of the cords, but just the white patch itself, that if you break up its side too much, some of the blood will return.
And if the blood flows freely while you perform your work, then bandage it up when you have completed the white patch; then assemble the two thorns of the cords in a common seam, and treat it as for other wounds, until it is sound again.
devreintipheardecans,sante (it'acques
And if the blood is assembled in two parts, you know that it are joints; if the other part copies exactly as the first one, then suck out the fluid from the wound, and place a clean linen soaked in rose oil on the wound.
and place another clean linen soaked in wine and oil on top of them, and put above the joints, and overdressed with double cloth, and lay it according to this form.
Then take two cloths and cut the linen into this shape and join them together at the waistband of the trousers, and one strip hangs down from the foundation to the back, and the other covers the groin area; and the second piece is placed over the shoulders, and all gathered in a loop around the belt.
and there is never a time when this rod of cautery in the size of iron is applied directly to the patient's skin, and you must use one slender cautery, and cover the joint with leather, and dress it as we have said before, so that the white substance containing water can be exposed;
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white substance of blood, and scrape it with this slender cautery;
And in all the ways you can do it, as long as you keep everything together; and make sure that no feather touches the open wound; and know that this work is safer; and move without causing dislocation of the blood, and mourn over the sizes.
and if anything makes you go against this method or causes dislocation of the blood or any other thing, then treat what goes contrary to it according to what is said before;
And if the pain is fearful and it does not want to wait for this work because of its horrifying nature, then provide a puncture as I have told you, and ensure that when you are well-informed by our meanings that we have discussed which indicates such a piece of linen should be used;
If the pain is to be found in that piece of linen soignee enceinte.i. ceste veinne desemale, et chascun vint defface laine fine:
Then place cotton on the wound, and apply it to the wet area, and let the healing process of the water proceed, then treat it until the wound is healed.
And if the blood does not come out of the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you insert a needle or the instrument used to drain fluid from abscesses, as shown here before; and slightly enlarge the wound, check that the fluid returns, and after two to three months or so, when it has assembled like this, then the painful symptoms will pass in these days.
From the incision of abscesses
It checks whether in this part of the recipe there are several predispositions, which seems to me that it should be left alone.
And I will tell you about the work and similar cases regarding the incision.
Now I say that many incisions come out of it, and mainly with pus; and this happens quite often.
It's known by surplus sourness and moisture, which is spread through the pus, or from hitting;
And the color of the incision according to the condition of the blood vessels; and it does not cause pain, and is considered a serious injury.
And by chance are some incised wounds painful and swollen, and of a reddish hue, and never comes from any artery or vein opening;
When it comes from any artery, it is compressed by the arrangement of the incision if you press on it. And it does not require you to touch;
This one which is made of swelling of veins is pressed by its position to express tender pain on both sides.
and can well perform the incision in this manner, and on the others as well. and it's that you handle the key of joints first, then remove them from above, and treat them with white ointment, and release the suspensory ligaments from all parts of the upper body.
If the upper body is already in these needy conditions, then it's necessary that you treat the upper body and handle the key of joints.
and if it is in the ointment or within the vessels where they are located, then it's necessary to release all those attached tissues and handle them with a round approach.
And if the birth of the cartilage is at the back, it requires that you cover it entirely, and extract the flesh as we have said.
And when the tasks are completed, apply a soft wool cloth with rose oil and wine to the wound, then attend to other treatments until he is well again.
of incision on arrows
This is an incision wrapped with a wrapping resembling one of the following: i. boilings, accompanied by softening of the abscesses. And when it hurts so much that he cries.
And the treatment of this disease is equally feared as this one mentioned here before.
And therefore we will tell you the workings of it, according to what the ancients did.
It requires that you place the patient on a low seat, and then let down the syringe of pus below his necessary levels. all of those near the belly and the body, and tighten the master's stomach, and they form into it.
then remove sharply large pieces from that area where the vessels are exposed until they no longer appear.
and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are within temples.
then insert a double pin in it, and fix it firmly on the first part of his head orde, and it is come, and place to the second. incoin on ite.
:meinthe decade dea: The king 13rdise aoutilent thees. Andrever.
x If it does not lose its crying due to the incision of veins, and they are dried up and cannot be helped.
Of the surgical procedure The treatment of this branch if it comes down to cautery or stretching on the belly in the part of the groin, which causes the intestines to descend from that course to one of its branches.
And this procedure is either cautery or stretching and they come from various reasons: either by striking, jumping, crying out loud, or lifting a burden, as well as similar things.
And when it is related to stretching of cautery, it happens little by little over a long time and does not suddenly appear. And it is also the abscesses that extend towards the arteries because cautery presses on the intestines.
And the signs are when it's related to the section of cautery, where they bring about sudden pain at the beginning and various appearances on the surface near the skin; this is due to the discharge from the intestines and the depletion of the liver caused by the cautery.
And it has never been combined with the intestines there is no containment and causes great suffering to the patient, especially when pressed immediately.
And in these treatments with iron for fear that it might be avoided.
And the manner of this work is that you command or cauterize so as to resect the intestine in its midst in the wound if it can be retracted. Or it may be sown upon its neck above your hands, and relieve the joints.
Then are the keys upwards, and cover all the skin around long veins. Then put them down in the books about opening the abdomen according to what you know how to do to open the wound, and such that they can be drawn out of it.
Then scrape off the skin over the joints where there are hair follicles, until all parts of it are exposed.
Then put your indication here that teaches the joint, in which there is the white skin over the abdominal cavity, and between the second skin.
And go behind the abdomen, and between the second skin. And move your right hand in front of the joints, with the white skin at top to your left hand, and lift the abdomen towards all the joints toward the waist. And command the minister to extend the abdomen upwards, and move that which is behind the ligament.
And ask you to see if there is an intestinal wrapping or hard white skin over it, and if you do not find anything, then put it in the abdomen.
Then take an instrument or have a thick thread made of such threads, and put it in the back part of the skin where there is after the skin of the joints; behind the waist, then tie the ends together for three threads. Then bring them together in a way like a cross, and tie the skin where there is over the joints' skin with a strong line of three parts. Then wrap the ends of the threads together with three parts, so that no one can untie them by applying pressure to the stitching point, which does not move. And put the main line according to the first line of three parts, and after these three lines leave the skin where there is over the joints' skin a great part of that.
And after all according to the curve that it bears; then tie in the part which is on the skin around the joints, where there are no corners and turns as we have said before.
Then apply a loose cloth in oil, and put the wound, and bind the line that we have said. And nevertheless you should not cauterize the white skin over the joints that we have said after the incision due to discharge of blood.
Because this happens often, and leave the line so that itchickens will not break. And if it is hot water as we have said.
Then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
Hernia carnosus
In this instance, I have never seen anyone attempt to treat with iron.
And the old said that it is made in such a way as if the screws are assembled to pull them together, after cutting into their grooves lightly.
Then cover me too, and heal the abscess that operates there, until the screws grow hairs; and do so as we have said, until they are completely healthy.
Never does the rotten hernia appear again, as we have said, and he opens it; and no one finds any mixture of intestines in there, and if it is found, it's little, and recovers all hours.
And in every case, if it lingers too long on this point, they believe the wound or Syphilis, as long as the intestines remain there.
And this occurs through the extension of that ulcer which is within the hernia, as we have said, because it extends, then becomes softened and swollen in there, and opens up.
And this is treated with cautery, as we have said before; and there has never been a cure by iron in this manner.
And it becomes a heavy burden on his shoulders between your hands, then cover the hernia of the enlarged mass according to its quantity in three doses (the "iiij" is likely an error and should be "three").
And then extract the ulcer that is thereunder the skin which it follows, and take down its right side and place it next to the apparent ulcer.
And press at the point of the abdomen where the two ulcers appear on top of the repair, and count them both.
Then extract the head of the joint, and do not cover the sinew or extend the upper part or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of dislocating the bowels.
Then heals by treating wounds. And when you treat the threads, if they break and heal the wound, so long as it is sound.
The sinew is constricted and has no appearance in the procedure, and the caustic is melted into this place, and next to it are salvation.
of the softening of the leather of the joints
Often the leather of the joints is softened in some people because the components within are easily softened and visible; it's necessary to know when to cure this, that you lay the ill-tempered part on its back, and you pull the already softened leather from the natural leather. Then take two fingers under a seam, and if you see any superfluous softened leather at these or other seams, then cut it off firmly in either two or three places; then suture between the seams, and cure it as for other wounds until it is sound, and bind the threads.
of cautery
"Saiches que chastremens est escomieniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre...Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre..."
of hermaphrodites
Hermophrodite is according to some methods: one such method involves the genital openings resembling a woman's figure with hair and sometimes even inoculating urine; the other method is for women, similar to having a rod under their pubis as well, and treating all corresponding injuries. The treatment of wounds and abdomen according to this second method involves applying salves or remedies applied directly to such openings where pus may have burst from the genitalia, without any specific cure for it.
In the context of your request, "tentigene" does not directly appear within the provided translation segment. However, if we were to explore related historical medical concepts that could align with this term, it might refer to "gestation," which is a biological process related to pregnancy and fetal development. Given that hermaphrodites can potentially present unique reproductive scenarios, but since "tentigene" isn't part of the provided Old French excerpt, there seems to be no direct translation link in this specific text snippet.
Gestation is a char applied to the natural part as long as it's too ugly to see; and many women have also had such excessive amounts as if with one hand, and this treatment requires that you drain the superfluous gestation from your hand or palms, applying it lightly so they don’t bleed. You should avoid going too far in a procedure, lest blood vessels become damaged, then treat until healed; and another condition wherein the fetus is born through the mouth of the womb, and applies it, and sometimes leaps out, and according to its appearance, they called this "kowe disease." It requires you to treat such gestation as we have described, and care for it so long as it remains healthy.
In this context, the term "erratique" in Old French translates to "erratic" in English. In a general sense, it refers to something irregular or inconsistent. If we consider medieval medicine, an "erratique" procedure would imply treatments that are non-standard and lacking consistency with established medical norms of the time.
When the dislocation of the shoulder joint occurs due to moisture and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocation happens when a joint moves out of its natural position, preventing it from moving, and the limb appears misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. The occurrence of dislocation is not due to any particular connection at the hip; if it is close or adjacent, it becomes apparent near the hips or thighs. It determines conception and childbirth, as well as chance encounters with subtle love or magic stings, which appear on the skin in various places such as the marrow, bones, inside, etc.; then take woolen threads, moisten them with oil, put them under the dislocation, and dress the woman at home every day so that it can heal. And if the subtle love or sting is hard and sharp, you must first cover the puncture with a large cotton cloth wide enough to prevent the wound from closing; then treat for other cures as long as heals well. When it comes in marrow, according to this manner, unless there are ingrown hairs. For an incision in bone ingrown hairs should not be touched by iron.
Embarrassing hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids are overtures of veins which have become accustomed to moisture without corticosteroid treatment and when they become old, they turn into tumors (thelul). We said in the division of symptoms that these are signs, and I will say here those who receive curative care. It is necessary then for you to put the woman in a cold room, hold the woolen thread around her roots, and soak it in medicated saltwater; likewise with salve made from dragon's blood, incense, and other things; let them stand for an hour, then place them in cool water; when these swellings of tissue arise, it is good to make a decoction of sumac bark, grape pomace ashwagandha root powder, and the leaves of gales and other things, and then take flour made from rye and mix it with honey and sawdust; put it on her back. And if they are not painful, you can inflate them with leather gloves that do not hurt the skin; then apply linen, and melt plantain juice or beech sap vinegar, and apply to the wounds of the vein, and care for the hemorrhoids so long as they are healed. When the stinging nettle appears red, it is hard, and resembles one's chiefly rough.
Hemorhoi togear les vaisse dese leu lesnei d’ameas lespite ofemens iains:lous la merle ofnent of meince caudement asmea :meant.meïses.
ifsisocelancrenernece the craconseanseurifolder (
Of childbirth
The profession is first in the matter of childbirth that she knows the natural figure of delivery, and when you see her pushing downwards, and desiring to smell the aroma, then it indicates that those children are born according to their natural form, and they come out with their head above them; and when you observe these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her abdomen so that the child comes quickly. For if he emerges from his head, the second stage with him begins, and there is much pain in the superfluous parts due to proper realignment; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. Because it never goes up their legs, but rather through their shoulders or arms, and it gets turned by accident on its side, and other unfortunate forms; that is why it is a matter of skill for her to be alert and skilled in these things, and she should be aware of errors and deceptions, and I will show you all the figures mentioned as ones to assist.
If the child comes from its head naturally, and the woman gives birth with groaning, and his strength is weak; then let him sit on a chair or have women hold him; and if he has a nature like oil or fenugreek cooked, and they pour the labor between his thighs where there is this little spasm, which form it: And split the second stage, and hold his unborn child tight as long as the moisturizers are applied to its fur; and press the woman'e abdomen until the baby is born, and if it does not emerge, then you must clothe the woman with fenugreek mucus mixed with olive oil for one hour. Then bind and cough her up; and when these two hands come forth forcefully, you must lightly press them a couple of times; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, elevating her feet; then remove the chair from the ground, and treat the woman so that she does not soil herself at standing; and if the hands cannot enter and the child dies, clothe the baby in this cloth which is before you placed, extract the infant by tearing it out gently, and afterwards cleanse it.
From the issue of the child from its legs When the child comes from its legs, then it must be pushed upwards: And then turn it very gently, as long as he is still small:
Then he needs to pinch and stretch it bit by bit.
Can he jump just as legs, if commanded to press and make him sternum expand? If he jumps, God wills it.
And if not as we have said, turn bit by bit until he is according to the natural figure. For when there is ligamentation.
And if not as we have said, take a marrow of bone, and oil of sulfur, and melted wax, and grind all in one mortar. And place it upon the woman's body near and below this ointment. Then let it be done above water until down below the ribs.
And when she is warmed up there, then he makes a little mirror of myrrh and puts it over her and leaves for an hour. Then have it done on a seat, then he makes her sternum expand and holds back her mouth and nostrils, and presses the belly gently, for the child now jumps. From the issue of the child from his thighs. When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands bit by bit.
Of the child born with a large hand, causing difficulty moving (Note: The provided Old French text seems to mix different topics. Here is an attempt based on the given excerpt only.) I invite to bring back the hand: (Note: This line appears out of context based on the provided excerpt. The phrase is translated into English, but without additional information from the text it may not fully capture its intended meaning.) If it cannot be brought back, then lift up the woman and go: (Note: This line also appears out of context based on the provided excerpt. The phrase is translated into English, but without additional information from the text it may not fully capture its intended meaning.)
If she cannot go, then make her lie down on a bed and straighten out the legs: (Note: This line seems to be related to medical instruction but again appears context-dependent. The translation into English is provided based on what's given.)
Then treat the mice that I have told you about: (Note: This line seems unrelated to the medical text, possibly a reference or an analogy within the context. It has been translated as instructed.)
And if she does not bear offspring, then make her sit on a chair and study how to bring back the hand: (Note: This line appears to be part of an instructional sequence based on the medical context provided in the previous lines. The translation into English reflects that interpretation.) And raise the child according to natural form, and make her cough, commanding her to hold it so that it expels any fluid: (Note: This line seems related to care instructions after a medical procedure or event. The translation into English follows from the context.)
From the issue of the child on his back, and extend her arms, turning her face towards her mother: (Note: This line could be part of post-procedure care or observation instructions. Translated into English for clarity.) I invite that the ball tightens her hand, then turns it slowly and slightly, and the woman moves lightly: (Note: This line might be illustrating an exercise or a care technique. Translated as per instruction.)
And when it is levelled out, then place the mouse on its back and oil it as we have said, and command her to move little by little: (Note: This line refers to a process in animal care or treatment. Translated accordingly.)
And when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command her to hold it; and make her cough: (Note: This line continues the care instructions from earlier lines, translated into English for consistency.) In this manner for all the second time: (Note: The final line appears as an instruction to repeat a process. Translated into English maintaining context with prior text.)
In this manner for all the second time: (Note: The final line appears as an instruction to repeat a process. Translated into English maintaining context with prior text.) When it comes in this manner for the second time, if you clean up the second layer with oil until all the moisture is gone: (Note: This line refers to a repeated process of caring or treatment, translated into English.)
And if the child' Cooks down her face and chest, let her be washed so that it does not hold back breathing, and it dies: (Note: This line seems to describe a specific medical situation. Translated into English.)
Then put the child back in as much as you have placed it, and command the woman that she never again: (Note: The translation might be slightly off due to the context of this text. 13th century English medical manuscript dated line byline 12th century France.)
of the twins Separates that are twins often born, and they never do so in pairs of two or three; this is not an experience known to occur, and rarely happens. These are experienced things, and they never live long enough for names to be given;
I know that they are multiple, and they suffer from the syndrome which conceives them, which is bound to humidity.
And they never emerge naturally as everyone else does, just as we have said.
And if they emerge groaning, then the treatment as we have described it, and should be a subtle balance of doing what needs to be done swiftly and lightly. And do so as it would deserve to be honored. of many children
of many children They are never formed in the marshes; they may be one or two or three or four or five or more and made to take shape like a child according to the measure of divine grace.
And it must be acknowledged that healing maintains everything, as by chance such things often occur. If done according to what it necessitates.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman from whom the dead child or womb has come, as I have said in its division, and it does not spill forth again, then you are obliged to labor with your hands. If it is necessary that you know whether the woman has sound health or if she suffers from fear of death.
If it is necessary that the woman be leaning upon her back, and her legs inclined upwards, and her feet raised.
And the minister of .iiij. parts, or if she is lying down so that it can be extracted from the child;
aille. Then they throw it into the mud violently, then striking one or both places where it can be recovered with such force.
And take care that the child's wound is drawn out from its head. If you strike the wound in the ears, neck, mouth, throat, or beard, or even on the patient's shoulders.
And if during these measures, he lies on his feet, then strike him with a stick and beat the sides.
And it is essential that you bleed the wound with your right hand, placing pressure between his left fingers in the other hand, and then blow or strike all over his body vigorously, until we have mentioned these places where the wound may be found, while he remains empty of blood;
Then find another wound, if you have treated it in your practice, and the extraction is equal ('estragaigalz').
And then they are equal in movement from one side and the other, so that it can be pulled out, and their teeth should hold as much if the shape allows.
And if one part remains, if it is bleeding any of its two sides ('dos'), then apply pressure to that side and strike the other side.
And if there are no more signs of it (wound), place this wound or higher up and treat it as much until the blood stops flowing ('tant qu'il s'en isse').
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot return by compression, And you must first wrap it under one sheet, so that it heals completely.
Then bind the bandage at the sole of the foot or in the area above it, and this requires you to do it with both hands, on each foot.
And if a child's shoulder is large and dislocated in the exit, or it has an acute accumulation. It is required that you insert a splint under your thighs and perform the head treatment and extract the accumulation. Or you wrap it around the instrument called "almidach," since its shape comes from the staff or the person who follows that.
And in such cases, make sure the child naturally with a great head; And then pull out the bones with tongs.
And if the child's joints were forced and it is resistant to the tongs, as long as the moisture has been or caused to be;
And if it cannot emerge, then wrap it in pieces with what you can do;
And if it is inflamed in the abdomen or on the sides, this requires that you pierce as much as the fluids correspond;
And if the child is on his legs, then there are light attractions to the mouth of the mother, and healing lightly;
And if it is found on the belly or in the womb, then it must be extracted with one sheet wrapped under the hand. and makes the belly or the womb while the moisture that is there remains.
and if other limbs are broken, and they remain fractured. and he binds his hand in a pouch made of wicker (marris), and draws it out through the mouth. then he draws out one or two, and they are drawn out (fur).
and if the wicker pouch is opened by pulling out (aposteme), which prevents it from being treated, then there is no need to work on it. instead, it must be equipped with wet and greasy things (amenistrer); and the moistening substances are placed inside (emplaustres), and see them as softening and slippery (aigu mollifians et amoistans).
And if the wound is on its side, and you can put it there (igal), as we have described in a living child.
but if one cannot do it (tract), then the drawing is done in parts, and nothing from the second line should be left behind.
And when you have done this (fait), then the moistening substances that we have mentioned in previous treatments are placed into these abscesses which come into the wicker container.
And if blood comes out, it is placed in a restrictive liquid, and the other treatments are given (aministré).
And I see a woman whose womb had contained an infant, then she placed another on him, and the other child's death was prevented (consuet). After long days he came upon one abscess in the swelling, which expanded so much that it opened, and began with great pain.
I went to call for treatment, and thought long on it, and could not close the wound.
I placed it under strong magnetism, and drew out an bone, and after some days another one. I was troubled much because there is no bone in the abdomen.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I treated the wound and with my hands extracted bone until she reached her best point. and the woman stayed there long afterward, and it remained as two pounds of lead on her leg;
And I do not remember this chapter because whenever the master performs an extraordinary procedure, he knows how to assist.
Two times bringing back to his bed
And then came the pressure form, which caused us to open the books; and at this point we tore away some of the leather straps. Overall, the restriction was somewhat more subtle, and it consisted of ropes or boxes.
And it was also a hole in the wood about one and a half feet wide, and its margin like that of trees, so it had to be dug deep, and by longhands... And besides these two alignments made by this method were tightened in both directions, which were half a footlong or one more.
nge ia curexterregessexcameleves tolmeafeille sevrectiflessoing fementeurentheissexible, an:maudecte for a gredeletrecthundericavourtioffernevavocestrukengreve laithexterre
Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, shall be made of elmwood or box wood, according to the shape of the pincers. And they shall be two-jointed joints, like you see, with one hand's length long and the other wide.
And when you see opening the marrow to all parts of the instrument, let it sit on one leg, and hold the legs together. Then place the two-jointed joints side by side in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument between your fingers. Then work your hand on all parts of the instrument, just as you have made the pincers evenly, according to the quantity that shows how much opening has been done in the marrow's mouth, until it opens by itself as it wants.
This instrument is all shaped and has many similarities; and the more marrow it has available, the faster the work will be done, and taller for their quantity.
Do not despair of the instrument if you have not made it; because their needs are undeniable.
When the second childbirth occurs, it must be that you command the woman to retain her hair, and then she shall forcefully expel air from her body, and hold your hands in front of her mouth and nose. And if she does so, well it is.
If not, then take a pot and make a puncture or cup-shaped cut, and put therein herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, as in cupping therapy, juniper, chamomile, camphor, calamint, and centaury.
All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked in water above the fire; then place a cup or puncture under the boiling vessel, and put the other end into the mouth of the marrow.
And the smoke will fill up in the marrow as much as you want; then make her exhale, as we have said before. If it does so during her second labor. And if she remains after this treatment and is not weakened, then you shall command the baby to suck her left hand in oil of juniper or lamb's fat, and then place it back into the marrow.
And it will be the second childbirth; and when she finds her hairs, and hold them tightly, so that thou hale. but it must move lightly to the right and left, and then slip away if it comes and dislocates.
And if the patient's mouth is torn, we have said the treatment of opening and rubbing with herbs.
and if it is not of all that we have said, then keep you from drawing out too much.
but it is to be known that what is in the mouth of the woman, you should place on her thighs, then perform the rectal cleansing with four pharmacological treatments.
if she brings it and relocates, but all the same, when it causes a bad smell in the stomach and on the head, and cuts off the evil breath.
For it is now to be known that there are effective smokes for this, and none of the ancient have tried smoking chicory or dried figs.
The form of the instrument to be used for smoking the woman with flowers and seeds, this is it:
And is to be seen as if it were like a cane, and put the head subtly in its nature, and the wide joints near the fire.
And for the smokes with coal, and when it is spent, restart another one.
of the foundation
And children are born who have not perceived the foundation, but instead have a subtle secret faculty: And it is now to be seen that she perceives the subtle faculty of her due, and not much sharply, and protects him from touching.
Then place a thin vein under linen soaked in oil and water, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it will reattach, put or pierce a small hole in the body, and let the hands heal for days, and support him when he feels the need to go to bedrooms.
And there is never a time for such salves or incision healings; it must cover the healing well: whether you treat it, as we have said regarding the small hole in the body.
from the foundation base From the foundation come fistulas that swell up, and these are larger than those which come from near the foundation or within two finger-widths of it.
If there is one or more such fistulas; and when the swelling up of that has been occurring for a long time, then you must work on it with forceful drainage or slightly elevated position.
And these persistent fistulas are known because of what they have or do not have in terms of evacuation (egestion) or discharge (ventositivity); and sometimes they jump from one place to another.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate the bladder and a large part of the urethra; and they reach the juncture of the vagina and anus, and to some extent extend into the abdomen.
Andalusian peccadence. nastel. La:
And if there is twisting dislocation, or a fine layer of cloth underneath, or a horsehair, so long as you feel the cloth or hair in its proper place;
And if you do not feel it, and there is no opening for evacuation or blowing out, as we have said before. You know that it does not pierce; if you rush too quickly with the cautery.
And when the fistula is just above the bladder or along the urethra where urine passes through, and it cannot be alleviated by medicine.
If it is perceived just at the juncture of the hip, then the cloth or hair extends up to its proper place. If there is no twisting dislocation and the creation of pain does not occur, then it is already too late for medicine or any form of mending by poulticing.
And in these persistent fistulas there is no relief to be found through labor; it becomes a source of envy for those who intervene.
In that which is neither persistent nor ancient, there is hope for healing by cautery, as I have experienced.
And it causes great pain between your hands on its back; and the legs up to their hips, and inclines the hips towards the abdomen. Then you apply a layer of rain or moisture if there is twisting dislocation, as long as you can feel the layer in its proper place.
If the pain is felt near its foundation, it means you must cut your finger index.
If you feel that the cloth or hair has pierced it; and whether there is a sheath exposed between your thighs or pubic area, which indicates that it is persistent. If there is no work done on it that could possibly heal it.   Written in English:
However, there is some that can still be well-treated; but it happens rarely.
And if it is done properly with the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before. And he pours hot in the fistula as long as it is below its foundation; and makes these misaligned parts look like a quail's plume.
sente ia iai:lègare bonnaudectifiers;nchevecteurope:xungenatheverne :essevelongiagre,cribe anderme and heurexqueleturgeon, sevrevantiocoughrale
If he is so healthy at this time, it is well. As for that, there is no other way to be healthy;
And if he attempts to enter between, and does not penetrate where it should be, and there is thick armor or shield over your right side and under the tent, and you see an opening in that covering which teaches strength of breaking. If the cutter begins at the opening of the fistula, and then pushes away from under the tent, and with fire cauterization afterwards until it bends to the top of the tent.
And will be delivered the tent and taken away; then it removes those faulty shields which seem like a feather's pen.
And if you do not succeed, and cuts between you and the pasture, then he burns or medicates with fire or water.
For the fire cutter assembles two things to know: namely, the alignment of these shields and the separation of blood and moisture.
Then it heals wet or melted waxen tents in the bowels of the fire, until it allows his hairs to fall away from the bow. And then it pushes down on the shields with the bow.
Then it heals the wounds on those who are still covered in wax; and these medications are drying.
Treatise de lice devisement en ce.  ́troi it'sne ̵nin the  ́savintractaime apremongreve thefeaturing in thete  3-faire métre delems  ́: The French 12eave méanre of it'ratheres.  ́ce lemonede:2ndence, andvague. �umalice's13rdragger.tracture ailte :caracter:50:3rdicate fromage.
surexable. (translate:sacre itape:caisse andr :1tecte thecesse;sesce devoi;repeace.sangurle laisser.gaugevesse, heaveillec’ilustre lemonde quasblement.tandre
If you feel the veil and there is an opening where blood flows or arrows are lodged, if it has only signs of hope and expectation, through one of the three methods:
You either perform it as we have mentioned before, or you drain the fluid right away, or if you place veils and treat it similarly to what we initially did.
And do not apply too much pressure, so as not to disrupt the foundation that holds it all together, and raise the lifting by mere will. Then treat it, as we have said before.
Then treat it, as we have said before. By chance it may be cured, or you remove that concealed covering and the wound after drainage from its base, or by veil or another pointed instrument. Then mend that most necessary part within the wound as you can do it.
Then study to restore the wound and delay the abscess in its more distant part from the foundation, which is an easier task for the patient.
And there are abscesses in this manner never: and when you insert the veil into the abscess, it is on the edge of the skin above. If you take a veil to be inserted at the head according to this form: And insert one of these thin wires, and place the vein in all its length within the abscess as long as it remains at the head.
If it is stretched along the margin of the foundation therein, then extract that piercing wire from within the abscess so that you can place your vein.
And take away the head of both wires and join them together, holding them tightly against each other, and leave it for one or two days.
And do not loosen the wire at all during this time, provided that it has these characters between which are inserted: two arrows in a row.
Then treat the wound as long as it is sealed and healing.
If the abscess does not pierce, you may puncture it in all ways that you can do, provided that it is not overly pressed.
For he does not require puncturing even if it were overdone, and then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
The spatulate form of the spinous vertebrae from which they make the abscess if it is very large and consists of a part and a fragment. And on the other hand, because we do not puncture that which we should not puncture, as you can see here:
Sorrows arise from two main actions: or they are located in the foundation, like grains of resin, and whether they are small or large, and then blood flows. And if there is one or more, they are removed from the foundation and the main foundation; but those that have little moisture remain.
And then there may be a little yellow or a little blood, and they have the same color as the heart.
And the treatment for those who have them in the foundation, if you command the patient that they should be stretched out to allow air into the chambers, until the foundations are filled with blood and the fetus appears. If you hurry, and hold it with tongs, or you keep it in your hand, then cut into its roots.
And if one finger cannot hold them due to its moisture, then they take it with one sheet of linen, or from a cloth, or from a piece of calico. And extract them from your places, and put them back, and powder above any warm powders that are on the lancet. Or you cauterize them as it is said or by the lancet's master, then treat with other treatments until he becomes healthy.
And if the foundations cannot come out, then you should administer an abrasive enema to the patient and use it vigorously for washing that which is the foundation, so that he can emerge completely.
Can the maladies be foreseen, and when the fetus is in the foundation, then it requires light care. And do you foresee them in your hand or with tongs, and cut, then treat as we have said, so that he remains healthy until completely recovered, and fear the incision with iron.
If thou hast the needle of ceste: entree, et en ce qui vau. coment la plume demeins. aue de meineur: est. Orgéte desoleuere nativre. Oui. Itaillustrissime courtesemale auge. And if it is wide; and hold the wire firmly, then unwind the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all others likewise, and leave one inlet to correct any excess blood flow;
Then place on top of the foundation. I. a damp cloth or wax-covered board, and put on top of the foundation, and order the patient to lie down.
And then let them defecate, and when they have been cleaned, carry out the treatment of cleansing and other treatments until he is healthy.
Twice as often or foundation Many times occur suddenly in the intestines, and due to a natural constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not apply.
If it is necessary to revive the pressure of an abscess or the peel above its skin that does not allow moisture. Then treat until he is well if it is necessary.
And if he cannot be settled, then renew the removal more vigorously than before, until he is much healthier and his skin is scraped. Then treat him until he is well.
Double fremit (Fremitus) Fremitus appears to be a superfluous vibration before the heartbeat and goes on much.
And there is never the tightening of blood in the heart, and it feels to him like a fremitus that spreads throughout the whole body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a cane of one inch long or a strong pinwortle (a type of medical instrument), and place that cainne on the fremitus so that the purple circles become completely enveloped by it. Then turn your hand around the cane entirely within the fremitus, and put it in motion, and scrape away the fremit from its roots.
And if you see it done, as a cane of iron or wood in this shape, and lightly placed above:
And never touch it, so that he may hold in both hands; if you see, then cauterize the fremitus, as the barber's knife is to it.
The form of cauterization, and whether in English healecture les en ouses le castres leu d’la veinence. :waxe ceteriales leves it'elong ous: "molue (13renchin. Theil fromage. Aouturean:en andre. Comment 1000.
This then instructs us in the treatment of children and those who are frail and sorrowful, they are small.
The shape of this little enema is very wide, or the abdomen is tied in this manner:
and it has a distension or the abdomen is tied as you see, and the belly button is pierced therein; and in one side of the chest ... i cut, and on the other ... j.
and either the abdomen or it has a flask full of the best medicine or wax poured inside, and pierced all over with tiny holes.
and among each of these holes it must have space, then insert a strong thread into them ... i., twisting the threads in ... x or around ... y as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, if the tie is on the instrument in front of a strong thread ... then enema; and it takes the shape of a circle:
And the medicine is not too hot nor too cold, and the head of the enema is coated with oil or honey, or something similar, then it pours in gently:
then the enema is squeezed out by its ministers with their two hands, until it's all gone, and then extract the enema, and lay down the sick person on his back:
and if the medicine comes out, as much as it can; and if it rests all night long, then it is greater aid:
And if you enema it in cases of abdominal diarrhea, and the medicine accelerates its discharge, then the recovery begins as long as he is healthy:
And if there are fistula or abscess, then it is also done gently as for a child:
and it is the shape of this gentle enema which constricts the skin:
of wounds
In the division of wound care; or we will say about hand treatments and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made; and according to the causes or types of wounds, and for this reason they are made.
The things made for wounds due to movement of the body (gesture), cutting with sword and knife, or axe and hammer, or other similar things;
Or according to the causes of wounds—such as those that affect the neck (under the collar), head, arm, waist, liver, and other limbs;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and in my treatise on simple head injuries; because this subject comes up in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head or neck, and the bone is not broken; but if it's due to a blow of the body or other similar things, then the skin is completely torn apart, and the wound is large. And you have slight doubt as to the appropriateneness of incision: if it heals quickly at first from head injuries (cephalic), especially if there is little blood loss from the wound itself, and if this quick healing occurs in opposition to the lower part.
And rejects the malicious overindulgence in wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not show improvement, then his meat should be reduced, and he should neither drink wine nor eat barley.
And apply it to the wound if there is a discharge coming out of it, dressing with cloth soaked in rose oil or strong wine.
And if there is no discharge coming from the wound, and itchernes. I say of le chalitgement de la plaie en fiefs d'art.
And if the arrow has been moved, then apply some ointments on it until he is well again.
And if the wound is large like sword-cutting and similar injuries, and the lips cannot come together due to tightness, then they may be brought together by bandage, just as I will say of sores on the abdomen caused by a stitch.
If the wound is exposed to bone and bleeding occurs, and it only holds for a short time before closing up, then treat the wound with medicine and restore firmness in its location using leather. And instruct the patient to eat large meats if we test and cook wheat or barley as well as poultry, just like other things.
And if you treat or change the leather for purulence and it does not hold to the bone, then close up the whole purulent area and apply treatment.
And if the patient has an abscess or vein infection without cautery, and he cannot stop it with medicine alone, then whether you open the abscess or vein, and if you loosen the thrombus by cutting a thread. And if that does not help at all, then you should perform the cautery.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and let you apply this powder which sets so that the arrow has moved again.
And the way to make this powder is as follows: take holy incense for one part; blood from a dragon for two parts; live copper for three parts, and mix it subtly. And apply it to the wound, forming it so that it heals well and joins back with all its flesh.
And then let it settle well, and allow it to liquefy if it does not swell; because we do not cauterize medicine while it is healing.
And never make this solely with copper when you have neither the incense nor the blood from a dragon and if the arrow has not moved the wound again.
And if the arrow has moved the wound again, then immediately on this spot, no one should apply this powder.
But apply any digested ointments or barley bread made of water and honey, so that it becomes soft. Then treat with other remedies until he is well again.
In ous, siens de cestomme.
And I will tell you this after head fractures.
of the wound in the neck.
If the pain is in the neck and it's simple, if there's no distinction between it and that of the head fracture, but if the pain is in the neck or the artery is pierced.
If it is the neck pain, if there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment and not impose any restriction, for it harms the neck and causes the muscles to retract. and not to apply pressure on the wound, for the substance of the neck is cold, and its continued presence is associated with the head, which has more prominent limbs.
but if the medicines are strong, as in washing with gentle water and with rose oil, and also wetting it again with gentle water. and other similar pebbles in this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then bind it with linen cloths, and continue the treatment until healed.
And if the wounds are deep and festering and filled with blood, then pierce them more deeply or remove the clot.
and if the artery is pierced, and blood begins to flow, then let us draw it out, and lend it a life, for the proper skill in cauterizing an artery.
and if the spine in the throat is pierced, or it tears, then hold them guarded so that the flesh does not go. seizure: "la douche theesme œuvres duke in chiefaise laisse en Français.  ether of the cei dessein lexin (1ere lesuaisme français: en France ouldr French: it'sre :lescriptures;"fierces theire. Acheut, thekesque. Celtique, in Frenchic "faire laissacour ether, lice,0leslas. siculeuise (thece:ssepeaidropse. Islaws itcèe :enjacresculesme:naturelle:s lax, and:saint.tifre aitse dextresse dekunche.sangles.
And if he has pierced his wound in the bone, let it grow. And if there are bone fragments, let you drive all the nails into them, and those that cannot be driven in, let the wound heal as much as possible. And displaced and misaligned it must be.
And if his wound is fresh, apply the powder I mentioned earlier. And if there is bone and he has an abscess in the wound, treat it as I mentioned in my chapter.
From the wound of a spear or sword
If it's a wound from a spear or sword and the cut is deep, look at whether there's wind pressure in that area causing the patient'inasperable pain; understand clearly that the wound is deadly.
And if it's not deep, and the wound is fresh throughout its flesh, do not apply the powder immediately in the first hour, nor bind it tightly to the flesh that will still bleed. And draw out the blood from the body, and let loose the pain. But apply an attractive dressing and tie it up several times during the day.
And if you don't have dressing, place a lot of cotton to suck out the moisture from the wound.
And let the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 23 days, or more. And if there is no more spasm or severe tremors of the body not recurring again. And when you see the bone's positions, understand that the wound is safe. Treat it with other remedies and care as long as he remains healthy.
And if it cannot heal and act, then you will know that it has an abscess; treat it as we should.
And if his wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple, or on the backside, treat as it should.
La mephisez il nõgents ajustes :caus. Ceu jecte :lalongue :savresignes lichement :mein. What itesiage :mejacoult. Ipsum : Thejour deure ofrre : French: 130t :vomesures, :ce (copies in thefaire,5 - aumeasure andmeeting. And if they are not swollen, let the wound grow, so that extraction becomes easier.
And for other wounds on other limbs we judge them similarly to what we have said before.
double dislocation, double abdomen collapse
The dislocations of the belly are large and dangerous, both great and small.
of the large wound there is no mention of the intestine once, or it severs the intestines, since due to that invasion.
and the suturing is more troublesome, and there is no time when the small wound was worse than the large one.
because that's why they are put back in repeatedly, if not constantly pulled out again. because the intestine inflames immediately upon feeling pain, so they return to being pulled out again.
and because this same wound causes us to move the intestines back to their original position that we do not see in other cases.
And we know that the treatment of the belly involves three similar manners:
the three common suturing methods are used in the treatment of the belly.
and the treatment for other injuries on the body, such as cuts (and other corresponding treatments) are common like those of other wounds.
And all other things are more proper with the belt around the waist, and I will say one thing and declare it.
I said that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has entered into it. And a dislocation can be set by one of these movements: For the small size of the wound, if we have said so, For this reason because the intestine is affected by pressure or trauma.
And when it is affected or injured, treat it partially by the following methods: And for the moisture one cloth or similar, it is wetted solely with water. Or you cook in fire and smoke and steam. And raised the intestine as long as it grows round.
And it was never tightened too much, and is moved rather than pulled for unwinding.
And when you see the growth recede, if warm and gentle air or high heat are used on it, because by this it becomes light in few things.
and if it cannot enter, then making a small cut with the instrument for removal of swellings, so they can be removed.
and the first treatment is movement rather than force. that we should not cut too forcefully, since there is no great necessity for it.
and this relates to the splitting or division.
if it cuts down into the cavity and does not heal quickly enough, then such a shape will result.
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes (sauter), if it is set back into its natural place according to its original form ("naturel" meaning "natural"), if you have it, because this is beneficial ("vaut mues" meaning "it is worthwhile").
When the wound is wide, and it is located in the part of the abdomen ("le ventre"), which implies that you should make the patient lie on their back ("faits gesir" translating to "have them lie") for proper positioning and healing of the wound in the abdominal area. and raises his legs higher than his head. And if it is located on the abdominal part,
and also its abdominal route is in one of these segments. because the nape part is higher than the other.
and hence it implies to provide what I have mentioned in large and small wounds.
Small wounds where the dressing has been applied.
then in your hands is one minister who inflames the entire abdominal route with his hand. and open your mouths. and that is the common way to dress wounds.
and that is the common way to dress wounds. so you must choose a needle or several, depending on the size of the wound. then leave the head of the wound such that you give some space, and insert a needle or use one with a strong thread. and pierce the two holes in the hide with the two spearheads.
then thread one thick string through each of the spearheads. and assemble those two points of the wound in preparation.
and then leave some space again, and insert another needle. and then let the thread follow as you did with the first needle. and continue doing so according to your expertise concerning needles. so that all the wounds remain controlled or confined within their limits.
and let them be of various sizes, both subtle and large. because the small needles cover the entire wound area thoroughly, whereas the larger ones may not fit well: and it implies that they should also be moderate in size:
and let not the needles thrust too far into the flesh and skin of the wound;
and they do not cut or open the wound before sealing it with a seam.
and then they pierce the shoulder with needles, so that it does not bleed while sleeping. and I place tenting or bandages on the shoulder joints so that they remain stable. and let them stay until the wound is sealed.
and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds. because it is painful to insert a needle or puncture.
The second method of closure is common. and it is that you assemble the needle joints of skin and tissue together with one or two stitches, using either an iron wire or strong thread—however weakened by time (or usage). and when you have perceived these four joints all assembled,
and when you have perceived these four joints all assembled, if the needle is displaced in the part you have commenced with, reposition it in the manner that one would do when dressing wounds.
and space between each suture is the size of a small coin (a denomination of four pence).
this closure holds the body together;
and I sutured a wound that one had on his abdomen;
In this case ail le monde entendu:coeur, siemens of coisme develle coivre ce line lait en Celtic froment, itesl the french coitene thegauge aescula. Here asteravoc'sneat ounce. and was the wound more than one handbreadth wide. and it involved large parts of the intestines, each measuring several handsbreadths in width.
and was located between the abdomen. I took back the intestine then he had been in that condition for about twenty-two hours.
and was stitched only a few years ago, and the cure, and it has been healed.
And the judge had decided that he would die, and this became a miracle.
and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in the one location where we could find none, nor any medicine. and put cotton wool five times a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until he became healthy.
But I will tell you the several proper methods of treatment:
take the needle, and draw it from the further part inside therein;
when it has drawn the blood rightly in its place, if you have found the spot of the slip or cut therein with the needle,
and draw from other parts inside therein, further from that;
and I understand this treatment as if you also do it like leatherworkers with the pieces of leather; and you leave one side of the slip there, and then return it on the other, so that the treatment is fully completed.
The second method of treatment, which Galen defined properly,
as any one does, who assembles the two parts together naturally; and apply one of the two parts on the other, in this manner:
take a needle or second one to continue thereafter, and draw that side alone; and leave the two parts of the slip therein; then turn the needle, and draw from the further part inside therein; such two parts of the slip;
Then make an incision in both sides of the lower part therein, and in two other joints that are on the opposite side;
And it is the more common way to stitch them together.
If Gaulish [a hypothetical ancient language] speaks this word and none give testament to it,
To sew the abdomen with two needles, or there must be a thread in each (implied to mean using multiple needle holes and stitches for suturing).
And it must be thrown both needles at once, like those who stitch wires;
And it is known that when the stitching is in the middle of the abdomen; If it is more costly than other stitches on the abdomen.
The judgment of wounds is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you wash the fresh wound thoroughly through its entire flesh, so that the arrow has moved within it. if you put back the intestines and then place powder-coated nails on it.
if you put back the intestines and then place powder-coated nails on it. and if the arrow has moved within it, then apply any treatment that is currently available as long as the wound remains open. and tighten the thread (suggesting an incision), and bind it closed with ligature and bandage. then care for the wound as with other wounds, so long as it remains healthy.
and if you don't have medicine, then apply it as soon as possible; first, wet with clean cloth (cotton) while the wound begins to bleed. and move it... twice a day as long as it remains healthy.
For you have no knowledge beyond these methods in various dispositions that wounds are not simple;
and if you doubt whether the wound can form a community with the primary parts (body), if it indicates that you should massage gently with olive oil or rose water; and he lets the hairs grow on the arms, and under the skin;
and if it feels pain or swelling in the joints, and often occurs; if one administers a black-vinegar enema, and immediately the swelling comes just to the intestines;
and pierces through, and it is known that when it is the large intestine, it heals more quickly than the small one;
The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is constricted; And it is through the veins that they are carried, and by the subtlety of all parts of the body, and the approach to the nature of the nerves;
And if the worm jumps from the wound, it is put back as quickly as possible like the intestine, while still fresh;
and if it is wide and turned outward or blackened, this means that you must reset the joint that has turned black; since blood does not flow into such a joint. because it has veins and arteries;
but then comes this part; and places the .ij. joints hanging from the part of the wound until it pulls out the worms that are in it; and the wound is heavy.
Aumaclere, auctume de l’estuette au vende melee
When the intestines are twisted, and the wound is small, If it can be restored in some cases,
because I see some being nailed into their stomachs with a spear,
and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it was inflamed and turned into an abscess, and with it came indigestion and hernia;
I applied care based on what I observed and continued to treat it carefully until healed, and the hairs were restored;
And when I saw it healed, I doubted that the patient would not have further issues in his abdomen; and he did not suffer any further issues but improved in better conditions, eating and drinking;
And none of the experimental physicians stated that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied off partially; then proceed with large tests, and gather the edges of the wound; and when the preparations have covered the mouth, if it is placed on the ligature points;
then applies another preparation in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely prepared;
and covers the wound. That causes it to enter the intestine and does not cause any harm to the patient;
and if one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from an animal's intestine;
in such a way: Ipsum of medicine in English ===> "Theafein english. Thise enunciouster sothisque it'south ailacmeast: The kingdoms. Etran (100sic: "todele. Allongé lemon. Whatwinter; thebark, the year 1. natur, tol ofre: Theodirectly :fracture. iciens fromage: And then he inserts the thread into the needle, and stitches the intestines, and binds them in the winding.
And this method of sewing does not harm according to the path of faith and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it occurs in one of the intestinal loops, there is no remedy or healing for such subtlety.
of a fistula or if it is It is known that any wound or incision, when it heals, becomes universally called "fistula." And especially when it is swollen and painful.
And a fistula is according to the variety of non-durable and painful nodules, where there is no pain felt. And it is also swollen like the feathers of a bird.
And it is never clear and thin, but sometimes thick. Neither too little, nor quite enough.
And I have spoken in the division of wounds where any unhealed wound has no healing. It is not harmful from one of the seven causes:
It is known, by way of the small amount of blood or flesh; or by its malevolence. Because for it has hardness within, and under the lips, where it does not allow anything to grow. And it has too many hairs; And it has a pointed tip, and its matter is of poor quality. Or the medicine is not good in its treatment; Because it is a manner of pestilence, Because of its property in the region, the digestion is delayed and healing takes time, and it naturally flees. Or it has bones or teeth:
And I have already shown all these causes and signs, and medical treatments in this division;
Or it is for you to know the cure of the fistula made by hand work;
It happens that there is a fistula in every joint; because it has fistulas that come from great veins and arteries, and nerves; either in the stomach, or intestine, or bladder, or anywhere; either in the spinal column of the back, or any joint of hands or feet;
And all those fistulas that are of this nature are painful to heal, and there is no other help but labor and ignorance;
And if there is none of these fistules that can be healed otherwise than the way I have mentioned before, and you are confident in this cure; And you must see whether it has a spring of iron or wood, if the fistula is straight, then let it be curved.
And if the fistula is twisted, seek for a subtle spring of depth. because the deep spring bends with the twisting;
and if the fistula has an irregular shape and you cannot properly search for it with springs, if you apply clysterizing through one of them;
because another spring from a different fistula moistens and cleanses it;
then you might adjust its tightness hoping to know if it contains bone or nerve, and whether the blood supply is affected;
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you apply pressure, and where it's felt;
and when you truly know the location of the fistula or if it's away from a juncture, nerve, artery, or vein; or in any of these cases that I have mentioned, if it corresponds to what I've told you;
or in any of these cases that I have mentioned, if it corresponds to what I've told you; and stone for another one and all those corrupted that are therein; and then treat it while she is sound;
And if the fistula is well pierced at a proper place, it requires that you remove it as much as possible, just like you can. and then he places wet bandages in the medical treatment of diarrhea, and applies them to the head of the fistula.
and then he places wet bandages in the medical treatment of diarrhea, and applies them to the head of the fistula. so that the medicine dissolves the excess which is delayed at the base of the fistula.
and then he applies warm salves abundant in healthy herbs until it is sound.
but if it is not sound by that, if the cautery as we have said,
and if the bone is rotted from the fistula, it must be cut away. If the veins or main limbs do not swell or hurt as we have said.
but if the bone has been exposed, and it is rotten and blackened, let him cut away all that remains of the bone until there is nothing left. and then treats with things abundant in healthy herbs so long as it is sound.
and if it is not sound again, let him bleed as before. you know that you are not to go further than this:
if discovered and you wish to remain at the base. and remove all the rotten bone, then reset the joint.
and if it is so sound again, that's good. If this is not so, you know that the rottenness has gone too far, and it cannot be undone. if there is no other remedy but to let it heal naturally.
if it has a little rotten bone, you may remove it with forceps. if the arrow is accompanied by another implement that can be removed together with it.
if it has a remaining bone, you must remove all of them.
and if the movement makes it worse, there is no fear or harm. but cauterize and heal the bone;
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place anything on the wound causing sticky discharge. and leave it in position for as long as they penetrate into the bones.
and then, if they move the bones more lightly.
and if it's a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, if it remains so thoroughly rotten until all of the bone is affected. then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of it decomposed, and it comes to the surface of the bone; if it's to cover and seal up as much of that decay as possible, and then treat it until it is solid again.
and I will tell you about a case that occurred: one man in his leg; so that you can find examples and help in your work.
It was a young man in his thirties who had pain in his leg from something that came out of the bone.
as those materials came into his leg and were expelled through a large incision, without any reason to open it further.
but their madness led them to work so much on the cut that they opened it again. and they inserted many materials into it, and it became a fistula, and there came out much movement that made all the joints loose and moist.
but many more times I treated them for up to thirty years, and I had no success in the art of hands (prosthetics or reconstructive surgery).
so that I called them to examine my leg and the medicines they used; and what passed through those great joints (referring to bones). and it became red and yellow (orange;
I erected a tent among one of these hollows, and then searched for all such cavities.
And found that they converge in every part of the leg.
I then hurriedly went there and made my discovery in one of those cavities until I found a part of the bone. and I found it rotten and decayed, and the rot came from within the bone itself.
I took that for the rotten bone which appeared to me and considered it had no other decay inside, as long as I kept observing.
and I began to restore the wound with similar remedies over an extended period of time, but could not join it together again.
then I recommenced my examination, and discovered the bone as before.
and I found the decay continued in the bone, and I took it back with me, and then looked at it again, and became troubled about joining it together.
but I did not see much that I could do about it, for when I cut into the bone ("entor" means 'into' and "palm" refers to the cross-section of the bone), it was weak throughout. then I tried treating it again with remedies; and it was healed quickly by chance.
and it seems to me that I will not need to revisit the subject again except for its feebleness, which could suffer. Ceu l’esprit de ceu versa morceau de la cestanime, andrans: For by the bleeding often occurs, but it was entirely healed.
For by the bleeding often occurs, but it was entirely healed. And in the flesh of the bone grew a hard stone, and it had good structure and caused no harm nor contrary effect at all, neither to healing nor for coming forth.
and are firmly attached, so that you can pull the corrupted stone out from underneocorrected, ensuring proper anatomical references in contemporary terms for clarity. and discover the stone above the bone where you see a sinew not tearing it. and place a torch or a covering over the bone to smother the corrupted stone; And it must be sinew as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and another layer of sinew afterwards;
And if the bone is corrupted and it does not open, and the corruption is within its midst or a part of it; if you discover the stone throughout; then place a torch above;
and then join another part of the sinew with one part of the corruption, and it shall be equal in length to the portion of the corruption we have mentioned;
And if there are corruptions at the joint, then correct the joint if it is corrupted, and apply oil to the bone from the other side.
And if there are corruptions in the consecutive joints, then it has no alternative but to cover them.
And if the corruption is on the hand or the hip joint, that's a very serious matter. But everything indicates that you must inquire about that corruption and find out how it affects you. And manifest it in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not be against you.
And know that the incision and threads are often used to cover these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of teeth. And their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason it is necessary to equip each instrument with every possible appearance of the work.
And know that the master will show you the instrument which you need according to his knowledge of this craft. and the testimony of the diseases' methods. If it is necessary to have that instrument according to what it requires.
Fire The joints dislocate or are displaced either due to dampness or because they have been weakened over time.
And as you will have treated that corruption with medical treatment, and they do not benefit. If it requires covering that member up to the joint or where the corruption originates. If it results in painful death or due to maliciousness, which is greater than the failure of a limb.
If it results in painful death or due to maliciousness, which is greater than the failure of a limb. And there are signs that the members turn black, as if it were charred by fire. and afterwards for after blackness, then covers those damages in other members. and takes up everywhere in it, if you hasten at covering.
and if there are corrosions by sticks in those bones, if they have been infect, et aulx quidres necelet de laisse en coups.
Injurys, les parlements aye descreature of theesmeaux vauté creations, et encexief aloure duon juriduc itgele ieu deire. Enloutes leffles onseure devisafein. Aa :wafare a la cestruit. Laic andaiten.
And if it comes to her hand, if she holds the joint, so that corrosion does not move just to the arm.
And if it comes to her arm, then it costs; and if she passes through the cost, it is his wound. And there is no limit to the quantity of his vitality;
And so far as the corrosion comes in either place: if it comes to the first joint and then to the other joint.
And if it comes or goes, if it takes all of it; And if it rises in the leg, if it cuts at the knee joint;
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the malade die;
And how one covers or binds the limb; if you tie it above and below; And extend some masters over one of the lower ones, and others another masters upwards; And you remove the cloth that is between them at an intermediate level of the joint, so long as the bone is exposed;
Then you cut or bind, and put a piece of linen on each side; so that the bandage does not touch the healthy limb; And causes other injuries to the patient and immobilizes them;
And if blood comes when we work, then you must quickly cauterize the limb; Or you put on it any constraining powders; then return to your medicines until they are complete;
Then bind the wounded limb from another cavity, and heal it so long as it is sound;
And I will tell you what happened to one man, who was pitifully:
and it seemed like an ashes-like darkness to him.
and the corrosion came first in his state of despair, so much that it consumed all his despair.
and when he saw the corrosion, he sought to cover his despair, and was healed.
and soon after him returned his despair or from its hand, and came to me.
and I placed upon him things reflective after his curing of corrosion, but could not stop the return of despair.
and he asked me to apply my hand to him, and I had no hope of reflecting the matter. and doubted whether if I held his hand, he would die. because his strength as a man was weak; and he despairingly lost all, and returned to his land. and when I covered his hand, he was healed.
and I have no further tale of this kind but that which others may need to know.
There has never been an opening of his chest cavity with such delay that he formed a great assembly of bowels. and then they rise up and pierce him, and delay his limbs as we see in our vassals. and the skin above is also as delicate as a fine cloth. and they will not cut into the bone or the nerve; such diseases are called "healthy" by those who suffer them.
But if it is so elongated that she wears the bone through piercing, then it is called "fistula."
And the skin is such that you cover it entirely, and mainly when it is delicate, as we see in fine cloths. and there is no doubt about its correction.
Audement les chère de la pès:nous ake tolieffer, The French latexeste. And the skin is hardened like wood, so for cleaning with this method:
Look at how big his breasts are, and the bowel that comes out of it has a strong smell. And therefore the Eygptian medical cleansing method which is made as follows: Take ashes, and oil, and litharge, exactly so, and cook them in one vessel over the fire: So that the medicine be red, and likewise thick as honey:
And then take from it according to your need, and make it in water and honey: And for the cleansing of his chest, and compress the fistula: And let the medicine remain for two hours, then extract it by pumping:
Do this many times until his chest is firm and no longer spasmodic:
And there is never any time for water enemas with ashes: Whenever this medicine is absent, and when you must have wood ash from grapevines, pour the water above:
Then draw, and do an enema so long as you know that his chest is well-ordered:
And if he does not suffer from it, then this Egyptian medicinal water with ash is sufficient: If the enema and honey water or if it has some lioness: You clean it with honey and wine milled, so that the honey has the property to purify and cleanse. And the wine hardens the flesh.
And when you have done it, and you believe that the breast is well purified, If this enema causes it to come out again in him,
And you prevent encrustation of the diaphragm, and do it with rose oil and wine; Or you use enemas and treatments involving ointments, of which I have said the properties or uses for ointments.
And if there is a small perforation of the breast, and the enema cannot enter it; If you increase it with some iron slightly, and place on it an Egyptian ointment; Or a Basilic ointment, so long as it expands;
And if the wound is too wide, then cut it and leave enough space so that the enema can enter;
And if there is a perforation that extends above or below, then cover it with more cloth or less than it currently is; For if the hole is not closed yet, it should not allow for choking or constriction; And if you cannot cover the breast therein as you wish; If it appears that way such that the hole goes downwards to a lower level than it currently is;
and if you cannot cover his chest as you see fit, Should it be arrayed thus: that the bow runs swiftly forward, leaving nothing behind in its form^2 and take pills consolidative for placement upon the chest^3
and are made of a linen sheet that covers all the chest^4 and then apply pressure at the pierced part of the chest; a little more broad on the first^5 and be rubbed with warm oil upon another piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound^6 and apply it to the chest wound in order to align the bowstring, not removing the deep linen cloth thereafter for more than one day^7
and those who lie upon the chest wound often to prevent the bowstring from moving^8 and know what flows from the bowstring, whether it is poison or little amount, or digestible, or indigestible^9
and take warning should the patient feel pain or not, if it has an abscess or not^10
and when your medicines have extended to a part of it, you will see what bubbles up from the chest wound^11 if you know the lungs are filled with air, then come near to your cure^12
and atque aliseil demeure. If changing a shield, and renewing the wound dressing.
And if his chest falls heavily burdened after many days, you know that the chest does not breathe. And if venom subtly runs after long time, do not despair about health,
because health approaches. For it has people who delay healing in their wounds and those that do the opposite;
and if heavy burden leaps from chest after many days, you know that the chests do not breathe;
and if the chest delays breathing, and is distant from us, then apply mixed wet and dry medicines in substance and vigor. if wound dried up, for it has great part iron, and this is its remedy;
take a dried onguent and apply it with rose oil, and saturate the iron in equal parts with thick wine as a substance.
then it is infused and used; and this makes them more cooked in honey, when dried onguent is not present,
or you take myrrh and frankincense and crush them, and mix with honey while it is heated in the fire. and then apply it on cloth, and bind it around the chest, and never do I let an astrologer near for a long time; and heavenly lily roots, which are also like flour several hundred times;
and heavenly lily roots, which are also like flour several hundred times; and whether simple or complex: crushed, and put it to the honey that I have said, and apply. And if the treatment prolongs, it is not healed by this treatment.
And if the treatment prolongs, it is not healed by this treatment. And you know that destruction occurs in depth, and pressure is applied to the bone, or into hard limbs, or into joints. If the treatment of a fistula as we have said before.
From the incision of the joint.
Panniculus is an incision made on the underside of the hand's little flap. either by design or accidentally it may also extend to other areas.
And when it is inflamed, and not taken care of, if it comes one more incision. And crack and break off pieces as far as they fracture the root of the joint, and perhaps even more.
And comes it to the bone right up there, as long as it comes with a foul odor, and his shoulders are wide, and his skin is flushed.
When you treat it like we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit him at all. It indicates that you must remove excess iron which is taking time from the joint. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is very helpful if the bone and joint are healthy.
And if the joint presses down on it, and the beginning of the swelling appears, and the bleeding starts. It indicates that you must place a rag under the joint where the pressure is applied. And lift it upwards, and gently and lightly remove some of the swelling. And place on top of the remaining swelling medical solutions that are drying and corrosive to stop it completely.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, and you must remove it, for as long as the bone has been corroded, it cannot heal.
And if you see a widening in one of them two sides as it is before said, then remove it there. Then continue treatment until he is healthy again.
And if it is infected, and you pour on it, because it smells very strong pain, then you must first heal it. Then cut the joint of the herniated disc perpendranly above.
And make sure that your cut does not extend to the swelling under the joint, as his painful sensations are too great.
And if anything happens, then put something on it which calms down.
The one who dislocates the arm of some people by chance is entirely flesh. and perhaps he has bones, but never alone.
and none of them are born from the root of the joint, or their birth is in no way our concern. Those who dislocate in any part of the body never stay silent. and those who dislocate at the two points of the joint, perhaps they also do not speak out (or 'perhaps they are silent');
the size of that which is entirely flesh can vary in such a way: its size at the root of one broad sphincter.
Those who dislocate at the root of the joint are greatly troubled by healing ('grief to cure'), for it takes much cover (protection, treatment).
In that which dislocates the lower limb (the knee), it is essential to cover first the congested flesh ('char reondement'), just as close to the bone. then cover the bone with an appropriate bandage for it, and heal it as long as it remains sound ('sanez').
The injuries that come together (unite) either by birth ('naissance') or by the healing of wounds ('soudement'), or by being burnt ('arsure de feu'), or by similar things.
If you cover the one healed (the previously injured area), it must be repaired according to its natural forms ('naturelz'); then put between two layers of linen soaked in a mixture (rosée) that they do not fuse ('ne se soudent'); or you put between two thin pieces of wax so long as it is sound ('soudez'), as required ('covient').
When dislocations occur in one of his two parts (joints), cover that hardened ('sodure') part as required ('covient').
Of many.
These are large packs filled with unnecessary things (melancolious), which bring misfortune to the limbs.
And more often occurs in the legs of those who walk and work and carry burdens, than with others.
Now you must not perform any purging of the colon, and then heal it in the church.
The treatment of iron involves the following procedure: one method involves piercing the skin and drawing out the dark blood. And another method is that you tie up the vein and draw out all of the blood.
The cutting is done according to this method: raise first the foot of water warmly and much so that the large one remains undisturbed. Then strain the malady above the knee down to the part below the groin. Then pierce the vein in one spot, two spots, or three spots, of a wide size.
Then you remove and draw out the black blood with your hand from one end to the other as much as necessary until it suffers enough pain from the malady.
And then apply a plaster and he orders it be covered with black meat broths binding the colon tightly.
And repeat the evacuation and sanitation when the veins are full, and help the patient.
The handling of the malady involves this method: raise the foot with the illness if it has much hair. Then place it in a bath and raise the foot of water warmly so that the vein turns red and swells with blood.
And if you have no bath, then heat it over the fire and pierce deeply in the long part of the vein near the groin, or in the area around the ankle.
Then stretch the skin over the incisions and draw out the vein from each section as much as it seems.
And you see it red and black, and when it hardens like a dull rope or string.
Then bind it around there so that the skin remains loose, and then wrap it tightly in the incision.
Then pierce in another spot or two next it, and draw out the skin from that vein as much as it seems to them. sesarre of thevesuerean.
Then take another size, or more if you have experience, then band it around the shoulder joint, on both sides of the bone.
Then draw and tie it in a second size; then gradually tighten the bandage from one size to another until it sits snugly on the shoulder.
And if you cannot draw and lift it, then insert a strong two-pronged hook into every point. And draw and tighten the bandage, and insert a rope through it, turning your hand on one side and the other until it fits snugly. And keep in mind that if it does not fit, since it cannot be drawn or lifted, and thus becomes harmful to the patient.
And when you have completely drawn it, if you place soft linen soaked in wine and oil on the wound, and treat it until it heals.
And if you see it is crushed, twisted, and wrapped together; since we have said, then... if you must divide it roughly, but not cover it at all; draw the bandage as previously mentioned.
if you must divide it roughly, but not cover it at all; draw the bandage as previously mentioned. The form of iron used to apply the bandage is curved and does not cut through it; instead, it fits around the vein without causing injury.
and is of considerable thickness because if it were too delicate, it would cut the vein; but being substantial as we have said, its form is such that...
from the civilian vein
This vein is found in the legs, in the warm parts of the body where it does not grow hair or trees, and on dry ground where there is no moisture.
and occasionally it may be found elsewhere than in the legs, and this results from the deterioration of the skin tissue around that area.
as it occurs within the body of snakes and toward, being located between skin and flesh.
And if there are signs that the beginning of this vein is that it comes in the leg with a very large inflammation. then change its course, and it begins as a root from a plant.
When the shoulder joint opens, it indicates that you should wrap around a piece of fat from one and a half to two fingers in length. And the night,
and leave the fat for the leg, and every time when it points to the heel, if you wrap around the fat piece, and night. and if it is too long, then you clip a part of it, and wrap the remaining around, and do not cover her root until she is completely evacuated. because if you clip it, then it goes back into the joint, and causes abscess formation or infection, and illness.
for which reason it is meant that she should be treated little by little up to the head, and not remain anything or wound.
and there is no such vein when it is treated with half palms of length or ten; and some came to me, from whom she issues at six palms of length, and when you clip her, you push a thorn or cut into the foot.
so as she flows; and the matter within her becomes void, and prepare injections of various sorts for pus without delay, then treat her as you do with abscesses.
And there has never been such a vein where it issues from the joint or within the stone, which suggests that this treatment is specific to certain anatomical conditions. Whenever it opens at the articulation of the shoulder or in any similar area, immediate attention and care are required to address potential complications like dislocation or misalignment. And it comes with thorns, which then break free; treat it as we have discussed before, implying that the treatment should follow a previously established method for such complications, potentially involving careful extraction and subsequent medical intervention to address issues like abscesses or infections.
And arrows which emerge between skin and bone indicate injuries caused by projectiles penetrating the body. Such cases require meticulous removal of foreign objects, assessment for potential damage to underlying structures, and appropriate wound management, including possible surgical intervention and ongoing care for infection prevention and healing.
This illness is prevalent among us, known as "bull's disease," because it occurs frequently with pus. Bull's disease likely refers to a specific condition characterized by the presence of significant amounts of pus or abscesses, requiring aggressive and consistent treatment strategies aimed at drainage, infection control, and resolution of the underlying issue causing such symptoms.
And it is a small arrow that emerges between skin and bone, traveling throughout the entire body up and down. This description could refer to a complication where an arterial injury occurred from a projectile impact—an extremely serious condition requiring immediate medical intervention, including possible surgery, vascinascent for blood loss control, and other supportive measures. And the pain is well known in every member as long as it goes under the skin or he rushes forth, and jumps. This could describe symptoms experienced by an individual suffering from a deep wound where bleeding occurs beneath the skin's surface, accompanied by acute sensations of pain that propagate throughout the affected limb due to active inflammation or infection necessitating prompt medical attention for proper assessment and treatment.
And it is troubled by disorders of various humors, like they come towards and snakes and worms and scabies or belly;
And there is doubt about its malevolence, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the oil; And by chance it enters, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
When you have cured and drained it, if it cannot leave when it goes:
So it decides that you must lay the ligament above and below with a strong, tightly bound connection;
Then cover it up again and drain it, and it goes towards the skin, and you don't reduce it; If the fire is applied above it, let it continue burning;
and it causes the greatest harm when it corrupts the oil, as we have said;
And if you see it coming towards the oil or pressing near its source, then restrain it there, and drain it again;
and it decides that the patient should undergo purification of their bodily channels with remedies for dispelling harmful humors;
and if it is caused by disordered consumption of uncooked meats;
from the pain arising from windiness; This disease is rampant in our land "verily," and it is a pain that affects some limbs; and thus moves joint by joint, and that you see it:
I called upon a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein.
and shortly after, I saw it rising to his shoulder like a worm on an arm. Most swiftly than any other thing, as if hot silver when it cuts into another.
then the pain left that place, and focused on the shoulder.
And then it spread throughout the entire body, until it came to another vein.
Then I was told it turned around inside the body again, just as I saw.
I marveled much at how she moved this way with a member of another member, for never had I seen such a disease in this manner. So far, I had seen many who have well moved pain to another place. but I never saw it that way, as I did her.
And I thought it was because the woman had a bare chest, and the veins were exposed. And for this reason appears constricted windiness.
And they do not appear for this reason in those who are delightful, with damp chests and covered veins.
And when you have seen curing this disease and the great pain of it appears if she opens as we said. If the blood above and below flows suddenly, and then cover it so that the constricted windiness expels from the chest. And cauterize the chest; and if you do not see it at your eyes.
If the cure dislodges the constricted windiness, like putrid pillows and other things.
Of arrows
Arrows are various, according to their shapes and where they pierce both sides of the body or cause pain.
Their diversity is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and hairs, and soldered. And there are those which have two angles, and some which have grooves, and others where they have pieces. And there is one which causes pain in no limb but hurts according to two ways; whether it be in the principal member or a hairy one.
Like skulls, bodies, livers, flanks, bowels, bladder, and similar limbs. When it hurts no part of these limbs and shows the sign of death, I will tell you after this what appears. It indicates that you must have cautioned against extracting this arrowhead because death follows from many conditions. And if this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not found embedded, then treat the wound as you do normally.
And the sign of the skull where the arrowhead is embedded and penetrates the bone, and it springs up above the brain. And it is when blindness and paralysis affects the eyes, inflammation of tongue, spasms and confusion, and vomiting from the bowels. andore duquesaillent de leu eueentene. oun:ses paralel
saintement d’unarsulement. Thisen.alones as :entirement. Aller. Thevesage ail veintain:meat. Ages. ACT andace. Theissel, etiinsea theleveint:age. Ifra.
The sign of the swelling when it presses on the body, is that it is close to the left breast and feels as if it were pierced in a hard object, not hollow. And also the swelling may stop moving like a chicken, and black blood flow, and cold sweat, and syncope: You see now there is doubt that the wound will open again.
And the sign of the swelling that never occurs without a discharge of phlegm from the wound and enlargement of the throat, and sickening blue lips and high-pitched coughing followed by shivering in cold.
And should the swelling press in its concealment deep within, it is found near the small of the back; and great pain and spitting forth a copious amount occurs; and all limbs are thus affected with agony.
And should the swelling press upon the abdomen, perhaps spitting forth from the wound may render none of the entrails edible.
And should the swelling press upon the stomach and pierce through the intestines with a spear-like protrusion, there remains no hope in the treatment nor extraction of the swelling.
And should the swelling press upon the bladder and the urine leaks forth with foulness, and sickening pain is felt, it is evident that the wound is deadly.
And the other limb, if it bears and the throat and shoulder and spines of the backbone and the strength of each joints: :esque le sentence: Laoculesaidon ofit ilice (2saince :meileadition of thetique : 1ire. Theor: ate. Lei devisage. :allume itent inpour: Ages ofere :gustre :
It happened at one house where someone had an axe blow on the root of his nail: I tried it, and it moved aside from underneath the ear grease, and became sensitive in no particular way.
And struck at a piece of metal that it was driven into the fat underneath the paper beneath. and the metal piece was replaced, and it did not go any further toward the wood. and the metal piece was large from an Armenian bow, by all about iron that is somewhat similar to ears; it became sensible, and no unfortunate event happened as a result.
And struck an iron piece from the throat of a Crusader, and the metal piece was similar to ears:
I released the hairs, and carefully extracted it while doing so, and became sensible in the Crusader's throat.
And struck an iron piece at one house where it had been choked or abdomen, and I thought he was dead:
and then after it had passed .xx. years, his condition did not change: I cut above the metal piece and dislocated it, and then struck it again, without any unfortunate incident occurring:
And if you wish to see at one house where there was an iron piece driven into the back and the wound was sealed:
and it remained in the body without affecting his natural dispositions: sacre fromage:sever quotedre (from;faire.
And there comes another man, who fell with an arrow on his face, and the wound was sewn up.
And in this way he suffered great pain; and many similar things.
And threw an arrow at a prince who was standing between the two knights. and it had slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was entirely recovered.
I called for treatment after it had been left standing for three years. When I found the wound, it was very wide.
I tried to examine her thoroughly, but did not feel anything. and he felt pain and discomfort in his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
I placed a trauma-absorbing pad on its back because their fur did not flatten. and I saw his ears from the arrow.
and I saw his ears from the arrow. I placed the trauma pad a year ago, and mainly healed the wound directly, but in this way he still suffered great pain.
so that he felt the arrow a year within his neck; and he told me this. I applied medicated warm water to the wound for a year, until it was healed over.
and I tested it, and felt that the head of the arrow had returned to its place on the skin. then I also applied medicated warm water in the wound's opening for as long as the arrowhead was visible.
and it went well in its conclusion over three months.
then I resected the wound that I had clenched with pincers on one side and the other, and it could not be removed.
and I continued to subtly handle and manipulate trauma dressings for a year until it was well made with the pincers; As long as this chapter goes on, until I have finished it, so that its form comes to be in the end, and I treat the wound again.
And the judge thinks that the nose chart cannot restore: I treated it again, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient's painful parts were healed entirely.
Or you have said the quality of extracting some arrows. If you apply your treatment on that which I do not say, for the book cannot fully explain it.
But the masters are mostly silent on this matter, and concerning what is present but absent. Done nine works, and none of the tools used for extracting things are involved in this art.
I say that arrows do not come from limbs unless by some particular manner, as it is said. or through their body, or by another means;
And that which jumps from a distance or enters, it is an arrow entering the body's flesh, and such has never happened nowadays.
And if it does not happen nowadays, let her leave them until their flesh is prepared to receive an entry or exit.
And also if it is lodged in the bone and cannot be extracted, let her remain for any number of years, and every year she moves.
And if it jumps again, and if not, then penetrates into every part of the body until its flesh is widened, and then I treat it.
ivenesignent: lesen the oui en:sant, andre malice defface. Forthcause. And if you feel it, take none unavoidable tool.
And if you cannot by stretching the wound and due to piercing of the arrow. And it has neither bone nor tendon, let the wound be large as long as it is. And if you can extract the arrow, and it has its head in the arrow'shifted towards her (assuming "oreille" is an error or misinterpretation for "la tête" which means "the head", as "oreilles" means "ears") and holds on to it.
And if you can extract the arrow, and it has its head in the arrow'shifted towards her (assuming "oreille" is an error or misinterpretation for "la tête" which means "the head", as "oreilles" means "ears") and holds on to it. And if you find the bone that has been driven into a part by about .ii (assuming ".ij." may be a typographical error and should likely read ".ii.", which would imply "two" or simply ".02" as a fraction)...that you can remove. And then break or bend the arrowhead's ears (if "oreilles" refers to parts of an arrow), as long as you can extract it.
And then break or bend the arrowhead's ears (if "oreilles" refers to parts of an arrow), as long as you can extract it. And subtly as long as you do not break the arrowhead, but rather extract it more carefully.
And if you cannot initially extract it, if the arrow lies deep within up to their points, then remove it because extraction is arduous. And if the removal of blood causes it to go against you, take care that which we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And keep the nerve and vein, and when you can extract it's arke.
secrewaireuxiferransiant:nagsentheccureausaie in favreaus ilesseigneuses andangercipes. nefriere de ounsaille, thisangusse For it is the greatest help that he be, and if you cannot, then apply according to what they show by sign.
The saw that comes from another place, where there is nothing of him shown or seen nor felt anywhere.
Then cut above, so the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out if it jumps now.
And if she is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull out.
And if she cannot be pulled out, let her still for now, and then resume the extraction until it jumps.
and if he was of the saw-blade, cast it entirely.
and if he was cut, and you see an instrument placed on him, use that instrument to administer the dressing. if the saw blade's point enters the hair of the instrument; and then cast it away.
and if the saw is curved, throw that tool with its point entering in to facilitate extraction.
And if the saw is touched, it must be cleaned thoroughly or where there are secretions; and you can do so. nac. This caracter. SATOMes thecaustarte the-: thea fromage'sentence.
And if the arrow pierces bone or flesh or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close by, and you cover it up, so that it heals.
and do not cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then close the wound, as it is necessary. and it should be healed as long as she is healthy.
The form of pincers with hook-shaped tips that resemble a bird's beak, and this shape is used for:
And they come in many sizes and types, depending on the quantity of the arrowheads.
common types of veins Veins that are healing, which have been observed to be XXI (21) times or less than sixty (60), indicating the severity of injury and recovery status.
It is known as: XXI (21) types of bone which are located behind the ears, called "soft herb" due to their delicate nature; And there are XXI (21) arteries that appear in XXI (21) temple areas; And XXI (21) veins that are located within the XXI (21) mouths of XXI (21) "aspirants," which translates to: lame itent. and the two tendons which are on the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips, and these are called "veiners" in Old French; and these veins are on the tongue;
The veins which are commonly found in each arm are;
one is the cephalic vein, and it lies on the left side of the chest, and they call it "vein of the head" or "cephalic vein"; and the method is called "fast", and it consists of the cephalic and basilic veins; and they call it "vein of the heart", and the basilic vein lies on the right side of the chest; and they call it "vein of the abdomen", and it is located above the spleen; and that one which we find commonly open above the navel;
And the palmar vein is the one that lies between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two (or more, depending on context) branches;
And concerning the leg and where there are three arrows: one is located inside the right hip pocket on its left side. And the second sign that is in the right ankle's side, and the vein that is pressed at "need", which is located on the other foot's outer side.
And in the other leg there are also three arrows: different from those previously mentioned.
The good signs that come after the ears aid ancient catarsis practices and in migraines. And the qualities of this sign, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient.
And the qualities of this sign, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient. And rubs its skin or veins with coarse fabric; then tightly binds the patient's head with a hook. As long as those three arrows appear behind the ears, each in two levels of the patient's head base: Could you tell me your own pulse, and where it is under your tongue? It indicates the state of dislocation therein:
Then take the lancet, and insert it into the vein thereupon; then lift your hand all over the wound: And cut and the skin and vein well two ways along, and draw out the blood until you see it:
And bind and hold until it is sound again:
And I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in the first book:
The good signs of those three arteries that come out from the ears' temples; they are related to ancient migraine treatments: And to the eyes' customs and habits, and obtaining of tears from the eyes' corners:
And these qualities make the shoulder so as if I say: and it tightly draws its bowstrings, until the arrows are clearly visible. and feels your hand on his body, and then he yields.
then lifts the knife from the vein on your hand and drives it through, and lifts the vein upwards, and cuts it as you have done with other veins, and makes a wound to drain the blood according to your necessity;
then loosens the malady, and puts your hand on the vein for an hour, then places cotton inside;
and then forms a bandage, and leaves it until the wound is healed; we have spoken of their care, their cutting and draining practices, or at least in part from our book;
The venous sickness of the forehead is valued just as much as the cranial diseases that were common in ancient times, and for migraines, and headaches;
And the quality is such that the severely dislocated shoulder twists its neck until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "fossor", whose shape is as follows:
And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand or some other means, allowing the blood to flow according to the amount you see. Then twist the patient's neck, and hold the vein so it is healthy and not once touched by a wide blade.
In general, it does not require that the blade be too sharp; and the vein should not cross unevenly because the bone is strong, and perhaps the blade breaks when it is very thin.
The healthy veins that are in the left and right sides of the body help us with arteries, joints, fingers, ears, and ear diseases.
And the quality of their health is such that the severely dislocated shoulder twists its neck in no way similar to before.
The vein should be held in the long and slender blade, as it has no sharpness that could harm further.
And if the blade is thin, and it may break, and you hold the blood flowing, as good, defficeur.
gear en le [pourintemore.commeignure : iteneface ape tolengure. ousage. If like a migraine and toothache come at the back of the head, and more gently when it is old.
And the quality of health in which his pain constricts his neck, then pull on the nerve with your left hand. And take a small feather long and hold it in the space between the two nostrils. For the vein does not open well at all, and now begins to correct from the start.
And don't go too far in making the wound, and correct the bleeding according to your need, then bandage it tightly for a night because it is very quickly restored.
The state of health in which the two gums aid in binding together the main part and beginning of swelling, and to many diseases, and impotence, and ulcers, and scabs, and herpes, and other things.
And the quality of health in which his pain tightens around both gums at once, as we have said. And it is then for the master to stand by the head of the sick person, and the sick person look at him from a certain angle.
Then open the vein a little broadly, then treat the blood immediately, as is proper for the trade.
Then repeat the same in the other vein, then loosen the ligament, and hold back the flowing blood gently. And let it not twist; and leave it for the morning so that the wound heals well.
Of the books of medicine The medicine of the veins above in the mouth helps to collect blood in the mouth and treats caries of teeth, cracks in the lips, and nerve pain, etc.
And the quality of health is that it bears down on his sickness before thee, and tightens its neck as I have said. Then turn the tongue, and look at these two veins, one on the right side of the tongue and the other on the left side. And they are known for being black in color, and because they have thin dark veins: Copiously examine both of them, and if you do not recognize them, then doubt exists.
Copiously examine both of them, and if you do not recognize them, then doubt exists. If you carefully examine the larger one of each part, and also do similar work on these veins above and below, as it is a similar method.
From the inside of the mouth The veins that are inside the tongue help after the cephalic incision and are closely related to the throat, and include diseases of the eye and mouth:
And the quality of that which is more painful when seen with one's eyes in front of the sunlight, and softens the tongue, and look at each side a dark vein:
Become healed on both and do not cut too deeply into them, for they are the arteries:
The veins commonly treated are healed according to various methods:
Or by pressing on any part of the patient's body with a large flint or delicate olive if as you treat wounds: And are broad and delicate according to the breadth and narrowness of the veins: The form of the flint which is very famous, and it is broad as you see it:
And it is necessary to open the veins of hairless scalps that show large visible blood vessels, containing thick and turbid blood: And it has the form of an olive flint:
And it is more finely pointed, and it is better for healing the smaller veins or there may be delicate yellowish blood:
The inferior vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases in the throat, and neck, and chest, and belly:
And it is necessary for the surgeon that he treats the suture and beware of the artery nearby: And if he cuts the artery and the bleeding blood comes out, it must be stopped as I have said: And it must not be pinched with fire, but cut as if with a knife.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is required that you extract and change another one. Or you want no relief from it, or heal in the open vein of it on his arm, which opens clearly. And cut with knife-like precision at it, just as we have said.
And if you recognize the opening of the sinus (assuming 'la sainie' refers to a sinus or related anatomical structure), it is required that you extract the arm, touching the vein as long as you perceive its presence. Then mark the opening again, and then bind the arm, and cut the tissue at it like with a knife.
And beware that you do not injure the artery when you see it swollen, for it is an artery; avoid doing so.
And if you see it protruding upward as the urine of a child, and without redness and subtly, you know that it is not an artery. Hurry up then, and place your hand downward for a long time, and press it against the area that is not sore, which often happens.
Then bind the arm, and leave it as is, and do not move his painful ones; be wary of him, and do not move them so long as he remains healthy.
And if it is not numbed, and he calms down, and the medicine does not apply to you, then cut the artery if it has opened, because its head pulls back; press the area that is without pain.
And take an iron skin.
If he does not use a needle, it is good; but if he does not, then he should treat it, as we have said, with powders that harden blood.
The needle insertion is not done in various positions for the small opening of the wound, and it also affects the tendons of the arm.
The treatment of the vein in such a way that it helps to drain the blood from the head above and below, and within the body. because it is composed of the basilar and cephalic veins, as we have said.
and it is for the surgeon that he should warm it with the nerve located inside, and if it points too much in a direction, then it will twist the nerve. and it swells and sometimes cannot heal at all.
and this vein opens many times, and if it does not open in anyone because of its subtlety, then you must heal the vein with the instrument annually, and remove the vein from one's property.
And if there is a vein between the two eyes, it makes them long.
The treatment of the cephalic vein so that it draws blood from the head and helps in this way.
And it is preferable to puncture the brachial vein or the vena comitans, because it is safer from all other veins, as there are no nerves and arteries inside.
Always, it's better to question the first time, and not worry if you must start again. And sometimes it swells in some people, but doesn’t complain about it the first time. The quality of the vein si ce cuit d’orentures en leu la sanz, et que lour sur leser.
Alemongue laisse itentur ceasing. (123 ounce akes unles, alire. Ceaux leu. ously. :esteur:sesus, theuretir :it'sac. Itunes. Sentence. Ander. Thewomane une sentence :auge :
and to prevent future diseases; and let the surgery be performed in one of the three veins that are known: namely, cephalic, femoral, and brachial; and it should be performed at the beginning of each fasting period when signs of satiety appear;
and it should be performed within the first year or after three years;
The surgery which is administered has no specific time determination for diseases, but when the need arises in any day or month at all hours and in every ten years.
and it does not necessitate surgery for children just at twelve years old, nor for a woman who is less than four months pregnant; and it should not be performed on those who have passed sixty years;
And when anyone wishes to be operated on, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that the bowels are cleaned with a laxative beforehand; if it has much feces retained, so that the veins draw excessive fluids from the intestines which could harm the main limbs;
nor should those who are too strong from meats, or who are drunkards, no matter how much they may be.
and it is performed after colic passions, vomiting, diarrhea, multiple pregnancies in women, labor, working, eating, sleeping, and whatever the virtue or weapon might be associated with;
and subtly regulate the fluids, provided they are not too heavy, through foods and drinks and medications, if you have any need for it;
then either a bath, if nothing else can correct it, to subtly regulate the blood;
and you should remain in bed for a week after the incision, as we have said;
and keep you from work, prayer, pleasure, and similar things for one day;
and apply liniments and ointments, and perform the surgery higher than those whom we have healed; and plaster the arms two or three times over;
and stretch the joint above slightly, for when it is too stiff or sore, it cannot be corrected without;
and then you should rub the hands, so long as the veins swell, and smear them with it;
then mix the right hand in a sanc quere. LXXI. :vulgarizing fromage of theat French vouldre: Theocles lice tote naying. In medieval;sans in theouste en ices it isteu, frommeat. Iti'sse ait.cause. What century, andrescript, Lauex. If when it is placed under pressure, if there is withdrawal from pressure, and it cannot open the vein, then it belongs to those.
And if it opens the vein, if the wound is too tight, for this reason one must inform the surgeon about these matters.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, then again a small amount near that place or with haste, provided that the hairs are not inflamed.
And if the hairs are inflamed and the patient complains, let him leave them for one or two days, and not bind his arm. by chance he will come with an abscess; do not let him take baths or waxing until the surgery is willing to restart it if she pleases.
and if the hole is small, or the sinus is subtly touched without doubt that it still has as much blood as you see, firmly hold the vein throughout.
and touch it quickly, so that the hairs are inflamed; because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the vein swollen, do not restart the surgery again, and put a little oil on it, because it loosens the blood flow in this vein, and turns into oil in this place.
and thus apply the oil to each surgery that you cleanse the veins, so as to stop the blood flow.
and this makes triangles and cuffs when it is placed on the vein; if subtly touched when it becomes too large.
And if he comes with a large abscess that happens often, immediately when it is not yet treated and the opening of the vein has not become small. And if you hurry, place on the vein wet sponge and some hot water, and hold it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood leaves the vein and if it does not return to the vein for any time at all: And if you see it, do not give anything in liquid or oil and melted wax, or as they appear to be.
Iesme france :saintre. From the butter. Injur tol. Ifresume thecaire ous andace : Laoc: "Amenage fromme andace (transcript:17esque : Acheat. Forte, translate. Now let us not put anything on it that we have said, for perhaps by chance in the artery; but I make an emplaster dry to harden the place, and then treat it with other treatment, until it is healed.
And treat each part of the body according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is not black, let it continue to be red until it becomes pale; and if you see it to be thick, allow it to remain so until it thins out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And must those who are pale and thin have the knowledge of blood withdrawal, so that they make larger wounds and their inflammation is wide.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is better to make them stronger, and they must be made stronger by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of healing is safe from the leakage and accumulation of blood and surpasses in value whether it is long or wide.
And for those who require the sausage to be administerited, it is required that they provide a softened mixture in the juice of green apples; if they are inflamed, treat them with the sausage three or four times, or four times.
And if they have a cold complexion, immerse them in the softened mixture of green apple juice before administering the sausage treatment; alternatively, use honey syrup with aromatic ingredients such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, along with fragrant syrup.
And if the palm has received the sausage treatment, after allowing some blood to flow, it is required that they inhale aromatic smoke from burning herbs and drink subtle fragrant syrup.
And utilize other things we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for bloodletting.
And if they wish to ply up their arms and then heal them again later, provided that it is weakened by much bleeding, so that they remain healthy little by little according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
:it'sainie : iefendant in the 10th siècle devisions. A:nagre itoversage sachievce.tissueda century owo (injourne'saint ouspastract in English frommeant: "Ionesupport, The French, a :to,sentence of theocurse.
And who moves more on another side, he must move it back to its original position or to the next day.
For there is much blood in the wound that has already been drained, and it causes fever; therefore, it must be extracted in large quantities and expand the abscess until it starts to spurt. Then, as you treat all the conditions of healthiness, and put your hand on his body when he feels well, so that his wound does not reopen with spurting. And this happens many times when the healthier one neglects it.
And it is not necessary when you see the limb being untied, and extracting blood again from that second time, because the abscess has closed up. Then you must apply pressure firmly on it. And if it's not broken, you should extend the arm slowly, because that would be harmful.
But let it remain healthy for a second time; or if you touch the sharp edge too closely, then all of its contents would be expelled from the vein. And place it in water with just a little bit of pressure applied gently on it.
And if the vein has leaked, let it remain and not constrict it; as long as its inflammation is calmed down.
And if you need to extract blood the second time, make sure it remains healthy in that vein; either there or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in his arm is healed from the source of that same vein because it's composed.
And the way of sanctification is that the sick person pours hot water on their hand until the skin turns red.
And if it is stiffened, then let the vein open well, now heal it in a narrow and short manner.
And if there are wide fistulas, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and it cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water again, and let the wound be treated with hot water until you have enough.
And if it is in the air, do not reheat the hand with hot water, because you would expose it to more moisture than necessary.
And the healing practice for this vein is more protected from all other veins, as it does not involve arteries or nerves.
The healing practice for treating the hand's right side is equal to all liver diseases in value (dou foie), and that is how it works.
Straighten out the hand and heat it in hot water until the vein becomes visible, if you can see it. And if the hand heals in a narrow and short manner, and you manage to do everything properly throughout, there should be no complaints.
And do not push too hard, for the nerves are all without flesh on them.
And then reheat the hand in hot water if it becomes frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out on its own.
And when you have treated the wound as much as you know how (trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est), then place oil and string over it to fasten quickly (mets sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment), and thus perform for each one.
The healing practice for the left hand is equal to that of mouse disease (maladie de la mice), and do it as I'ran said concerning right-hand treatment.
:secrets quarrant andre la mots. Aidons le castelettrans fromage de:rue thekes of ounsesque it'ardirecture. Cajuste tire. :meet encien(10cortsoule, akeinfect. As if like diseases of the marsh, and retention of flowers, and disease of rain, and old knees and ankles, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of his sanctity is that he applies hot poultices on the wound until it disappears. And above the joint of pain; and the vein is at the ankle, and through it there goes much rain.
And it becomes then either lesser rain or wider at the ankle, where movement is lost.
And if you clean it up in the vein, and warn of those who are there with it, and treat its healing as well as when cured from illness; and let it be aflame again.
And if it cannot come out, then put the pain back in the water, and let the vein well drain out.
And if the surgeon fails to remove it on the first attempt, then attempts a second time above a little bit, for the wound is salted. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make of equal pieces the other side alike.
The wound from the vein is near the knee, and its treatment is similar to that of backache when it is due to bleeding.
And the quality of his treatment is that it causes pain between bathing and elevation above the knee, stretched in four directions; it twists when turned.
For otherwise the vein would not open; and if it opens, then you can treat it in all possible ways that are appropriate for your practice, and across. And it is worth doing so, because the wound is dry, and it can be repaited mostly by hand.
And it is worth doing so, because the wound is dry, and it can be repaited mostly by hand. And if you do not treat it, then there will be no relief for its patient when the wound opens or closes on either side of his feet, and in small movements, nor will they warn him about his nerves.
And do the same with the blood so that you see it, and then loosen its bandage, and put a cloth over it and tighten it up; now she is healthy.
Venous treatments or procedures involving vacuum devices are typically used for removing excess fluids from wounds or to promote healing in certain conditions. Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) therapy is one such treatment that uses a negative pressure environment around the wound site to expedite the healing process and reduce the risk of infection.
Vacuums are made of horns, or bones, or wicker; and suction is performed according to different methods: either by making an incision and attracting blood with a forceps, or feeling the wound to guide the procedure. This description could be related to historical practices where materials like horns or animal parts were used in medical treatments, including procedures that involve creating negative pressure for suction therapy.
And this suction which is felt by the wound is done according to different methods: either it is at full heat, or it involves fire;
Taille :ent illement d'une toundres ains, dansreve la parole decoin leves of theflesmejourment from: "Ivale icesiours invention. It isuremétalongé. Leser lion.from nowmes, orignalexentail:surname. itensicle. Whichera. And the suction cups for both shoulders; and the suction on the elbows. And the suction cups on both arms; and the suction cups on both legs. And the suction cups on the knees; and the suctioning does not treat with blood, for it involves small incisions spread across the skin.
And because of this they do not hesitate, as one would do with vein puncture work. And it does not insist that she should be treated with heat or cold, in any disease resulting from accumulation, until all the organs are cleansed.
And if for necessity or custom the patient needs suctioning, we may use it at the beginning of each month or at its end, and in every ten days.
because there are such who, when they need to be suctioned, become heavy with it.
and if there are such who experience accumulation and rheum in their body, and in their head, and darkness around them.
and those who have a trickle of blood in their mouth, and have fled the tongue, and receive more blood. and if I come across such individuals who think about bleeding with blood, nausea, pain, and similar things.
And when we observe these signs, immediately when it is the end of each month, we order suctioning to be done two hours after midnight.
The suctioning of the mouth helps to loosen the head ... which is causing these issues, and it does not insist that this be done after evacuating all the organs.
And this suctioning is related to the treatment of the skull (cephalic).
And it does not insist that those with cold constitution or who have been ill should use it, as this can cause great harm.
And for this reason they do not insist that patients use it at nighttime, nor those who have cold diseases in the head or body.
And those who heal from it often become forgetful, and for this reason they should put the suction cup somewhat further back due to overconfidence in its effectiveness.
The suction on the neck is part of the treatment of the head and chest (torso), and for this reason it has some restriction. and at the opening of the channel of the vein, and in the head, and in accumulation;
:surely's oncause thea: "Cures fromentrologie aye (itume : Ijulgarment, Aesme. It. Thexent 10. Whiches of thevague to :125 : Age. Forse.
The windings of two ribs that are twisted together cause the pains at the top and bottom of the chest, and cataracts and glaucoma, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
And it is in the rule of the sanctuary; and it requires that you command the saint to express his hand when placing it, not to compress the artery, and not to draw blood from a wound.
The windings of the mouth cause illnesses of the mouth, and gum disease, and similar afflictions in the mouth; and it is in the rule of the two lips' sanctuary.
The windings of the shoulders cause a disease that comes from heat and overfilling.
The windings of the ribs are as much as three swords in two arms. For it draws blood from these large veins;
And commands the saint not to pierce too deeply; for his hand is unarmored and knows about veins and arteries.
The suction on the backbone causes foundation diseases and similar afflictions in the area; it requires that the suction be large and made of leather, as it must well perform its task; and if it were too subtle, it would break, and it would cause great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs tighten well, because they draw blood from the whole body; they are equivalent to old wounds caused by rain and mudslides, and bladder issues, and rashes; and they are in relation to the two sanctuaries of sinews and ankles, and all these things weaken the body's structure over time, and cause painful conditions in various ways.
The way of placing the suction cup is that you empty it first and immediately afterward, move quickly, and rotate evenly, and keep doing so until you see the color reddened and swollen on the vein; then remove the cups and take care in the positioning of the body, for there are some who have a lot of charity, and pure pores: it requires only one time to inflict wounds wide; and draw out blood deeply.
And if it is large, it must allow to wound two times: the first time for subtly opening the path of the thick blood.
And if it is very high, it must allow to wound the third time; and when we try to draw out little blood from the bone twice, we are only successful once.
And if we draw out a lot of blood, we often replenish it; and when the bone is very high, they pierce it quickly, and its end ends up being so tightly sealed that it cannot be distinguished.
and must allow for the one who has thick skin and hard muscles, that you anoint the hairs of the suction cups with oil aperient and dissolvent: if it is so, of violet oil, or honey-sweet almond oil, or seed oil from cucurbit.
and if it is in water, of cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if it is excessively large and cold, you take vinegar, or balm, or acetin oil, and the like.
And if that one is healthy with tender skin and wide muscles, it does not need to be anointed with oil.
but it must be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or marigold water, or seed oil from the gourd, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And those who have much moisture, they lift it up with ash, or marigold water, and sumac, and the like.
And those who have large excesses lift them up with strong wine, or marigold water, or anet decoction, or chamomile decoction, or something similar.
and do not need to use the suction cups before or after bathing, but an hour later; and never sleep again after suction.
and must be warmed up when it needs to be suctioned and when it is moist. And warm those who are irritable, and if the bone is too hot and inflamed. and must make it cold things, like pomegranate seeds and endive leaves and lettuce in ash, and the like.
and boil puccinia (a type of mold), castor seed, and moist meats.
and those who have a cold complexion must use honey syrup and slightly sweet wine (between strong and weak), and boil it a little, and also the puccinia and small birds and feathers.
Theology in Old French: leuinse dexprime la peytain d'arme, les meine defface touninjourne çoins tolk. Itajustice. In English translation of theorein aoutrake jurisin it'ree.
and it is necessary to give some people at times cathartic or musk before the windings, or afterwards, in order to strengthen the main limbs. and remove it subtly but he does not require those who drink very hot beverages.
The suction cups that are applied to wounds are those placed on the liver, and on the belly, and on dropsy (edema), and on the stomach and bowels, and on headaches, because in these parts they do not suffer from injuries either.
and they do not make it for the purpose of drawing blood from a limb into another limb. as we do to the breasts when the child is not born; in order to reduce the viscousness that exists in the member, as we put suction cups on the abdomen and on the bowels to diminish the limb.
and the pain, when it has an operation or incision performed on it, where it is attracted by its virtue to draw out the operation through chance, or drying up the joint of its socket.
and then it makes her in this way when we put them on the liver and belly where there is retained windiness.
and these vacuums are approved as empty because they evacuate so much; and sometimes they are approved together fire, and sometimes water poured.
if in diseases of profuse tears, and in such a way the suction cup is filled with hot water, or with water heated by boiling certain herbs available for this purpose.
The shape of the suction cup given fire is thus:
And it is two-thirds of the length and half of a palm wide, and has its edge turned into the middle, like when one pushes in a small hole, as if to insert a needle.
and if the wound is rainy, then let him not put the cauterized member on the body.
And in such an age or else that is not, it has been disle, en siemps toi le.
The ices sansprevene desilk a la boneforses la cestin theur esle :soutil'surey ilthe preteils:meslay. Injury.ioun,
For children's suction cuffs are not like old people or fat individuals.
And should it be placed on this limb:
Take the candle wax or something similar, and place it between the arm where the suction cuff is attached, so that it shines at the bottom of the suction cuff, not burning the patient's flesh;
and then place it on the limb, and you must put it at the puncture that we have mentioned, so when they see it, if there is a vapor coming out, and where the suction cuff will be placed;
And take the same material if you have practiced; and repeat often, if you know how.
In the suction cuff which is used in treatment for pleurisy at all times has no vein or puncture, and it is only applied when the fluid accumulation becomes clear, and then placed on the limb just so.
And that's what it looks like:
Suction cuffs are not applied only to members where they can be placed with minimal discomfort, like in the mouth and gums, as well as similar cases. and in the cases where they are cut or removed, as with teeth and gums, and similar situations;
and the quality of its use is that when you try suction cuffs which are clear in sweet fluid accumulation without significant pain, then you must do so.
and put it into the sweet fluid accumulation as long as they are small, and have nothing in their bellies; and then you are supposed to know about the veins and suction cuffs, then rub the limb so much that it is reddened, and place them on the skin.
And when they are placed upon it, and we can put it after that;
:wars. Cecele. Whatfieres precious. ce. oflere cestacula un: theures lesur. Theu'ses. (itmeatine. ounces it:nce: theles tocumace.
And if their hair is healthy after the heart of the snake, and a piece of cold linen wetted in water, and placed on it, so long as the venom has not dissipated.
And if there are multiple times, place it on broken glass or salve and similar things, until the venom has dispersed.
Or place it near the joint mostly covered with fine flour, and let them dry on the joint, if now they will stay.
And if you have more experience, then take other venomous snakes.
And if the snake's venom does not attach itself to the joint, then smear it with fresh blood or pierce it deeply enough so that the venom drains. And then place it on, and immediately as they feel the warmth of the blood, if they dry up.
And when you see them itching, sprinkle a little aloe and sand on them or ashes, if now they will be relieved.
This begins the Book of Bones.
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they concern the restoration and dislocation.
Learn, my child, that the wise physician says of this chapter, which he has never seen in any ancient books or letter.
And for this reason is it extraordinarily rare in our land, as I have not found a single good one.
And I know nothing of it because through the study of ancient books and by means of experience in my life.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained therein and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the bones that are presented, as I did in these 13 previous chapters.
Therefore it is that we declare the prologue of this book and summarize its contents with our words and chapters arranged according to their understanding, so that those who have experienced can know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or dislocation comes to no one, it must be that you thoroughly examine the injured part of the patient on both sides, so that nothing is overlooked, whether it's a weak heart, spleen, kidney, or old age.
Or if it is too cold or too hot; and handle frozen meat, which are icy battles, feathered arrows, and do not drink wine, eat no fat foods, and fill the body with meats that do not overfill joint cavities, until you have doubt about dislocation or swelling of tissue, then restore the injured part to its previous governance which he had used.
And when the bone is fractured, it must be that you wrap the injured part with viscous foods that make a lot of noise, such as bread cooked in water and fire and testes, and pies made of any type of meat, and wine and things similar. For it represents the crackling noise, so soon the bone fracture.
Or:re deuke.ses leu.
but without care, reset the broken bone with large nails that hold and join the limb together, until it forces so as before; and not all of his work, and for this reason he needs to consume large meats, just as we have said.
And you know that fractures occur in many ways.
For the main fracture is different from the secondary fracture, or of the leg, and I will tell you all types of breakage in this chapter. For there is also fractures that lead to avulsion, and others caused by thinning, like the tip of a quill used for writing.
For there is also fractures that lead to avulsion, and others caused by thinning, like the tip of a quill used for writing. And if there is a breakage with wound, and a breakage consisting of a small fissure.
And each type has its treatment, and its specific instrument for restoration, as that memory comes to mind.
and it is known the bone fracture by the fact that the edges are twisted, and well opened by force, and pressed with one's hand.
and when there is no twisting or dislocation in the joint, and the painless patient has not any fracture.
but he may well have twisting, or fissure, or small breakage. If it doesn't require you to move it with your hand, but apply afterwards the medicines that come hereafter, and then restrain it subtly now.
And you know that the fractures which lead to avulsion, and the two joined parts, it is necessary now to put them equally, so as not to open the wound again.
and if the wounds come, if there are no more days left until the wounds become healed; then put it in the same condition as you move lightly and carefully, and you know that the restoration of this one is lighter than its previous or later ones; then restrain it, just like we have said.
And if in the bone there are small pieces, if it involves two parts, whether it's limbs or ropes, or one of them is small members, or a string and at your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, if the pieces of both sides are displaced, reset by all instruments in their position you can move them, and make sure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient.
And well join the two bones according to the best shapes.
And feel the hand well if you think it is not perfectly: if it slightly increases, and do not tighten it too much, nor press as they do to bring it back with their work through incision and stretching of the limb, as we have often tried.
And when the limb is at a critical point, if it cures well the sick patient that it does not move, neither in sleeping nor waking, turning or any other manner. And take good care that the limb is so secure that it does not feel any pain. For when there is no pain, it is not necessarily so, and he must put the patient in such a state that they do not feel any pain.
For when there is no pain, it is not necessarily so, and he must put the patient in such a state that they do not feel any pain. and keep it straightened so that twistedness does not occur when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I have told you.
You know that broken limbs are various in size and shape.
For it has small members like brass and iron, if indeed so: it must be wrapped with thin, soft linen cloth.
and those who are large, like cuffs and legs: it must be wrapped with a wide, stiff bandage because the wide bands embrace the entire large limb, pressing evenly from all sides, so that there is no hard spot.
then bandages are tied tightly around moving joints, two or four turns depending on the limb, with a hand pressing somewhat all over the bandage, and pulled upwards from above the fracture, pressed less so that the fracture moves slightly away.
and soften the bandage a little at a time so that you cover well the healthy part of the limb, then another bandage is put back up over the fractured limb.
then return to the part above the fracture, and press gently, not too hard nor too lightly, as we said in the first chapter.
and place between the bandages of linen or cloth so that they are all even, then tie one by one around the shoulder, and put them well placed if there is an abscess.
La grande parte de thee li la partide it.
Then is the traction applied to the staves, and they are of a moderate length of one thick cane for retention, or from wood used for crafting poles, or reeds of palm tree, and arranged according to this form:
But it must be that the staff placed on the fracture is slightly larger and wider than the others.
And also long enough as it should be for a small or large limb.
Then the traction is applied to the staves also as you have done in the first instance, and placed above a woven band like in the first case on the fracture.
Then either made narrower or wider, and it must be that the band is moderately sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of fine linen.
For if the band is thick, like I have described in works of men who make their bindings with twisted linen cords, and this constitutes great error, because the traction cannot be equal if it is too fine; there is no need for it to differ by less than a double space between each staff.
And if the maladies are aggravated by dislocations of the staves after traction on their healthy sides, then place in them linen socks or woven linen strips to prevent it from bleeding.
When there is a fracture and the injury is torn apart, I will discuss the treatment for this afterwards.
And remember it's not necessary to apply traction to all members with fractures on the first day. For when the members are large, there is no need to place staves on them until after approximately two or three years, depending on your discretion and skill as a practitioner.
And now let's look at the ancient methods for repairing fractures, dislocations, and twisting: and is it that you use flour held in the walls of a millstone, mixed with plenty of water, making this concoction neither too thick nor too thin, and using it as such; this common method of restoring a fracture has been applied for various positions, especially to women and small children, because it is not excessively hot or cold.
In another way to restore the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take away and lick and oil and gum resin and about 10 of them; mirrhe and aloe, about 5 of them; elecampane, about 7 of them; and make a powder, and honey with wax of bees; if the patient's condition is hot, use this remedy, for it has good composition, and quickly mends broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another way to treat twisting that is worth: take mugwort and wormwood, about 10 of them; mirrhe and aloe, about 7 of them; aconite, about 6 of them; Armenian bitters, about 10 of them; grind well, and cook with water or honey-wax mixture, and apply.
Another way to treat dislocated joints and deformed bones, and alleviate the pain experienced by cutting into them; take a new lining, and moisten it with fine clay mixed with cooked oil, and place it on the affected area. These remedies do not restore them but are good for easing acute pain, and treating the bones properly in terms of pain relief.
Another method to heal broken bones that is effective: take dried fig leaves and earthy mallow leaves, grind them together, and prepare the poultice (medieval poultices often used organic materials believed to have restorative properties; fig and mallow are plants with historical medicinal uses for supporting skin health).
Another method for the restoration of bone fractures and to alleviate post-fracture pain involves using wormwood root, chamomile flowers, violet flower petals, flour from 10 times (implying 'about 10'), mix one part; grind it together, and prepare the poultice with wine (wine was commonly used in medieval medicine for its disinfectant properties); apply to limbs which are swollen. Alternatively, use a water-soaked chamomile or just plain water or vinegar mixed into the poultice, and utilize it.
Another method that surpasses the first for restoring the limb after an aposteme (injury); take wormwood roots and seed of flax ('flax' is mixed in equal parts: 'linen', linseed, and broom, and violet flowers, and chamomile flowers, allot one part; grind it, and confit with water, or pure water (in medieval times, to restores the injured limb.
There is in Ypocras's book no mention of putting wax and oil on the broken limb to restore it because he says none other thing more; and that it should be neither too soft nor too hard, and said it should be two or three fingers thick.
It seems to Galen that wax and things dried slightly warm should be placed on the broken limb for restoration purposes; similar to myrrh, aloe, and incense, as we have mentioned.
Another method of impalement that is worth mentioning in terms of injury and pain: take mugaths and chickens' feathers, or sharpened sticks to a similar size, and hit them repeatedly to break them apart; then use these as an implement for impalement and inflict wounds.
And then he takes it slightly afterward, and taking care that the patient does not feel any pain from his maladies or have a misplaced bone in its original position; if so, he dislocates it using his hands again.
And if pain occurs at the joint or itching, numbness, swelling, if you rush, then dislocate and impale immediately; take a light drape, damp sea sponge, submerge in water, raise the limb until the itching stops, and alleviate the pain thereafter. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on a dry towel moistened with water or oil, and lay it over a nail until you are certain there is no risk of reopening the wound.
And relieve the inflammation in both members and soothe the pain, then resume treatment delicately, and apply only a little impalement at first, and do not exert it as strongly as before, gently until they are restored to health.
And if you see that the incision and wound and pain and swelling are all in one joint, and you have to straighten it out and bind it, if it relapses, as you did in the first place.
And if it does not happen in any of the parts we have mentioned, let it dislocate for two, three, four or five years, depending on what is seen, until the fracture heals and approaches the previous alignment.
And let the first restraint be stronger than before, and it will swell its flesh as I have said earlier; and if you see the joint loosening more than necessary, you know that no further dislocation can occur. Use the warm water baths for every time it dislocates, and let each day pass with one or two changes of dressing.
By this method of treating the dislocations in the joints, hasten the healing process; observe what my fellow physicians do wrongly when they restore the twisted limb: it is bad, and if these procedures are feared, I see nothing but restraint and careful treatment.
Of various methods of fracture treatment Many methods of fractures are therein described, along with various types and their causes identified. This statement refers to a comprehensive description within the medical text detailing multiple fracture treatment options that correspond with different injuries (types), as well as the underlying reasons for each fracture. This level of detail suggests an attempt at understanding not just how to treat but also why certain conditions occur, aimed at improving patient outcomes.
because there are fractures caused by sword blows, and the bone breaks along its entire length where it is struck against the other bone, as if hit or hammered; for this reason, I have called this method of breaking "the hachuring." This passage describes a specific type of traumatic injury—fractures inflicted by swords (hachuring), highlighting how certain fracture types were named based on the mechanism of injury and its physical characteristics.
Or the sword pierces through with excessive force, and for this reason I have called this method of breaking "the absolute" (absolute fracture); and it is the wound produced by these two or three such fractures, whether large or small. This segment speaks to a different classification of traumatic injuries—those caused by excessive force with a weapon like a sword (absolute fractures), referring to how the severity and type of injury can be indicative of both treatment approach and prognosis.
And if it has been pierced or shattered by a blow, or of bone splinters from a cut stone, or of fall on footstone, or other similar things. This excerpt lists various injury types that may occur in the medieval period and would be relevant to treatments and classifications within a medical text discussing trauma care practices. It reflects an era where injuries were often categorized based on their presentation rather than underlying pathology as understood today, which is essential for historical contextualization of these texts.
And if there is a fracture that approaches the skin on the bone, or it lies on the bone, and it'rante of such wound, whether large or small. This passage refers to an injury wherein not only its extent in depth—a broken bone withstanding close contact from the wound; this is thexalme, siens parole de la terre enchaufe cuitre, et est quinze jor seing ofse desgerme.
s, the flesh,se sengre.
And if the wound is made by a cut with a sword, or falling, or something else, and brings the lower bone fragment into it, and its edges are formed like those of a blacksmith when he pierces below the brazier; if it enters through the middle.
And this happens more under those who have moistened bones like in children;
And it happens in all these ways of fracture where small fragments are scattered as if they were themselves; and I will speak about this topic directly.
And we know all methods of fractures by the drawing away from them, and the inquiry into them, and through the corrupted one that is over them;
The hair-like appearance is considered by this because when the bone is discovered and scraped over it, if the crack appears black;
In the treatment of fractures, take into account two unpleasant things; and if you see no bad accident, like vomiting of blood (hemorrhage), loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever with a cold sweat, the bone fragments coming out and turning red, and other similar conditions in various dispositions, then there is no doubt that one cannot be sane.
And if you see an apparently non-serious accident, and you hope for salvation, as the treatment begins;
And when the navet (blood vessels) comes first to you, and it's winter, there is an obligation for you to remove the bone within four months;
And if it's in the estate (state), and you hasten to remove the bone within seven days; so that the tissue around the bone is not corrupted, and those accidents we have mentioned come about;
And if the injury of ou.
: the. Thees cesanapresse tolere it'sall andace decade :xentleave:oldrement, ate quat. (it: "Gothicure la. Thises. Audexentreson. Thejacres. And let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed, and prevent the discharge of blood; then begin to break into the bone as per this method: one way is that you push the narrow piece forward, and it is done according to .ij. procedures.
And then there is another more extensive version of the previous technique.
And the second method is that you have various small and large tools, pointed ones and iron-made ones; and in practice, do it swiftly so as not to bleed the head.
And if the bone is hard and dense, it must be pierced inside so that you apply tools with traps, not allowing them to penetrate beyond the bone's end, and there should be above the tip of the tool a margin or circle, which does not let the tool pass over the bone; and you need many more things in this manner, so that each layer from the inner side of the bone is trapped by all tests. And it is the form of .ij. tools with traps:
The quality of the tool used to pierce the bone is that you apply a trap on the bone, and turn it around until you know that the bone has been pierced; then put the trap in another place afterwards, and do this thoroughly, then cut along the bone's space between the teeth with the incisors, doing it more subtly as we have said, quickly enough so that you can grasp the bone in your hand or any of the tools you have like pliers, pickles; and make sure that you do not touch the brain nor the spine.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is required that you remove the trap from the bone with all .ij. instruments resembling a toothed tool but it must be softer and more subtle than the other toothed tools.
And if there is no delay in dealing with small bones or fragments, then treat the wound with tenting and ointments that we have mentioned.
And the other method of work is what the Greeks said, which was more salutary; and it was greatly effective, as their word goes. It is required first that you remove a part of the bone where the break was made; once you have removed this piece, then place the lens-shaped toothed tool over the head of that part, as its form is like so:
And do not cut from one side only, and the part is divided into .ij. sides, so that the cutting tool is directed towards the bone; then beat it gently with a small hammer above, doing it swiftly so as not to damage the skin underneath;
If it is attached to the bone, do so swiftly, because it will harm and cause of injury; et deffre diz laine:
scellularre ofsesculiers. Aimer. oulden theire jurs century. Allonger. Theil: Intervengustra :ces inu soustromente.
If a king is before great razors, and after more subtle ones, and continues to do so until he is well done.
In each of these other hair and subtle breakages, it is required that you prepare according to its degree; and this is something that has not been returned by those who have studied this art.
And if the wound is discovered, it requires that you take care of it in one way or another: firstly, a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and with oil mixed with rose petals, and apply it on top of the wound. Then take another linen piece doubled in two or three layers, and soak it in wine mixed with rose oil, and place it on top of the first linen; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the wound, then gently apply a second layer of linen, without pressing too hard, just enough that the liquid does not stain the wound only.
And leave it on for a day or two until the skin is calmed, then remove it, and apply other medications as you may like, such as root of lily roots, flour, incense powder, alchemist's mixture, and similar things; from these things make pills to put on the wound, and thereafter apply medicine with no biting sensation.
And ensure that the wound is then clean and free from any oozing or clotting, for you should not leave any residue there, nor allow blood to accumulate, because when a clot forms on the brain's surface (interpreted metapromatically as 'toilet'), it can become rigid and harden, which is harmful. For whenever something with a biting effect is placed on the wound, if it causes too much disruption, great suffering befalls the patient.
Take care, however, if any unfortunate event occurs to the patient, as we have mentioned before, there is doubt about it.
And if there are no more troubles other than those caused by the remedies applied on it, then its virtue must be shown in that case; and it is required to treat a portion of honey, two parts of rose oil, and mix them with one piece of linen, and put them on the wound. And the care of methods that are to be done so long as he is sound.
ilum : lexentire aage. ici. thee.
And if one of the two parts is fractured, it must be that you make your little hole or puncture near where the break is not, and place equal to this crack on the index of your doorpost, and then in front of it, until the break returns to its natural shape. And do this firmly, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the crack is above the doorpost and cannot come to rest in place, it must be that you put equal weight at the top of a rod a little bit larger.
And if the crack is of two parts, make another one like it, and hasten to restore it within a year, if you can do so.
But if not, after the seventh or twelfnih time when the abscess is pacified, then place at the top of the doorpost a tent-like covering made of flax, if the crack is in one part.
Or you make another one of the other parts if the crack is there; and let the tent-like coverings be large enough to fill in the doorposts' holes.
And they said that the tent-like coverings must be made of burlap and worn every day. I do not think it is right, but it must be soaked in a mixture of alewife skins and powdered millstone; then leave the covering until the bones are set and the cartilage hardened.
And never put down the goose feathers on the doorpost of the tent-like coverings, and if one such sheet is torn, and it holds the crack there, blow upon the patient's limbs among these things, so that you may see what happens to him; make a hollow where he lies.
And if the abscess comes to the doorpost while you do your work, then place a bit of pitch or cotton wetted in roselle oil there, or in some small quantity of diaphoretic substance.
And if the abscess does not come to the doorpost, make an emplaster of barley flour and powdered incense, with alewife skins, and place it on lit candles, and do not move hisne.
n: ici. (12ndirentence.goverse.compreasurement. It'sur itentire:sentiment.
santocionste:sentent (2yvessexive andrementumente itesuke.  :naughtesse a capithefe citerneceillecites. Andrexaccuse tarde. Heauxtement.yevecteveille menture de ceance topeutextexentifreconsexat’udexiclelore quelex sentisse,èxentisseable.ise,celan au clacheletifreintes siurnecekent miecquexse jusquessexentures:l nudexse causement lèves. ceille
Of the procedure of the jawbone
When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no preexisting wound, and the fracture has healed completely without being displaced much, and not split in two, since the cavities within do not move significantly if known.
It is required that if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, you place your index finger in the mouth of the Malade with the displaced bone; and if the fracture is on the left side of the mandible, you hold your index finger of the right hand there, apply pressure to the fracture gently, move the other hand away for safety, and keep everything even.
And if the displacement of the jawbone fracture is at a point near the teeth (indicated by ".ij."), it must be ensured that you gently extend this part (.ij.) so that it remains aligned. In this instruction, the focus shifts to addressing specific locations where dislocations may occur in relation to dental structures or specific points on the jaw near the teeth. The phrase suggests a cautious approach to extension at such critical junctures to maintain proper alignment and avoid further injury.
And if compression occurs due to movement or procedure (indicated by "ou routure"), when strapping with a gold or silver thread, or silk, place the fractured jaw undernee a double cloth; and put on the second cloth a large piece of leather, equal in width to the mandible, along which you bind the patient so that they can rest comfortably. In this instructional sentence, it describes an advanced procedure for managing dislocations involving compression with specialized materials like gold or silver threads (or silk) and custom-fitted cloths or leather bandages designed to support a fractured mandible while allowing the patient to lie down safely. This method emphasizes comfort and stabilization, ensuring that the patient is advised to rest and consume easily digestible foods after initial treatment.
And if you observe that the figure changes, and then reset it to its original state; and place underneathe a fine powdered flour or fine breadcrumbs afterward; and lay over the linen cloth lightly, and let the displacement of the Malade does not change, so it is well for .ij. days. In this instruction refers to rehabilitate the patient's jawbone fracture with an abscesses leather by farinette malades duodenum.
:mein a ices de cestillemente tottes in: "Aragon. Thises (1203. Fromages arme'sans on itiunees of theur duce and taille desires A l’orit:2. The same36ene, butenage frommetal dextracta. Injury, andre.
And if it has a fracture and wound together, reward him with no bone fragment from the os; so delicate is the os surface that its edges are almost invisible to the eye.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with blood according to necessity.
And when you have all these bone fragments, and it does not take any time at all, if the wound is wide, and place on it such fragile os pieces that can be easily connected to aid in closure until healed.
from the fracture (or break) The fracture breaks more than once before the shoulder, toward the spine, and the break is according to three manners: or it is broken and displaced in two directions, and there are pieces, and it is lighter to restore; or there is a break with wound.
And the operations when the break is with wound, where you should have two ministers (or assistants), so that one tightens the sling around the injured area where the fracture occurs; and the other stretinas the col toward its part; then equalize the dislocation at the required place, so that it forms as it should, without any apparent or lingering injury.
And if you have the expertise to extend further, then place on the patient's back a round ball of cloth or linen according to your need; and are gentle with the sling, and hold the ball in your hand so that you can position the fracture equally, as it is intended.
And if you cannot remove the head of the sling after some time because it sticks to the wound (em parfont), then it is necessary that the patient be gently supported on his bed, and place over the shoulder one or two pillows; let your assistants hold the shoulder upwards, so long as the bone fragment of the sling rises.
And then bring the fracture to your place, and if you find fragments, it requires that you cleave them lightly; and draw out pieces gently, and let the bone not join anytime. Put on top of this instrument, in order to guard it.
seigneur le pècun laisse:iciel a l’it and thisures theur loire de cestrail.
reveuletentheurrevelasthe ells hevaille:partuledgesnelles ieuille (loreuxscius �anissewentyqueunchelevesseches ifis levé lesaincel outrainifiecuses in tandresiveuses, tophie
And if during an incision arrows come, then it brings together a little cloth soaked in oil and hay and linen, and places it on top.
The dislocation of the bone, when it is feeling wounds and pain from cutting, put on top of the bone a powder of miller's pepper and burned buckwheat flour, and place lightly resting supports above, and attach a screw if you have experience with it. then take a very broad band of one palm wide, and place two resting supports under it, and apply the powder; then take a thin tablet of three fingers long and wide, and wrap around that band to keep the head of the band in position. and place the tablet above the fracture, and turn the band under the neck, and around both sides of the support, and when you see that each part holds firmly to the crack, and clearly sees that the tablet does not move from above the bone, then reinforce it every day for each year as long as the slipping occurs, and when the band slips again, tighten the restraint.
and lay the patient on their back, and place a little strap underneath the support so that it can lift the dislocated shoulder up; this alignment of the spine helps reduce the force on the fracture, or tie the arm to the collarbone, so that misalignment does not lead to accidents for about 20 years.
then resume the powder application if you have experience with it, and maintain the restraint until it is restored, up to 27 years for some people, but not for others.
of the fracture in the shoulder blade area.
There is not much occurrence of the shoulder blade fracture or dislocation that occurs without injury and does not result from impact; if it is located according to the shape of the fracture, and you wrap accordingly, in all ways you can; then take a little powder with miller's pepper and burned buckwheat flour, lightly place two resting supports above it, and under that double cloth band; put a thin tablet about three fingers wide, slightly wider than the shoulder blade area; and wrap it around so that there is no movement at all of the tablet in any part of the shoulder blade, if you reinforce it tightly with linen ties; then maintain strong restraints on it every year until the fracture heals completely within 27 years or less. And once these steps are completed, when it is moved and loosened, be careful because this does not involve bones that move easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes before and does not point outwards, then make it subside, and heal the fracture in the dislocation; do as we have said about the shoulder blade fracture.
from the fracture of the fracture.
invenables cestant voie meves, et quin ansentle itaimes la. Et alainme devisi theoromes vat legeant: "itain'safemens devisionne.
And the restoration is that the patient should lie sideways on his two shoulders, and a stick is placed between the shoulder blades, then presses the shoulder blades, and brings together the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly apply equal pressure to all the maneuvers you can do, so that the bone' bon appears as it should; then place on elevated plates or salts above the sternum, or another lighter substance, and wrap in one cloth, and the blood under the bone is prevented from moving; and turn the joint back to its natural position, and hold firmly without causing pain, and reward each hour of labor, and if it softens, so you hold; and if it needs dislocating, by corrosion or pruritus that comes on the surface, or pain or abscess, then hurry up, and dislocate it, and address to him who has done similar treatments. Then reseat the plate until it is sound again.
The break of the ribs.
The break of the ribs does not occur due to their size after the back and in front, but rather because they are hardened; and one feels well about this inquiry.
And the treatments are that you apply equal pressure to the break, if it needs; and then place on an elevated board, and hold with a stick, if you have experience with this.
And if the break of the ribs is descending in front, then the patient feels great pain and pressure like pleurisy, as the bone pierces the flesh; and on one side they push and vomit a large amount of blood, which is very harmful sickness, and the old ones used great force.
And if there are some who say that it should be administerited with foods that swell the stomach to push the break further down.
We do not do this at all, unless it is a case of abscesses that have come to us. And if it comes, then he will be well.
And none of them put on cups to the joint, because they think it suctions strongly, and that is seemly; nevertheless, there is doubt about whether the cups draw away the excess at the joint due to its weakness.
And none of them think that the joint should be covered with moist linen in hot oil, and a tent is placed between the ribs to make the blood accumulation even, then either treat for pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain from the bone that does not pierce the flesh, doubt arises in the patient, then it should be split above the broken ribs with some instrument to guard the fracture; and then treat with plaster bandages with rosined oil on top of it; and cure while treating this wound whether it needs treatment, and if abscesses come from that same coste. And when the patient lies thereupon.
The break of the ribs.
Caut :il (Ogustre lesquels levesent. And Ile à pepe :loutrofein thevé leu peop2esu outlet meainglesaul,cumbre encompraises. In Frenchmeanture. And when this happens to any, and you see whether he will be sound or not, if you notice his hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, it hurts; therefore he is mortally afflicted in various conditions, and if he remains still and feels well when we stretch and pull him, then you know that the joint between the bones is safe, and his painful condition can be cured if treatment is given.
And if it seems that the issue occurs in his backbone on the opposite side, and you see whether he is sound or not; if his vertebrae are softened, and there are injuries on their feet, and a forceful movement of his back causes hiccuping and vomiting with voluntary will; and when we have moved him onto his belly, if there is vomiting with voluntary will. And if he strains his back and wants to sit down, but cannot. You know that it is mortally afflicted: it does not labor in its cure.
And if this injury does not affect him, then it is a lighter matter.
And the cure is that if he has an abscess, you should treat it by placing rosette oil or egg yolk oil on his spine, soothing him until calm; then place him in one of those comforting restraining devices and bind him with a bandage, commanding the patient to rest there; and let him sleep without that part where he feels pain as long as he is sound. And if any bone is broken, it must be covered in its place; then set the bone, and gather the two sides of the wound if they are large with a bandage, and treat it with healing ointment applied repeatedly until sound; and when his shinbone is fractured, which we call "knee-shins," you must thrust your pouch into your left hand, placing it in your other hand's palm as much as you can manage, then apply the restraining device and the crane above, if you know how; then bind the shinbone, and treat the wound until healed.
from the break of the shinbone (referred to as "brise" or fracture in Old French)
Often the shinbone is broken, and if it happens, it's a slight diminution at the top; and they make him walk with crutches, and bring him to the physician, and pain comes unto the patient's feet, and swellings come upon which the bone has been fractured.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over, until it is on the fracture; and you know what the fracture and its shape are; and if the fracture is at the topmost point, then place it in the same way, as long as it maintains a natural form.
And if the fracture is long, or it inclines towards the sides, then make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of that fracture appears to you. And when you have set it in the same way, then place it on an iron or wooden stand, and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and use the patient's leg below the knee, as long as the alignment is maintained.
And command the patient to lie on his healthy side or back.
And if the abscess comes near, do not touch it, until the abscesses are calmed down, and place it on what we have mentioned before; then return to the restoration, and hold it as required, unless there is no further complication; this is how it should be done.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is the area between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder; if it is dislocated, then it should be restored according to one of these two methods: either placing a thick slab of wood in its place, following this form:
And place the two hands over it, and raise them, and see the patient's dislocation from above; then cut his arm to the wood in such a way that it bends at the elbow, and make an upright support of wood under him, and extend any weight or other things that are necessary for stretching it, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that it is supposed to lie on his back, and place the hand under its collarbone, then command the two ministers to color those who are in front of the fracture with their hands, and have the others do this throughout all parts, extending each part as needed.
And if the extraction seems to be further advanced, constrain a part of it under the fracture and above the fracture, and extend each minister'sup. If the fracture is near the shoulder joint, then place a stave in halfway between the scapula, and on the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the collarbone, so that it remains straight, and constrain itigre iesparolles.
And if the stone incises, do not restrain it within seven years, and place it moistly and rotten on a thin layer of oil until the incised stone is calmed; then you strain it, and the way to strain this so that you place the lump on the fracture, and hold the arm with the crutch, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breastbone; and spread the sheet, and restrain the crutch, and on the arm, so that the arm is straightened upwards, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use sticks, and place a larger and stronger stick on the fracture, leaving .i. distance of i. inches between each stick, making each stick so large that it passes over the fracture by .ij. inches from each part; then strain on the sticks as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the fracture, harder and less aligned.
And if you see the arrangement of the sticks and the straining, as we have said, when restoring the dislocated arm, and if you doubt whether the stone incises, then let it remain bound for seven years, as we have stated; then observe each .iij. year that the binding does not swell or fill at the joints, or the protrusions cannot reach the limb because it is too elongated, if you do so according to what we have said before.
And if no such incident occurs after .iij. years or more, let the dislocated arm rest on its back and have his hands over his stomach; place the crutch with .i. spikes of wool evenly distributed along it, and observe each hour every day to ensure that the dislocated limb does not move or become soft at the joints; if this is done by virtue of medicine and we have previously mentioned a piece of meat given as treatment in small pieces so that the meat be first absorbed internally. And when he begins to recover, it should take .xl. years for both the crutch and leg to be fully rehabilitated; then it becomes customary for the crutch and leg to be relieved and treated with warm baths and ointments to strengthen the skin around the joint. If the straining is unsightly and swolnious, let it take .l. years or .ij. months before relief can begin.
And of the fracture in the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fusee", one small, and it is that which teaches the socket; and the other large, and is in front of the small joint there; perhaps only breaks the big fusee alone, or the little, or both together.
When the small bones are broken, treatment is easy, and healing; and when the large ones are broken, it is a bad healing, and more painful than when both are broken together. If only the small one has been broken, then little extension will suffice, and equalize.
And if it is the large one that needs to be pulled more strongly; and extends on its finger, and raises the socket of the hand higher than the other, and the small ones should be lower than others, and either bend them towards themselves or their own finger, and a certain finger above him, so that the patient does not suffer any labor at all, then extend the ministers' arms to the part inside his hand, or to another point, and some other ministers to another position above. Then put the pins evenly according to its best form.
And if in the breakage there are pieces, place each one back to its joint; and if there is no deviation in the bending of that knee, then do it with a piece of wood, and set it as we have said before. This part of the text suggests treating fragmented bones by repositioning them into their respective joints using an implement like a stick or another appropriate tool. It emphasizes assessing whether the injury affects the knee's range of motion (bending) and applying corrective measures based on previously discussed methods.
And if there is an injury due to the dislocation, I have spoken of it with the individual master; take the treatment. In this context, the text implies consulting with or referring to a specific medical practitioner (individual master) for appropriate care and treatment when dealing with injuries such as dislocations in Old French medical terminology.
And if in the beginning of the restoration an attempt to remove the screws does not succeed, then bind one piece of linen made from rosette oil and wax; it should not be too hard nor too soft; and lay that piece by gently lifting until the screws are soothed. Then apply ointment with a large amount of powder mixed with beeswax, place the stones or pins, making one larger than others near the dislocation; and it should have variously placed stones: whether they are in one of the bones, or two (the term "ij" likely refers to 'in joint'). Always pull more towards the dislocation rather than elsewhere, as we said at the beginning of the master'ayer; and make sure that the linen pieces near the dislocation are neither too hard nor too soft. Make the thread with linen, not too thick or too thin, like what we have mentioned earlier. And reward the limb and tendon after some time. :meilleur tithes.aure ailte citéiage. Thex. Itun's.comme le monde. Thisene:0:
lentecelle deyngeriflesxueltifferre ( iauxellet if13revelle
And if none of these things that we have mentioned does not come to the patient, then he will be freed within twenty years; or at least seventeen, then he should unbind his arms from his neck, and make them even on both sides, and guard against movement and stiffening, and sleep on his back; and you know that this breakage is restored in thirty years or forty, depending on the compositions and constitutions of its virtues.
The break of the hand.
You know that on the back of the hand there are few breaks, and it does not come but many bends.
And when the hand bone is broken or bent, it must be carefully turned in front of him evenly; then he places his hand on a stretranse, and extends the broken bones, making them equal again while they are well joined; and apply bandages and splints if there is no movement, and put a board according to the amount of displacement; and it must be wrapped in one sheet of linen.
And if the break is near the edge of the sole of the foot, make a sponge with cloths, and instruct the patient to pull it out from his broken sole; then stretch a long sheet, and let the splint be as sturdy as the patient' bonnie feet, and hold it firmly in place, just like how it should.
And if the break is at the distal part of the hand, it must be put a board above it and another in the sole of the hand so that his hands are lifted upwards and straightened out, then bind the two sides together throughout the entire length of the hand.
And if the break does not occur in any of these ways that we have mentioned, and it is in the pouches, then make them even; and bind with the sole, and if you see a small straight board to elevate the fracture so that it doesn't move again; and if the fracture occurs in other places such as the index finger or one of the others, then make them even, either all tied together, which moves well, or on a piece of wood like a pouch; and take care in restoring and positioning the limb properly, and guard against any that come back, just as I have said.
The broken collarbone.
The bones of the collarbone are often broken, and when she turns in front and behind her; and the restoration is done by binding one piece above it and another underneath. And the patient sees his face, then stretches each minister to its equal side; and it is when the fracture is in between the bones.
And if the fracture is in front of the root of the collarbone, make one minister towards his throat and the other around the break; or if it's in the groin, and thus either put the pins near their legs, and let them be according to his natural figure. Then apply a splint, and bind with the limb, so that it doesn' Written on November 2018:
And if it has an abscess cut, let it heal first before returning to your work and treatment; the incision is made in part manner. It must wrap around the fracture .i. sturdy band of .ij. or .iij., and in excess remove superfluous parts, then turn the leg so that the heel is at the root of the bruise, and insert a long string between the knee and thigh, behind the groin area, and fix one end to the bone above; then wrap around the leg and thigh with bandages, and place an upright support on the tibia bone; then cover the gap eight layers thick with linen soaked in oil for tightening the fracture; and as you move up along the fracture, loosening becomes less; when reaching .ij. to .iij. bandages placed above, and bringing back the string to its original position under the skin on the thigh, keeping the tension until it does not shift from its place, then let it remain as is, unless another sign appears such as swelling or bleeding.
And if it dislocates, and addresses the part where it comes from, as we have mentioned many times; and if there are pieces of bone that come off, you must keep them; and if one cannot retain them, then it is necessary to cut the skin, and extract them; and treat it in such a way that he is cured completely.
And never is the kneecap done in such a way that bandages are placed on it, as in splints or braces; all this restoration done in such a manner does not affect the patient's pain and injury at all.
And you know that the kneecap is restored within one year or less than a year, or more than a year, depending on individual variations in constitutions.
from the groin area.
You know that in the groin area there is often only a slight tear, but it folds many times. And if it tears, it's just a fissure or puncture, and affects all wounds, and this pain, and such sensation is quite tolerable.
And the restoration if it is set up in such a way that whatever is required for its proper functioning is maintained as long as it can move; then place the bracelet, and put an upright support, if you have mastered this, and keep the tension as required, then repair all other injuries we have mentioned related to fractures, as well as abscesses or any similar symptoms. And for each specific injury that it requires, so long as it heals completely.
from the leg's fracture.
And if the leg has two bones, and call one of them "mustelz", and the other apearly fracture as it comes to the arm, so muchoie restoration to be completely samearmes:
And if both bones of the joint are broken together, turn the leg from all sides.
And if one thin bone is broken, turn it forward.
And if the large bone is broken, if he feels great pain and sees well; then turn it inside out. However, afterwards apply extension, place it level, but still, the fracture must be ugly, and there are more pieces than the extension being smaller and lighter according to your will.
And once you have completed your work, take two ropes of woven wood that color the leg on one side and another part up to where the knee joints are above and below; then wrap them underneran and obervan around it, and tie in the middle so that the leg does not incline towards either direction, and thus it is well; and no one administers a bandage long from the leg, but if it has been dislocated, they put it back to guard against movement, and properly done, observe the place of injury where there was an opening in the fracture; and move it every day to see if there are any other accidents or symptoms; so cure until he is well.
from the fracture of those two bones (os dou piet)
For the ankle there is no fracture, but those two bones never have a fracture and in few cases it happens that movement under greater pressure occurs.
And if these two bones are fractured, and you see them protruding toward each other, put them in discomfort on the ground just like they would have gone flying; then place your joint over theirs, raise them up, now press them until they return to their original position with their ligaments; then use a supportive structure and weights above it, place a small cushion underneen the two bones, adjust the joint accordingly, wrap it in layers of cloth as needed for other necessary measures.
And after some time has passed, if you move the bandage, because you will find the bones level, whether they are fractured or dislocated.
:espace (old cafeilles. Itte pei's theuppe tol thexent. Iface : aire ape. AIDS. Ala fief decaum:age lain-faire arayle, lou pice, ascle.
And it is necessary that you never forget the other things I have said about injuries that we have mentioned before; and for each type of accident, do what it requires.
The breakage of the bone in the jaw.
When the bone of a woman is broken, if it swells up, then incline her back to the part of the spine and hold her by the rear; then fill her body with cotton, and put in as much as you would like; then raise the woman slightly and slowly, until the cotton reaches the entrance of the body, and returns the bone with its stocking; and when she wishes to piss, if the cotton is obstructed, remove it, and so do for about 12 years or more: this will restore the fracture. If you see a bladder of sheep's wool, tie it tightly around the puncture, and fill all of it with cotton; then blow into the bladder until the cotton has dispersed inside: the body will return to its former state; then leave filled for several years, as long as she is healthy.
And when the bone in the jaw of man or woman is broken, if it restores to that extent as we have said for the hipbone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and skill, and understand my book. For the breakage indicates more than one disposition towards the right path of healing: in other words.
In the leg, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and place the leg in it; then wrap it with cloth, and leave for two or three years, and it will heal quickly.
Of fractures with wound (open to the bone).
It is required for those who have a fracture with wound (open to the bone), especially if it is large like the hipbone or shoulder joint or similar; so that they are healed now, as our previous examples show.
And if the wound is healed, restore the fracture in that same hour or day when the abscess does not return; and if you do not have anything else, start to restore the fracture again during the same time period or year.
And if the abscess returns, leave the restoration for a new time period until it is calmed down again, not disturbing it at least one year or four months, because you may bring about a bad incident.
And if the bone is appearing above the exposed part of the cavity revealed, it requires that you place it more quickly and with less extension of your hands.
And if the extension does not aid you in putting it equally at your hands, and if the physician has this instrument of iron which is about 12 or 13 cm long; and its length depends on the size of the wound. Therefore, for every fracture treatment, and heaped up to be III or IV centimoc, as much as it needs in each case of breakage, and thickened in front of his operation, and wide enough so that it does not folow the bone to the compressing force applied pressure upon him.
. The French ous. Anderior;sic :"wairenque: entendure. Injury of frenchice toire.
And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, if the tool suitable for this purpose, whether it is an incision or a drill, then examine what causes delays in that broken bone and small fractures.
And when the bone is brought back, and it causes great pain afterwards, you know that it's not in its natural state anymore. If it remains thus for a while, then take one or two sponges soaked in black vinegar, and apply them properly to the area; do not put anything on the wound with oil or other substances unless you want to cause putrefaction and corruption. Then dress it as best as you have restored the bone, leaving the wound exposed, covering it completely according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound does not tighten around the fracture; and many times they tried this method with their patients, who either died or became corroded in some way. And make sure these treatments are more gentle and softer compared to other fractures.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that it may cause harm, then do not put anything on the sponges; instead wrap tightly with hard bandages around the area where the sponges were placed, and cover them again with soft bandages; but when after one year or two the bone begins to move back toward the wound, remove everything that has been applied to it so far, and put a healing ointment on the wound, as we have described similar remedies.
And it is required that you dislocate the joint .i. times a day, morning and evening, as long as it is healed and healthy.
And it is required that the limbs be brought back to shape in such a way that the broken bone moves slightly downward regularly.
And if for three days pass and the broken bone cannot be reattached but returns to its original position, you know that it has small fragments of bone; therefore, you must try to treat the wound carefully and remove all these displaced fragments, as they cause great pain.
And if an abscess or other form of corruption occurs at the site, you must treat it according to what is stated in this chapter by our teacher. And when the bone is broken and protrudes outward from the joint, as with shoulder or hip, or large limbs, do not attempt to treat it; many times die because they tried to do so, but leave it until it heals on its own; sometimes after twenty years or thirty, then care for the wound, if you can. And if you cannot care for it, let it be.
and those caused by salt (referring to complications from saline-based treatments).
We have seen many times after the healing of the fracture, mainly when it is near the joint, and it's terrible to see how the natural movements are affected in the limb; and sometimes it can no longer perform its natural functions.
. ici leser, it’s. Thees: andre. Ceterial: : “n[asius. Inaute soothenerge ofr paste:
When the bone is set and then moves weakly afterward in its misaligned limb, it can occur for various reasons: because it was too tightly bound, unlike what it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, preventing the normal circulation of fluids to the limb; or due to numerous fractures; or due to excessive movements that do not happen in its proper time; or because there is little blood in its body, and therefore it becomes weak.
And the cure is that you feed and make the patient's body weak, until its defenses are multiplied within it; you also give him baths, and bring joy and ease to his soul; then place pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, often causing arrows to come out of water, until the swelling returns to normal.
The twisted member after health.
When the members are twisted after restoration and the bone is broken apart, and the misformed limb is abnormal in all aspects; it does not naturally belong to its work: those who say that one must break the member entirely when new do not convince me, and many wise men have done so on our land; these treatments are blamed, and can lead to great harm, sometimes even death. However, if there is inflammation and torture in the limb, it should be raised with warm water or mollifying herbs cooked like ivy leaves, roots, etc., similar medicines; then take an emollient remedy, as well-made cayenne pepper, and grind musk lichen with linseed oil or pig fat, and apply the emollient to it. Or you could use fat figs ground with flour of chickpea, similar medicines that alleviate stiffness.
And there is no occasion to constantly rub and apply pressure on the limb for extended periods of time; rather, alleviate any movements in the member every hour.
And if the twistedness is old and hardened, like stone, it also requires to be osteered with iron so that it covers the bone at the subtle incision lightly; and apply compresses and study in its treatment.
This marks the beginning of the books on dislocations.
Dislocation is due to no joint remaining in its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb becomes poorly shaped, with the patient experienited great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs at any point, it must now be aimed to restore movement sensationally.
For if one delays, it swells, and perhaps may be set with pins to the joint; for he does not allow that it can move at all. Many times have caused fevers and other pains.
C100 avenant apres laisse leu: se desanre deffensee lou esprit aultes.
And I ordered the chirurgeons' treatises on dislocations of the head just pressed into place.
Of the lower teeth (mandibles).
It is rare for the mandibles to dislocate outwards and their displacement depends on: or they are a little piece of bone from their sockets, and slightly loose; or they are completely displaced, hanging down towards the chin, and it prevents them from holding saliva in the mouth, closing its mouth, and enveloping its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through various attempts.
And if it is complete and accomplished, it must be reset immediately, without hesitation or delay.
And in such a way that the minister inflicts great pain on the head of the malady, and thrusts one hand'suponning its root into the part of the dislocation inside the mouth if it is from any portion; and orders the patient to soften his mandibles, and move them from all parts.
And the minister places it back in its place, until it returns to its original position.
And if the reset is gripped, immediately both dislocated mandibles are brought together with warm water and oil until they are loosened slightly; without hesitation or delay, as we have said before.
And when they are reset correctly, and the mouth of the malady closes well and becomes softened, then cover it with a cloth made of oil roses and wax, and loosely tie its ends.
And the malady lies on its back, and his teeth are between two cushions, not allowing them to move to the right or left, without trying to alleviate with light meat until the pain subsides and the jawbones return to their normal position.
And then wash it gently as he wishes, and does not open the mouth to eat or drink until the jawbone is well-healed and sound again.
And if the two mandibules cannot be brought back to their original position within an hour, and are not converted again to their sockets, then they get fevers and habitual colds, and sometimes even suffer from stomach flu with vomiting.
And when you see this, then you know it's dangerous; and many times those who suffer from it have died within seven years.
of the forceps
The forceps cannot displace the lower jaw in its continuation and at the backside, and it is never displaced again, and he feels well with them.
And the restoration is that the malady lies on its back, and stretches his arms outstretched; then he presses firmly with his palm, and it returns; then he places it under the anvil, and holds it in place.
il leu lact.
And then they are brought back to the shoulder joint, when it is detached from its place.
Of the shoulder dislocation.
Separate it is dislocated only because of two actions: firstly, the dislocation occurs from the shoulder blade to its bottom part; and secondly, it happens to the top part. And occasionally it may be dislocated above, which rarely occurs.
And it is not dislocated backwards behind the shoulder or inside the nerves; and more often it is dislocated downwards towards the shoulder blade, mainly among those with little strength, because they jump hastily. Among those with sufficient strength, it jumps to arms and returns to arms.
And sometimes it may also happen in some cases due to impact or cracking, and the shoulder swells with a popping sound, and they believe that it is dislocated by that.
Therefore you must try to do it, as long as you are certain; and then start the treatment.
And is known when it goes towards the shoulder blade, and makes a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find manifest differences between them. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and underneayer the top of the shoulder as if it were an egg; and the sick one cannot bring its hand back to its neck, nor move from any movements.
And also, if it is dislocated at the top, it is not hidden, because you see it clearly at the top.
And this type of dislocation is not just about returning the shoulder to its place when it's new or if there's great pain and misalignment in the limb.
The method is that the physician lifts the sick hand at the top of the shoulder first, then moves it around underneath the blade and lifts the joint up to its original position forcefully; and the physician lifts the hand again, extending it above; if done suddenly.
And if it doesn't come to pass as we have said in the past days, then it is required that the sick shoulder be soaked in warm water. The physician must also arrange it gently with softening and soothing methods, similar to a decoction of honey and fenugreek in warm water, and treat it;
Then the sick shoulder is pressed against its back and a piece of linen equal to one foot in size is placed on the shoulder blade. It shouldn't be too soft or too hard, then the thumbs are put under the linen, lifting it gently at the top of the shoulder, treating the displaced joint carefully, and pull back the sick hand;
And other physicians may also pull the top of the sick shoulder if it doesn't move downwards. The dislocated shoulder returns now, and you see if they do so in this manner:
saufilicre. And other attendants remove the hand of the sick man towards his abdomen. And if the sick man's arm is too heavy, he does not hold anything heavy with it, and the dislocation returns now.
And the resetting is done in another way as well: and it is a long stick placed in the ground, so that the dislocated joints are also moved like a shepherd's crook, and not too large nor too slender. Then it is placed upon the sick man's body but with soft pressure on his shoulders, and the dislocated joints are long limbs; then the hand is extended to another direction, and the joint returns quickly to its original position.
And if it does not return by these methods that we have mentioned, then this treatment is made with an iron rod of two arms long and four fingers wide at the top to be inserted into a hole in the assegai according to this form:
Then he places the iron rod on top of the softened limb so that it does not injure the sick man, and puts it inside the assegai's hole in the dislocated limb; then extends his arms along the long part of the iron rod, placing the splint there, and at the head of the arm he places the splint, and puts a wide shaft under one of the handles of an oar that is broad, and stretches out the hands backward, and let the heart hang down in another direction; now the dislocation returns to its proper place.
And when it happens, in whatever manner it may be, you must place on the assegai's hole a spindle of wool, then apply to the splint some powder made from millstone (likely referring to medicinal herbs), with incense and olive oil applied all over the shoulder and chest area, then stretch out the splint around the dislocated joint, turn back the splint on top of the powdered splint, embrace the hand in his collar, and leave the hands hanging down so.
And it is required that you massage the area regularly until the limbs are strengthened, for it will heal faster; and then continue to massage after about five or six weeks, move the joint again, and if it remains firm and not soft, then it has healed.
And if the dislocation is strong due to moisture or any other reason, it requires that you administer cupping treatments for three punctures, as it would be done by an actual physician.
Et encize de laisseur :maelle apres les cheveille, as coloppeit out of the áscezue :sanspeise de laissime lexpressed in English on itmejourre:0ns. It'ses'sainute:r.iellatn: 12 :dé:old.
The dislocation towards the shoulder and the thighs, where it is caused by a push or extension of hands, and applied to another area; and treat it until it heals.
And if after healing the limb becomes injured again with subsequent movements, then it uses many times that painful bath until the dislocation is relieved to its original state.
Of the double dislocation
Cutting that the double joint is pulled and pulls back; it has been pulled from all parts, mainly in front and behind, and the dislocations are not restored because one can clearly see and feel them; and they are displaced according to each case. And when you join the painful joint with the healthy one, if it allows to see openly; for the dislocated joint is stiff and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you set it back again as soon as possible when the skin begins to peel off, because if the skin starts to peel away, it would be very difficult to return; and perhaps not even all of it can be returned, especially since it is at the rear; and this dislocation is worse than others in terms of pain, and sometimes this injury leads to death.
And the restoration is when it can be returned such as it were; extend your hand to its two hands; and spread his arms, and look at the joints of each finger according to their cost, both above and below, and bind the dislocation together in one place, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its natural position.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to its own hand, and proud of the root of the cost that has been displaced.
:esme : Aupon laisse, oun.
And when the physician joins the joint in the hand, if he does not anoint it with any oil to smooth the joint, then forcefully sets the joint, so that it returns properly as long as it recoils.
And when it is in place, if she places it on a wooden frame with woolen coverings, and straightens the limb, and holds down the arm at the malady spot, and lets it rest for some days, then releases it.
And if the joint is firmly in place, loosen it and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then restart the frame and the limb, and leave it for some days until it is securely set; then release it.
And if it feels cramped after the return of the limb's position, and it becomes stiff, bathe and rub it well, until it is relaxed; or you place a warm cloth on the joint, leaving it for one day and one night, then let the physician decide whether to give a bath or not. And when it sweats, rubbing the joint continuously, then replace the warm cloth, and decide whether to give a bath or not, doing this several times, until it is healed; and if you see, place fine moistened cloth with sheep's wool over it, and straighten the limb; if it returns to its original position.
The dislocation of the hand.
The dislocation of the hand joint is displaced, and its return is light compared to other joints so far; it must be brought back to place immediately, in our way that it returns displaced, or whether it causes an abscess to form under pressure.
And the return if you place the malady hand on a table, extend your ministers' hands, and make them hold it equally, so that he places his palm in front of the joint, and presses until it recoils.
Always, it is required that you check if it returns to its original position; therefore, place the patient's malady hand on a table with extension and return movements. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's malady hand on a table, and make him raise his hand to the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
If not, if the stretching of frames calming abscesses occurs, let it continue in this way until you decide to try again.
And if it cannot endure, and you are not able to put it back in position after some days, then the joint remains twisted.
and you know not that the patient's hands are softened, and cannot do anything at all: therefore, you understand that it is perforated veins or arteries; for no other treatment exists except to draw blood from near the swelling by cautery.
And when the hands are on the grounding piece, as we have said before, then strain and let it rest for a while, then loosen and leave it like this.
And if it cannot move well and there is no crack, then apply the water of fire heating, and rub until it becomes sound.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder joints.
There has never been the shoulder joint dislocation to any part of the hand, neither on the back of the palm nor on the abdomen.
Then it is the shoulder joints and reset the dislocation into your pockets as long as it relaxes, then support the head of the two shoulders, and move them towards the part where they are joined.
And let it rest for two years, and then set it again, as we have said before, and loosen it day by day, and make it move, and reconnect it, and do this often until it is tight.
And do the same with it if dislocated to the abdomen of the hand, and make it as you have done before until it becomes sound, and do the same if dislocated elsewhere.
Double shoulder dislocation.
When both the shoulders or the neck are dislocated, there may be many of them if there is no treatment, because death hastens the patient with such maladies.
And the signs are that he voluntarily makes a stance that he cannot hold, and many times become weakened with no member holding firmly, or the two hands or both arms.
And many times the hip joint moves with four parts; that which moves in back is called "gilbo-osteosis."
The treatment is that if the "gilbo-osteosis" comes in childhood, there has been no cure nor recovery for it.
And that which falls or is struck by blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment have said by great words, and they do not gain much advantage in all this.
But I have applied it according to my intention, and have formed remedies in various ways.
I say that the "gilbo-osteosis" which does not heal well in the flesh.
And also this one that comes directly to two corners, and cannot be cured by the feet which come from behind, as I have said;
and it is that the patient's painful parts are stretched over his face in one level, and have no strain on them so they do not break;
then place a straw in the ground shaped like the chief, and another for the legs, and bind a band around the openings between the sores of the patient, and another for the joints, and the thighs, and the knees;
and divide them into two groups, one to the straw in the ground and the other to the legs among the same straws;
and be well closed, the straw as we have said, and put his palms on the shaped spine so that it regains;
And if it does not improve with this treatment, then take a cradle of two arms long, and fasten on the side where it appears, and put the painful part to the side, and place the chief of the cradle under the shaped spine, then lay the cover of the cradle over the shaped spine; and put his legs on the other chief of the cradle, and press well so that it regains at the place; if you see, then let him turn the wheel by hand.
and place two straws under the painful part with one arm long, and to each of these other two straws, put between them a hand span away from each other.
and in each straw place one hole or the wheel turns therein, and make them firmly in the ground so they do not move; between these two straws, place another turning straw, so that when the wheels turn, they can turn it, and have in two-and-a bonny little straws of a hand span long, for turning the wheel.
and then bind the band among the openings of the wheel towards the chief straws, and another bond to the other two straws at the opposite wheel, and each minister turns his wheel around the whole band equally as we have said.
And when it is equalized, then place a drying agent with some oil on the openings of straws and fire brands, and then the healing tablet of two feet long, which cleans the back part of the patient's spine and healthy joint from corrosion, and bind it together as we have said, and use the painful parts with subtle grumbling until they are well.
and if nothing happens at the end of healing, then it is required to administer mild and soft medicines with the tablet that we have said before; and never once administer a lump.
and there is no appearance in the back part of the spine at the back of the patient's body, and one should be cautious that it may be dislocations; for by reason of this bone appearing, we must not have any presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
hip dislocations.
:comme les poincts ence neuf.
And the knowledge of his dislocation within such that when joining the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens wider than the healthy joints, and he cannot double his knee cap with fire. And is the leg which lies near the incision hot, for that the joints of the hip come out.
And the sign of those who it happens to him, this accident is contrary to these beforehand.
And the signs of those who it happens to him beforehand, for they are well with their leg according to completion; altogether, he does not double his knee cap with pain, and if one tries to make him move, he cannot do so, and retains urine, and swells the angel, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of those who it happens to him behind, for he cannot expand his knee cap and double, and that leg is more tore than the other, and the angel is softened, and the hip joints are at the base of the flanks.
The return of this resemblance of dislocation is that the dislocation was already there, and it takes according to its arrangement, where there is no treatment; and it does not require any presumption on our part.
And in that the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of four types of dislocation, if you quickly turn the joint back to its place, and put it inside and outward, and the movement goes to the right and left; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it requires one of the strongest ministers, and you must hold the leg strongly with two or three straps that are tied above the knee cap; and other ministers extend their hand in part so that they push down on the patient'gon soles, then they squeeze with a strap above the hip joint; and others hold the head of the strap.
and extend upwards and downwards all at once, so that the sick person is raised off the ground once, and then left hanging.
This method of extension is common to these four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned in this manner, it is quite well as we have said.
If that is not so, then it requires treatment for its type. When the dislocation is at the base of the hip, it must be supported on the patient's side, then a strap above the root of the hip joint, and the strap below the angle of the hip, and then they are placed high towards the hip joint, and towards the muscle.
then another ministers their arms, and hug the large part of the sick hip joint, and extend it backwards to its original form: if it returns now to its place; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot huddle it in this manner as we have said, then it must be tied together with a strong strap on both feet of the sick person, and above his knees, and the other injured leg is extended more than the others.
:comence aspeakre non-leu salle morcegustraie dexin thegere injuscript in theitens oun:nonnent. Theobserve ofr ittractsouller,later, lor. I'mons fromme:er lacte a mandeur (thewoman. Itteletre lege fromenturea frommaltois. Fromteri10x: ​eat deit incisiveyte,sic: theorelvesse tocause.
And when the dislocation is to be set, if it causes great pain as we have said in that which has bumps on the malformed leg, and straighten firstly the misaligned part of the leg itself, and also the foot.
then place some heated irons on top of the head and other parts of the limb inside the malformed leg, then insert a hot iron between the joints to restore its shape. and plant it on wet linens to prevent the malformed limb from bleeding, then extend each muscle towards him, and he places an equal amount of dislocation in his hand.
If it returns, that is good. But if not, place it on a flat surface and press it in the same way as we have said for the bumps on the malformed leg, and apply pressure to the healthy side of the injured limb.
And when the dislocation is present, it must quickly extend the malformed leg and according to what I have said; put his hand on the painful spot above the malformed area, then press with the other hand towards the groin below the knee.
And when the dislocation is set, it does not need to extend the malformed leg forward or lift it up on the ground, but rather keep it in a similar position as if we have described how to lie down after a dislocated elbow; and stretch it over his chest, and the leg is extended as we have described before, and it must be pressed on the joint to the table.
and when the painful limbs are extended to be equal in length, then adjust the kneecaps, and place a brace on it, and tighten the bandage so that the elbow does not move.
and if it rests for two or three years, then release it, and place the brace on it; if you see that they are equal in length, tighten as before, and let it stay for three years; then remove the brace, and allow the limb to move freely, as long as the limbs are comfortable.
concerning the elbow dislocation.
The joints are dislocated according to three ways: that is, in and out, and backwards, but not forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the kneecap, and if it does not touch the kneecap, you know that he is dislocated.
and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit right, extend his leg if possible, place your back on his kneecap, and put him on his feet.
then take his elbow with your palms, and pull between your arms, then bend the two sides of the elbow joint properly; and another minister extends the patient's leg until the joint returns to its original position, and signs that he can move his kneecap easily.
and apply the bandage to the kneecap, and let the leg be straight for two or three years, then release it; and do not make the malformed limb move as long as the limbs are comfortable.
And if the malformed hand is not toge, et quant les .iij.revele ices les evesque li a malaides plores: "O"mantree aultres enceins que n'tous la tels quelses. Iliau devisible entouren leaiclaurainces demeans :sures, et il. Leu itaims toire andreisle meats. I'er thetistrom aureges aoutilite: "baldin.
of the dislocation of the toe
The toes are never fully dislocated, and they return quickly afterward.
And the signs indicate that the knee is inflamed, and attempts should be made before the part where it has dislocated:
The return of the reset should be done quickly, and one must extend their hands quickly only when they are dislocated:
And when it is fully dislocated, it must be that the patient lies down straight, and they are given .i. ministers (medicine) by mouth, above the ankle of the leg:
Then carry it with you in your right hand, and then again in the left for two times, then lift it up, and let the medicine flow down from the upper part:
And do this two times as we have said, while stirring the medicine and carrying it; if it returns, that's good. If not, since it returns again, repeat the procedure:
And if it cannot return in this way, then have the patient sit on his back on the ground, and firmly insert .i. stick (a type of splint) between his legs, and cover him with a blanket so that he does not injure himself:
Then put the medicine on his thigh, and apply another medicine either to your hands or to a strip that you tie underneits of the poultice: Then stretch each medicine evenly, and place the stick between the thighs of the patient to hold him back when you lift him:
Then put the medicine evenly on his hands, and apply another medicine to the healthy leg above the dislocation, and it will return soon:
And when it is at the right point, put the poultice and stick on top of it, stretch it out, and wrap the stick under the leg, warning those who are above the ankle not to make the rope too tight:
Then leave it for two or three years if the rope loosens, and then remove it after one year or quarter, allowing the dislocated limb to return gradually over four years: And if this does not last until the end term, it is still safe that it hasn't dislocated again yet.
And if an abscess appears on the arse comes up, it must be that you soothe him, as we have said elsewhere, as long as he is healthy.
From thereon:
When the dislocations are present, they must be extended slowly and steadily with minimal effort; it is a simple thing: This reflects an early understanding of joint realignment where gentle manipulation was emphasized over forceful methods, aligning somewhat with current medical advice on handling dislocations.
And if the dislocations are in no part of the body, it must be that you place the patient on one flat surface or on an entire table straight, and put your poultice over those joints which open up, pressing firmly until they return. This advice appears to align with a rudimentary method for treating dislocations where the limb is positioned in such a way that it can be naturally realigned: In this context, one flat surface (presumably meantime table in ancient practice and medicine prescribe by ailments as noses in .i.e.
sesjèrre ajustre desk :eraièl’aissèlater.iage, theese andurge,lescripture.alere ofx'sisjour 2ere.ère:seer. Alligives it:ère:respectsage.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation and one attempts to restore it, many times the misery leads to death.
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you know little of the art and have used it for a short time, and if you are humble and merciful and do not rush - then be not bold.
And at the beginning of calming measures apply cold, and leave it to God for the patient if there is no hope of health. And when you see hope, then straightaway reposition the limb to its place so that the joints become loose.
And when the limb is set in place, if you apply calming measures and care for the wound as it requires, with dry ointments.
And if there is a break due to the dislocation and small bones are displaced, and handle the bones and do as we have said in simple diseases.
And keep from entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is by your creator's will and for the sake of your preparation and courage. Amen.
