Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science and together with its fulfillment and at its end through its exposition and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this section, which is part of the work on hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and employed everywhere entirely, it has been completely forgotten except for small descriptions found in ancient books where hands have moved them. And thus comes the mistake and arrogance, with minds closed and wisdom forsaken.
It seems to me that I must revive it fully according to the treatment of exposure and diagnosis, as well as abbreviation; and come together with the forms of cautery instruments, and other remedies of work along with adjustment of preparation if necessary.
And because no good masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned. by and ou bonte;sso ça que t1: s.
And thus says Hippocrates that the one without a bandage is much worse, and with the hand is little; especially in the art of surgery.
In the introduction of this book, we tell you that those who do not heed the things previously mentioned should be wary lest they err and kill people; therefore I have often seen many of those who involve themselves in this knowledge abandon their sense and experience.
For I have seen a madman who cut an abscess of scrofulous glands or neck in a woman and cut her arteries therein, so much blood issued out that the woman died between his hands.
And see one other healer who treats a stone from a man of ease, and the stone was large; it took with him a part of the bladder, and the man died inside three days.
And I had already been called to extract it, and see the position of the patient and the size of the stone, and if one were to cut into it, he would die.
And see one other healer who took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound; and the ignorant physician moved the fracture onto the wound as close as possible without touching it with a scalpel, and left it in this state; and commanded that he should not remove it. And so it remained until the leg fully healed and the foot came to ruin.
I am called to come to him, and have been hurried to come unfasten the leg; and when I see it dislocated, then he was at peace and felt no pain.
But in any case the corruption was already confirmed or the limb, and it could not be healed; and the decay continued to spread through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
And behold a different physician who collapsed an abscess that became inflamed due to the illness of its lordship.
the et; (c.
And therefore, esteemed son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, in places where there is danger and various methods; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and risk.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the wise men cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms with caution and courage, embark on the treatment of your sickly ones firmly yet gently, and choose the best path so that by God's grace you come to health and are glorified; and let go of diseases that cause great affliction in hope for better well-be groomed weapons, and have confidence in yourself so that you can come from this world to another one of glory.
Gallens says in one of his warnings: "Do not take poorly the treatment of illnesses, lest you be called mad doctors."
I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire and medicinal cauldrons of ague, and it's ordered from the head to the feet; and forms of humors, and iron implements for caustication, and all that is necessary in operation.
s, and:
The third chapter is on restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things; and it provides instructions down to the fingers, and shapes of splints.
Thus we recall our work, it is necessary that I describe the nature and harm of each constitution.
I say that the nature of aid and harm is characterized by lengthy words, subtle science, and secret wisdom; and on this topic, many wise ones speak and agree with it; but they lack my few words, for I return to its essence.
I say that fire cautery helps in all conditions where there is matter; for two kinds of conditions: namely hot condition with material, and dry condition without material.
In both hot and dry conditions together with matter, some advise that fire cautery is greatly helpful; while others say the opposite: that fire cautery does not help diseases arising from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated for hot diseases caused by heat or dryness, and those who say otherwise claim that fire provides great help in treating hot and dry diseases affecting the human body. When you examine the body of the man and his moisture to its nature by fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it never once through experimentation.
and they can's:0 by  Jum; s: they do:. And all healers gathered and agreed on the use of fire cautery.
And know this, my son, that fire cautery is a secret of healing and has greater kindness than burning medicinal caustic.
Ou li desmedical knowledge, then cure the cautery of medicine is fire and les poinz comme maint, soigne est caust estreation de healment at cauter it cile: they are medicines et que ne est. Est oint. And treatment by they s in themes, for paints you dose, as cure it medical treament of fire, the lese medicine, then c.
Ardent remedies come from one limb to another by transmitting, and they bring about serious diseases in the member that require difficult healing; and sometimes it kills the patient.
The blood due to its heat and the goodness of its nature does not do this unless there is an excess.
And this is what I have found through experimentation and by the long service and study that I have put into this art, and it pertains to the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from being lengthy with my words, as I do not wish only to take from you the secret which is revealed or written here, and the quality of work, how it counteracts the diseases of the body, as the philosopher has said in demonstrating; therefore receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, when to perform cauterizations, they seek advice from learned men.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all cases, because the harm occurrheness occurs without the aid of the cautery; and especially if the cautery is for urgent painful pains that cannot be borne until a greater evil comes to the limb.
so qu’es:t the li est not c they ne lier de crowe pudres that and snoit ondle them:
And it may be that the disease occurs at any time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; and are present in him excesses acquired through consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are applied where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and other things, so that no more pain returns; but this happens seldom.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last of medicine, and that is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are after medicine, their understanding is false, and cauterizations are the last of medicine because when we administer treatment methods for any illness and they fail, then we apply our cauterization, which works. Then it is well understood that cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of some people.
The ancient ones said that cauterizations using an instrument of gold are more effective than those made from iron, and they did not consider copper to be equivalent due to the quality of gold and the superiority of its substance; they stated that the wound caused by cautery does not cause pus, but it is indeed true as I have tested it myself, finding that it is true in some men; gold cauterization is more effective than iron, as they claimed.
And even when you heat the gold instrument, it does not retain its warmth due to the color of gold, and cools down quickly; if overheated, it turns red-hot; thus there are enough obstacles.
And for this reason we use fire cautery because we have found its application to our work useful.
Now I have ordered this chapter from head to toe, so that the path may be easier to find.
The olive oil caustic
These cauterizations are for moisture and cold in the brain; those which are done due to a disease called "soda," and by many humors descending to the head, ears, causing numerous dreams and pain of teethache and throatache, especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, stroke, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
the f
And then make the patient sit with their legs crossed between your hands, and place their hands on a support; afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his neck between his two eyes; where it comes to your thumbs, press until it bleeds and then heat the cautery called "olivare," which has this form:
And place the leu with ink, and draw while gently stretching your hand little by little; then lightly lift your hand, and mark where you see a small bone hole; if you do not see it, continue cauterizing until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take some wax, and place soft cotton inside it, and put it on the leu; leave for three days; afterwards cover with burred cloth; let heal until osteogenesis occurs; afterward treat the wound with anointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healthy.
And if said by ancients that the more open wounds linger, the better they purify themselves; and thus it helps with healing.
And some say that one must thoroughly clean the fire cautery if a part of the bone is burnt, and then repair what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
And they say that one must thoroughly clean the fire cautery, and press it as hard as a woman's belt buckle to expand the bone wide enough for the humors to be released from; and one should leave the open wound long-lasting; afterwards one should cleanse and bind.
by the:
From the pain at the nape of the neck to severe headache
When there is chronic pain throughout the head that lasts for a long time, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie", as well as emesis of head and oils and plasters; if one performs the cautery we have previously mentioned, it is ineffective.
Be aware that the patient's head is of a strong nature and not too cold; then one should perform cautery below the previously mentioned cautery, just as we have said above.
the.
For both fire cautery of the head When sudden pain occurs in the head and the disease extends to the entire body, and the skull is purged with cleansing medicines, and other remedies have been applied as previously mentioned for various diseases, but none work: then one must perform cauterization according to two methods - using a cold medicine or fire.
The cauterization using cold medicine involves selecting a piece of alum, removing the coating and peeling off two small pieces from its surface; then you place it on the temple where the pain occurs so that you can reapply the alum under the skin; once placed, make sure to keep and secure it well for twelve hours. Then release it and treat the wound with oil, leaving the sore as such for three or four days; afterwards, apply cotton balls dipped in butter until pus is formed.
After the treatment with ointment until it is healthy; and if you see, apply some of the burning medicines that I have written or mentioned in treatise dealing with burning medicines.
The fire cautery is as follows. Heat the cautery of which this shape is:
And it is called "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. protrusion at the top and inside there appears a small hole; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron a bit until half of the hair that covers the skin turns red; then remove your hand so the artery does not burn further behind, and let out abundant blood.
After applying cotton soaked in oil to the wound, and placing it over the area for three days; then I put cotton mixed with butter, and afterwards treat the wound with ointment until healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare', at the tip only, and avoid covering the artery in this area as it is not an old injury.
Migraine
When you are treating a migraine as we have previously described in divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and observe that the previously used medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the 'cultellare' caustic until it becomes white; and place your hand on the sore area for half an hour long, gently lifting so as not to cover the artery or reach the bone. Be cautious of the jawbone moving when chewing, and that the nerves do not deviate towards pain and spasms occur in a patient; be wary of bleeding from the artery once it is covered, which can cause great fear if suddenly cut off without being noticed or tested. Leave the organ halfway through; but I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery has been covered, and show you where it opens in this book.
If you see that these cauterizations do not ease the illness and the patient suffers greatly, caution them in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; if you see this, administer the cauterization we have mentioned or the extraction tool for arteries, with a cauterizing instrument that has two blades; these cauterizations are better than those ones and more helpful.
From the pain of ears caused by coldness
When pain from coldness comes to the ear, and we have applied soluble medicines and other treatments as mentioned in the division, and the pains do not cease, then heat this cauterizer called "points," of which here is the form:
After pinpointing all around the affected ear, where both sides hold pain, and moving slightly above the base of the ear after finding the spot through touch; and place six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healed cleanly.
Regarding the torment of the mouth
The torture that must be treated with fire is only those caused by humors, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply fire to cases resembling itching and blackheads of pores.
When treating this type of torture which involves the vapors of insects and cleansing of the head and gargling, if it is ineffective, then you should caulk with three burns: one at the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and the third near the corner of two lips; place the cauterizing instrument on the healthy part, causing the burn above a bit below the tip of the ear, and another along as long as a finger's length on the temple. Leave the caustic until half the hair is burnt off; this is the effect of the caustic.
And this type of incision we have discussed before is slightly more subtle, and the knife should be slightly larger; then treat it as I have previously explained until healed.
When treating apoplexy as we have said before and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you should caulk with four burns: two above each of the two corners of the head, one in the middle, and one where they are called "vasicles" as we have previously explained; and thereafter place a cauterizing instrument on the mouth of the stomach. And treat it as we have said before.
From lethargy
This disease requires giving the patient large years and purgative pills to cleanse the brain; afterward, apply all over the head of the sick person an eucalyptus plaque that is written about in treatments for plasters; here is how you perform the cautery: do as I have instructed.
If it is thus, well done; and if not, then do 3 cauldrons above the head descending to the collarbone, with two inches of space between each cauldron; treat as with others (referring to plasters), and if you see an adhesion, make a cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, place 2 other on the tips of the horns, and treat until healed as before mentioned. The cauldrons referred to are called "olivare," as I have previously explained.
From coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be warmed with wool as we have previously mentioned; after reassuring the patient, then apply fire caustics on the head and at each point, and one behind and three over the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the illness is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; leave until the most red skin appears, then relieve your hand; after curing so that it becomes healthy again, let the caustic called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned be.
Of epilepsy
The epileptic should not use a strong fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and first it is necessary to purify the brain with herbs and other treatments we have described in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical treatment.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, let them do gargling and chewing to purify the brain often with bone meats; afterward, they shall have their head shaved closely, and .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessels, and on each horn; and if the patient is very ill and suffering, let them receive cauteries as I have described for one who has paralysis and softening of limbs, above the spine along the back and neck, with olive oil cautery according to my instructions.
If it is a child patient, they shall receive a subtle cautery as follows:
When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted moisture and large phlegm, then one should apply our described fire cauldration on those with paralysis.
And if caused by melancholy are the diminishing excesses leading to melancholy, and the body is a weakly moist corpse, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be clarified, as determined by its status in the classification.
After healing the head of the sickly; after making .i. patch well made, as if a circle, put it in the center of the head; and let the patient be crossed and held secure from all sides; then apply the liniment, and rub with butter of old sheep; and warm up the bandage on fire quickly so that the patient can tolerate blowing air through it; after emptying the circle inside the head, leave to cool; and do this to each sickly one once a week with other good governance until they are healthy.
When you see the need to cauterize, do so in various ways throughout the entire process of cauterization. This method of cauterization moistens the brain evenly; then place a cloth soaked in butter and fat on geese on it.
For the healing of the eyes Firstly, address the issues with the eyes as I have described in the division; then begin by having the patient drink things that purify the mind and guard against all dampness, and make them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
After the command to lift his head again and perform a cautery in the middle of his forehead, make two cauteries on both temples where the nerves are located together or separately; cover all veins and arteries from under the skin with the entire length of the temple; be careful about bleeding. If too much blood is seen to flow, then stop as best you can.
And I will teach you in extracting the artery and making an incision, as how to stop it; never do a cautery or ligature under either of the two bones behind.
Doubtless this refers to "douleurs" (pains) associated with the body. Perhaps a mistake in transcription, and should read "douloureux".
When tears are ancient and customary, appearing near veins or close to arteries that are visible above the forehead; and it is seen as cold foul-smelling humors, then perform the caustic treatment I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter: one on the head, two each on both temples, and two behind both ears; and if more is needed, cauterize carefully just above the eyebrow with a small caustic.
Throughout the body's tears flowing into the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three doses of strong beer; next, perform a caustic treatment or oil caustic on his head, and do two "clavilis" (small hooks) cauterizations above the eyebrows, one slightly below the hairline; and take care not to injure the artery. And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavis":
When the parchment of oil is softened by illness and moisture, then apply the cauldration from this fire cautery called "olive". This is its form:
And if you see two cauteries on the two scars as long as they are like eyelids; and do not remove your hand except when one-third of the parchment is burned, according to the manner I have described.
by:t; At no time do the hairs of the eyelids turn into scales, and they prick the eye, which is treated with caustics in two ways: that of fire or of burning medicines.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Once they have grown and are even, then the patient should be placed in bed; place a figure on their eyelids such that it is like the feather of myrtle, with the beginning sign near the hairs; then put cotton wool soaked in egg white and musk essence of pine under the eye, then apply the caustic as shown by this form:
After causticizing the affected area that you have treated little by little many times, let the skin be scorched at the spot; and signs of healing in the wound are when you see the paper retracting, and hairs standing to the height of an olive; then gently touch with your hand, and leave like this for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the scalded area is discharged; afterwards apply ointment until it heals.
And if after this the hairs appear, and the paper is softened as before; then resume the caustication at the same spot; and if the hair has fallen out, then causticize until the skin rises to its natural place, and it is even, and does not touch the oil with the hair.
The cauterization of burning medicines commands that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make parchment in the form of a bay leaf; then take French soap and lye each one ounce, and grind them well together quickly so they do not cool off, then heat it onto the form as per the bay leaf, and put on the paper; and if the disease is only in one place, work on it once; and also both. And put cotton ball into a cup of oil; and let the patient's head be healthy again, and your two hands pressing to the medicine, and press every time that the patient feels pain from the medicine, for he feels like fire. When you have done this for some time, administer the appropriate medication. And when the swelling has subsided, raise the affected area and check if it is raised as though lifted by heat or incision; if so, that's good. If not, apply more medication to the affected area or if the medicine hasn't worked yet, until your treatments are even, and your eyes point correctly; then cover with cotton-like butter until the scab is fully healed, after which you should dress the wound called "dyafenis" along with others, as long as it remains healthy.
And you must be very careful with your treatment to ensure the medicine does not get on the eyes. If later the paper becomes weak, and the hairs prick in the oil, restart the medication for that area as you did before; after which cure until it is healthy again; this is the form of mild fever:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this, so shall be your constraints; and let not the correct path be returned to those who have studied this art.
In treating a fistula by means of cautery.
When treating a f지stula as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and if your treatment does not yield results, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
e onli isntous. If;miches tant. <breste te la t – f
After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat the pus and dryness; and if it is closed, operate on the opening; afterwards heat the caustic well, and hold your hand to the caustic near the painless part above the wound, so that your hands do not go mad; then put the caustic in the oil fat, causing corruption.
If you start the cautery to the bone, it is best. If not, restart the caturere one more time, and if needed, leave .iij. days (three); afterwards put cotton cloth in butter, and apply drying ointment until healed, and after .xl. days pass that it is healed, apply corrosive medicine until the bone appears; then follow according to what comes in your chapter.
And there is a method of treating a fistula that the ancients did not mention. Consider the wound, and cut it open; then put in a subtle needle with this shape: They make it the quantity of half an ounce; and hold your hand or whatever firmly, so that the patient does not move in any way, until the fluid flows into its place; and it is fitting to put cotton moistened with this on the wound: if the fluid properly fills it, then there will be a marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, it is good. If not, you should administer purgatives and return the faster to its proper place on the body as needed.
For bleeding in the lips. Many times there occur bursts on lips called 'hairs', especially in children's lips.
How you treat these bursts as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment does not work, then apply a small incision-like fire caustic according to this method:
And apply haste in those bursts until they heal, then cleanse the wound area so that it becomes healthy.
; by themi;
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has been swollen and torn and become old and turns into a fistula; you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary to have a cautery according to the quantity of the fasters; after boiling or cutting the opening of the fistula, hold your hand until the heat comes to its end, and thereafter at rest; do this once or twice as we described in treatments, until it heals; if treated thus, it is good; but if not, you must uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your chapter.
By the slight movements of the teeth
When the gums are weakened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but does not help, then place the head of the patient into his health; after soaking the cauterization as described in a way to put a clamp on the tooth; and in haste the cauterize inside, and hold your hand until the heat comes from the root of the tooth; after remove your hand the clamp off, then renewing it. After wax the mouth cleansed, and rinse it with water; wash it away with aromatic herbs pour out the wine.
And in this manner the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the gums are softened and held still, and the infected moisture dried out.
Of tooth pain
When tooth pain comes from cold or heat, and the remedies of medicines are ineffective, then it is necessary to perform cauterization according to two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
byble;
The caustic of fire consists such that you grasp a vessel of iron or lead, and it is large enough so the flame does not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the caustic, from which the form will come afterward, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the caustic has cooled; do this often, for the pain will decrease that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of this caustic, and then remove it quickly; and this is the effect of the caustic:
When the scrofula is of cold humors and does not obey through medicines, then apply the fire caustic as described hereafter which comes from the form; and make two openings for smoke to exit from the caustic on the other part; and heat the caustic on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the edge of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply caustic according to its quantity, and leave as such for three days; then place cotton wool soaked in butter until the scab is shed. Then treat with oil ointments and bandages until healed.
When the moistures overcome along the ducts of the pormon (throat), especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first emptied through solvent medicines; after which perform caustic at the root of the throat, and ensure not to come near all the way to the throat or burn the skin but just slightly. After this, do another caustein at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine (cervical vertebrae), and it is the caustic called "clavile" as we have described before; then treat the area as previously instructed until healed.
Perform the treatment at the cauterization of the throat, or incisions, or if necessary, and as long as it is necessary incised (or lances) to be performed along the joints dou cervical spine; et s’il est plusors du pains ne. Et adonc et s’il sont cauterized dou chanfreux de la veuze au lieu dou painful; et li chiés, si nul que tu puet, ou se l'oeufs When all diseases of the pores are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweat, and the illness is ancient, for which two cauteries should be made in the roots of the hair; and another cautery within the armpits between the mammary glands; and there is the cauterization called "clavile" according to the form previously mentioned.
And if you see, make a cauterization by touching all the cauterizations called "points" of which the form is as before in the ear disease; and let the points be up to 30 or less than that. After curing the hair according to what has been mentioned before, there should be other cauterizations at three places according to this form:
And because these cauterizations are lighter, as you make them in three places simultaneously.
Of shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first address the dislocation initially. Afterward, soothe the sick person'angs on their back and sides; afterwards lift the core that is in the hollow of your left hand; and if the joints are dislocated, heat the caustic which has two points at its tip:
Et for the incision of the neck until it pierces to the clavicle, and there would be four incisions together with the cauterization; and that is why cauterization is done with the instrument having three spikes, so that the figures of cauterization are these four instruments; and the nerves follow according to the subtlety of a tent, which is the shape of the instrument with three spikes:
And at no time should it be approached near this one nerve because there are eight incisions;
After applying the instrument on the bruise with a slick, then make the patient rest, and do not move the limb for long times until it is well comforted;
And if it is dislocated above, little happens at first, then make a fire-cauterization on the thick part of the cauliflower, or many cauterizations by pinching. For the joint is repositioned, and bone moisture remains, and the patient feels relief.
Of the cauliflower-like swelling
The ancients said that for the swelling of pleurisy, you must make cauliflower-like root cauterizations in this manner: take the longest root of aristology that you can find and dry it; then cut it to be as thick and long as your fingers are. Grease with oil and hold over fire until cauterized. Make one large cautery between the collarbone and the neck, two small ones slightly descending on the part above the beard; two between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning back a bit; one at the navel, one just above the stomach, one between the two armpits, and one each on either side of both ribs. Do not press hard with your hand but make it as open as when smelling sweet things.
Some old ones say that no person should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then great pain follows, as we have said in the liver abscess. But in this kind of work there is fear or death for the patient now, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
Removing hair from the area with fire cautery can cause burning and discomfort to the patient, but it may also lead to quicker healing if done properly under professional guidance.
When treating the disease known to us as 'mice' and its divisions in wounds, if there is no improvement, then there are three methods of fire cautery that all work well.
There are three ways to do this: make iii. or iiij. cauters, lined according to the length of the wound, following the figure of the liver caustic that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, let it be turned off on its back.
And another way of cauterization is to use the caustic that has ii nerves, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; lift the head which is on the side of the wound, or where the left side of the patient faces, and perform elevations from which you remove the head according to its size, according to the length of the body, and let the caustic be applied according to the width of the body.
After igniting the ii nerves until the head is pierced on the other side, and then apply the caustic, so there will be iij. And if you see it, cauterize all of the caustic on iii nerves. Then heal after it has been swollen for a long time, and this means that the other treatments mentioned before are also effective.
Of dropsy
For cauterization is not for dropsy, except in the manner called "ascites". When you treat according to the methods we have described in divisions and your treatment proves unsuccessful, then it should be done with four cauteries around the belly, one on top of the stomach, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back above the spine, and one location on the thighs; and let the cauterizations be close to the area that needs it.
After opening the cautery, leave it open for long periods to eliminate putrefaction, and do not abandon treatment of the patient after the cauterization; healing will accelerate, and both intentions will be fulfilled with God's help.
The form of the fire cautery for the belly should be a skewer as we have previously shown; and that for the back should be oval-shaped, as it is set before.
From the swelling of the veins When the veins are swollen in someone who is jaundiced and filled with yellow bile, it should be treated by causticizing on the back between the little finger and ring finger; and raise your hand with the cautery turning. And do not go too deep in, thus you would squeeebore the yellow bile out, and make the cautery according to this form:
ceustroit that (tant t
Of a dislocation
When the solution of an upset stomach comes from coldness and moisture, while retaining and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are wasted away, and cannot be healed by ordinary methods; and you see a patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, then perform .i. great fire cautery on the stomach as described before or stomach cauterization, around which cautery circulates; and four delicate cauteries between the hips, all connected to one delicate caustic point, and two cauteries above the buttocks.
And if you see abundant moistures and the patient suffering, then perform fire cautery on the fingers, and one caustic point on each joint, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large ones, because it is beneficial when there is good assistance for treatment.
of treating swellings
When swellings are numerous or of some size, and they are old and composed of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and treated as we have described in divisions, but do not improve, then apply three cauterizations: one on the spine at the back, where it is just before the almecdate point and gradually becomes triangular; and one near the armpit with two fingers.
and if you think his stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one can see swelling on the face, then apply a large cauterization to the stomebefore as mentioned, and another to the liver, and another over the milt with all the cauterizations closed; and let the cautery stay open for a long time. Afterward treat the leg until it is healthy again.
of the cartilage called "theal"
When you reach the cartilage called "theal," if fatigue appears as though it is a scraper, and then set fire to the caustic so that it blazes upon this cartilage; let your hand and the caustic be near the birth of the vein until blood flow; for which there is relief. Do this once or twice, and if there is much fatigue, cauterize each one as we have said; after applying healing ointments so that they become healthy; and if you set a large caustic upon the cartilage, it will have greater aid.
of a wound improperly treated
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening wounds, we will discuss this in detail; if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
When a patient comes with an advanced fistula, filled with decay and spoiled moisture, you must cover the entire area thoroughly; know how much of the tent is full. After drying the cautery that appears like ash, apply it to the fistula according to the amount it entered, and start over with the cautery as long as the body remains rotten and corrupted, once or twice or thrice, depending on the quantity of fat needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and large veins. If the fistula reaches the bladder or intestine, be cautious of these leaks, and do not apply heat where it is tender, considering that they are not frank; after curing the leak so that it is sound, if the materials have been washed out for a long time, then know that the leak is entirely healed; and if the materials have not been removed, understand that the leak is seeped through, and corrupted at the source; thus as we will discuss in detail.
For the disease of the kidneps, first assess the symptoms and severity; then consult our medical knowledge for appropriate treatment. If there's an obstruction or inflammation present, proceed with caution and consider dietary changes along with specific herbal remedies to support renal function. When the pain of cold comes with great swelling and does not resolve itself, then you must make a cautery on both sides of the veins with the pointed cautery that we have previously mentioned; if we do this in the middle, there will be three cauldrons in line, and they will provide greater aid.
For bladder issues. When the bladder is heavy and cold with moisture, causing the patient to hold urine, then you must make a cautery in the area behind the bladamoor starting at the base of the hairs, making one on each side; and each should be as long as our thumb. Also do a cautery towards the back, or two if needed; and use the pointed cautery according to the previously mentioned form.
of the joint When the testicles are cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers (sperm) are corrupted with late endings; when they come, there is great pain: then it must be done as we have said of blistering around the scrotum, and two cauterizations before the spine; and the clavicle cauterization, as we have said.
of the thigh
byz.
And if these fire cauteries are not present, then make three large olive-shaped ones and place them in the same manner as all keys; and treat until they become healthy.
From thigh pain When pain comes from the buttocks of the thigh, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division and treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of large humors with foul-smelling pills or other good smelling pills.
After the fire cautery; and the manner of performing this cautery is in two ways: one involving hot medicines, and the other being the cautery of fire. The cautery of fire has many methods, among which is as follows: you make three triangular burns on the skin over the hip joint with a sizeable gap between each, ensuring good depth and space equivalent to the width of two fingers; the shape should be olive-like. Never perform a cautery directly in the middle of the top of the hip joint, as there are four such shapes following this method:
And if you see, when performing the burn of the circle as we have previously mentioned for hip joint dislocations; but make it so that the circle contains the entire hip joint and all sides are equally burnt.
And this is the way to perform it for sciatica when pain occurs in the hip joint and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and leg, then make two burns where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one burn above the ankle four fingers away; and the shape should be crescent-like, and the thickness of the joint should be as you have seen; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the second or near it. Then cauterize where he feels the pain .iii points or .iiij by the cautery called 'points'.
If it is necessary, if more are made; and if there is pain under the knee towards the thigh, perform a cautery at the caustic or circular one, and give good care in all your cauteries that you do not let them burn too much so as to avoid damaging nerves and large arteries, and causing further harm and contraction to the patient.
And I have seen others who performed cautery on the ankle with a stone, and they burned it so much that the entire leg was inflamed, as were the feet too, becoming pierced and corrupted throughout; after drinking from the stomach, he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on each one accordingly. // The wise men say for the hip caustic, here is the method, make a piece of iron as big as a small boat or slightly less, and it should be with intervals and from between to the other so that the quantity is like a lump of wax; the intervals are over two parts equally spaced, and they also have this form:
Ensure it is cooled until completely red and tender to touch, then place it on the bandage of the affected hip, and turn slightly towards the ribs; cauterize once with one cautery, leaving for three days; then apply a poultice of butter, allowing the open wound to remain exposed for an extended period; after applying ointment until healed.
Albuquerque says we use little of this cautery because of its appearance, and few people do it; nevertheless, it is a good cautery that one may suffer from, but where it adheres.
It causes great pain in the back.
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion, or from too much blood loss, or from resembling spread cold matter, of none of these matters does cautery hold value, except for those coming from an influx of cold substance.
After the patient has expelled fetid pills or other substances, place them on their back where they feel pain, for three lines marked with dots; and in each line, five caustics or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; make the caustic as per the one called "point"; if you see it, do three or four caustics on the middle of the clavicle as follows:
This disease often comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow chest when they lie down, and fear; you find in the lower spinal bone at the back and above it appears as with other vertebrae.
When you see this wound and examine it, then cauterize with a caustic cautery as follows.
If the caustic needs to be applied to each part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed caustic making two or three lines and being close together. After healing as previously mentioned, ensure not to place cauterization in areas that are near nerves.
For the pain of joints
When pain from joints is due to moistures that spread throughout the body, and when pain comes in the feet which people call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and remedies cannot heal it, then it is treated with caustics in this manner: make a multitude of caustics around the joint of the foot, and let the caustics be olive-wood according to this form.
And if there is need to grasp above the face of the foot, make a caustic for all the caustics that are called "point". And if pain comes near to joints and other joints, which often happens, make a caustic over each joint .iii or .iiii on each side, using olive-wood; and if more is needed, do so, but do not keep your hand too close until the flesh has scorched.
And if pain extends to joints and the back, treat with the caustic we have mentioned in our chapter. And if there is pain in the hands, make points around the groove .ij. lines; and if there remains no pain in the elbangs, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if pain comes to the edges or near the shoulders, causticize each part, and provide good care for the sickly and give them medicines. For if you take good care of it and purge phlegm, with God's help, they will become healthy again.
From the custom of sucking
When this custom occurs, and the bowels descend as if newborns, it is necessary that when you see them emerge from the body, they do not defecate on that day; and use things that aid digestion so that the fetus descends from the womb. Afterward, he sits on his back between your hands, and commands that you stretch his legs until the bowels are restored, and reset the dislocation at your hips, and insert a probe without the custom in the bone of the elbow, and with all signs resembling half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery which is described below:
Then stretch the bowels to their proper place and let them pass smoothly without difficulty. The assistant should wash his hands so they do not return dirty, and work well on the limbs of the patient, placing a pillow under the thighs, and a servant above the buttocks, as well as another between the legs which you hold with your hands; then place the cautery over the mark made by all your hand, and straightly and carefully until you reach the bone, and if you do not achieve it on the first attempt, repeat again until you succeed in reaching the bone. Be subtle that bowels do not come out when you apply the cautery; do not burn them; and prevent any harm or other illness to the patient.
When coming to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are in vain. It is necessary that children's cauteries be subtle according to their size and for large people also sizable according to their measure; after three days treat it locally with butter until the burn is healed; afterwards use other ointments until it becomes healthy, and allow the patient forty jars of rest on his back until the wound is well stitched; and ensure that its dressings be changed frequently so that when they attempt to rise from bed into chambeplets, the boils do not burst.
After forty days, when he wishes to get up, dress him with a well-made bandage, and keep it for another forty days; ensure good rest so that he does little work and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and shouting too much; then after this instruction, he will become completely healthy. And I shall now explain the treatment in his chapter regarding tailoring. Of abdominal surgery
When warts come in other bodies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then do the first cautery as per its quantity; and let it be third by measure; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should use caustic at three angles in this form:
But first sign the area around and make lines for the width above the wart; another one behind it, and place your hand over all the caustic completely. However, the first cautery is lighter and less painful.
From old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain lasts a long time, with medical treatment not helping, then it should be treated with caustery of fire called "points", according to the length and size and weakness and virtue and location of twists and its pain. If the first caustery is suitable, that's good; if not, start another caustery above it, as the custom dictates that it should move in the limb closest to the wound, so you must make the causteries until the patient is healed.
Medicinal treatment
Medicinal treatment should be administered with caustery to provide great assistance, especially in diseases that come from the putrefaction of moisture and melancholy. If you can see it being treated with cautery, take care if the disease is at its onset, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not hesitate; then make 5 causteries above the head: one in the middle of the forehead near the roots of the hairs, another at the end of them; two behind each temple; and one behind the back part of the ear. Leave your hand until the cautery reaches the bone, and keep it there until the scrapes come out so that the vapors of gross humors can escape; then causterize according to what is stated:
If the disease is spread everywhere and clearly manifests itself, it must be treated with fire as we have said before: one cautery to anoint each of them chiefly; another cauterization where you do not see; two cauteries on the spine at the neck's column, five cauteries on the spine along the back, a large one above the navel and another nearby it, two on both shoulder blades; two on each hip bone, two over each elbow tendon, one for each joint of the hands and feet, and over the palms' hollows. Beware of veins that lie beneath them so you do not burn them, nor make any cauterization above the bones of the knuckles, or on the stomach bone, or above the liver.
Know that the more fire treatments you apply, the more it helps and benefits them; understand that the sick person does not feel pain from the caustic as a healthy person would, because their body is already completely corrupted. It's necessary for the cauterization to be large or small according to the limbs and joints, depending on how you find them in handling of metals. After treating them with fine wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedeby until they are sound.
"de."
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it's not healed, then you make fire cauteries on the limb according to its size; the incision should be just slightly deep enough for inspection. Then treat with ointments until it is healed. Sometimes cauteries are made on the hand, foot, and back, where a nerve causes the limb to move, thus creating swelling; however, no one interferes unless they know about the limbs and moving nerves of the body.
In times past, there were certain individuals who could be found in various towns known as 'albaras', specializing in the treatment of wounds with their knowledge and skills.
When the disease called 'albaras' is advanced and all medical treatments are ineffective, then you should make a small incision with a cauterizing iron according to the quantity of blood flow; until healing occurs and color changes, then use flour paste and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaf juice, as well as pigeon blood and duck'cuajar de harina de haba y judías verdes con aceite rosa y hojas de planta de llantén; y jugo de carnero y sangre de ánade, una parte cada uno; y mezclado todo junto, y amarrado con un paño, y cocido al fuego hasta que esté sanado.
The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
When syphilis begins to appear, if you see it can be stopped, perform cauterization using the circular caustic around the entirety of the sore; and though some say that caustics are also done at its core, I do not think this is good, as I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen before. Furthermore, a more suitable approach would be to cauterize around it with the circular cautery we mentioned earlier in our discussion of various caustics.
Of the inflammation that cannot die down
When anyone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays dying or due to the excess that it causes or by the sour condition of the patient when they are very old (that is, too aged) and have little blood, or because of time; and you see them close to dying: then cauterize around with many small cauldrons by poking; afterwards let it be so. For it will delay dying.
And if you see the entire cautery pierced, heat the cauldron of which there is a hole:
And put your hand within the disease called "adubeleti" until the cauldrons have pierced their core, and make such cauldrons that the patient feels behind them in a way that the course of pus is directed. Afterward cure it as completely as possible when it is perfectly sound.
The healing of fire with iron
Another way to disease is called "corrodens," and it's nothing more than a swelling of the limbs, since they consume the limbs like dry logs with fire. If you see this disease in place that can suffer cauterization by fire, then apply small and large cauldrons as appropriate for the location or where the illness is; after cauterizing all parts until you've treated the entire corruption, leaving nothing of it so that everything that is corrupted turns to bone. Then let it rest for three days, and put oil on the affected areas with cauldrons until the fire burns have turned to bune. And after this treatment by ointments generating charcoal; and if you see after three days that the wound isn't healthy, then that is good; and if not, continue cauterization of those limbs remaining corrupted. This swelling has never been treated with aqua medicinal in place of fire cauterization; but nonetheless, fire cauterization provides greater assistance, and I have already said about the treatment of aqua medicinals in that section: take as much as you need.
small pearls coming to the fingers
Often it happens that in the feet a disease arises behind which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and is a large swelling causing pain in the foot. And the fire cautery for this disease has two methods: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is such that you heat a cauterizing tool similar to an earthen lampwick, made of good iron capable of piercing all parts, with sharp edges; after heating it red-hot, turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the forged part, then leave it so for three days until pus starts to form; then make a poultice of finely ground malva leaves, and let it rest on throughout the night, allowing the nail to loosen and be uprooted from its roots. Then treat the wound with anointing charms as long as it is healthy.
If they are converted forward the body, and it often happens on hands and feet; then you must use hot water cautery: take a tin of iron or bronze, or an earthen lampwick, place it over the nail and its root, that is for warts; put the tin around so that it touches all sides, then add some hot water, hold your hand firmly, and press with your hand turning until the edge of the tin reaches the base of the nail, allowing deep heat to reach the roots; allow the patient to endure a bit of burning sensation from the hot water for an hour; then leave it so, and it will uproot all its roots. Do this again and again, until you have removed everything within the body, then treat with enchanting ointments.
by tin la ouest anyt lesse s’enlde;
When anyone shivers from coldness of nerves, or fever quarterly or other, it is proper to make them .iiij. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of their back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery at the base, and one above the stomach at the olive oil cautery; this will cease their trembling and remove the illness's cold effects.
Of purulent swellings
At no time appear on the body baths or purulent swellangs that come from corrupted masses of large substances. If it happens to be at first when they appear, make cauterization over each head of the pustules: a fine cauterize with wood mugwort, whose tip is ignited by firewood, or lenticular cauterization; and do not caution them all along. And no time are cauterized at once appear thus, but broken superfluity from which comes forth, and are sanez, but it be made after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery has been cut Often there are great blood loss from the artery that has been cut to the wound at the periphery or during abscess incision or limb caustication, and similar things; it is a very serious matter to stop bleeding.
And yet if this occurs to anyone, quickly place your index finger over the vein wound, and strain very much until the blood is calmed from beneath your finger; then apply with fire olivary caustics of various small and large sizes as long as they are all red; then take .i., or a great or small one depending on the size and location where the artery was cut, and place the caustic over that vein or where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood is stopped.
And if it jumps when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And continue doing so until the blood is stanched; and be cautious not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; know that when the bleeding ceases from the artery, one cannot properly stanch it by themselves if the artery is large, unless through one of the four methods we have mentioned: or with a cautery, or with extraction if not previously treated, or with strong binding with thread, or with medicines applied that can stanch blood; and do so at the same time.
Who will administer proper stanching by wrapping tightly with cloths or applying burning substances above, or other similar things; if it does not help much.
If this happens to anyone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then they must put their index finger under the wound of the vein as we have said, and extend it well until it is resting on the wound and over the vein; do not move it, but moisten with cold water often so that it may be very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and rests; then make incisions there before using cauterization and medicines as needed.
We have told you in the first chapter all illnesses that require fire-cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices, and causes (diagnosis), and estrangements (discharges) and the shapes of cauterizations; I included those up to the joints there, and will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that you can find it easier as intended.
In starting this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn in this chapter there is greater risk and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore more caution is required.
For in the practice of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision upon an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and such things; where doubt and fear arise, and to some it brings death.
And I advise you not to undertake folly. For there are many ways of people coming in cures. If they come from those who so suffer with their illness that they die easily due to the ignorance of its nature and severity, and of such should we be wary. And among these who provide their sense and say, "Wait, I am healing"; the patient is despised. It does not suffice for you to consent only to those coming to you with this manner, but place greater trust in your honor than in your selfishness, and do not rashly act on what you are certain of and can have obtained knowledge; make use of prognostication and indication in treating your sick so that health may be restored; and by doing this, it will aid you to achieve good renown, glory, and memory of the kingdom.
Three dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
And I have ordered this treatise by sections as I spoke of the section on cauteries that I instructed from head to toe, so that you may find it more easily what you will need.
Full of water at the top
It is said that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the womb tightly grips the child's head; and there has never been a case where it was resolved without knowing why.
And I have never seen this illness in adults, and it seems that all those I have observed die quickly; therefore, I believe it is better to focus the treatment on these particular remedies.
the c s; and: CaI bon les  the n't bones text le con lasdilibe ;
If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see at the junctions above each part are clear, and the pain intensifies when pressed from within with your hand, and it has not been resolved: then make three incisions as follows within the head.
After the incision, remove all moisture thoroughly. Then close the incisions with bandages and powders, and apply wine and oil; leave it thus until the fifth day; then detach it, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, allowing for even drainage from the head, and give the patient dry meat with little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Another method of incision is to examine where the swelling of the abscess lies and its surrounding water; for it never lies before, never behind, never on the right, nor ever on the left.
Therefore, cut where the abscess swells and there is water accumulation, following as much as you are able to do so; but be careful not to injure the artery; ensure blood flow without causing excessive bleeding or evacuation of pus in the patient's condition.
Restore
When a disease called "catarra" occurs in the eyes or legs and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is the fire cautery where you cut two arteries.
Then it is necessary that when you cut the vessels, the patient turns his head back; afterward, he rubs them with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extracting the neck with one cloth, and examining where the veins bite, and both eye sockets being behind the ears, but they do not protrude much. Then mark the edges of the incision, and cut each vessel through a sharp strip of two parts as long as the flesh reaches to the bone, and it is wide at the top of the head.
And if you see, insert the strip underneath the artery and cut above it as two parallel lines across.
And when the vein is opened, blood flows continuously upwards from it.
And if the artery does not open upon touching, measure the length of an area three inches long, then cut and extend up to the bone; and that amount of blood you put out should be 5/8 pints, adding a little more or less according to what the patient can endure and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without a sore, and does not form an abscess when cut open, cleanse the wound and bind it, applying ointment until healed.
Of migraine
When migraine comes early with acute catarrh, due to moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old headaches and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical remedies which do not benefit, so we draw out the arteries from the temples and perform cauterization as we have written.
The manner of their extraction is that the patient grows hair on his temples and hears an open artery in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsing, and is not fully closed as in some men who are too cold; and if it is reopened, the patient strains a piece of cloth with it, then rubs their bald spot with rough fabric, and warms the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly visible. Then take the spatulamine whose form is as follows:
Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach an artery, then tie it at the punctures, and bandage well with strips from each part; if the artery is delicate, twist it with a pincers' tip, then cover that area according to the quantity of both eyes. For if not covered, the blood does not stop completely in all cases.
And tie the blood of five veins until three; and if the artery is large, it must be tied with two strong strands of silk thread so that decay does not occur at the wound's suturing, and bleeding continues from the vessel; then cover the excess between the two ligatures at this time, and then, if you see, cauterize with a hot iron caustic until bone is visible as long as both eyes are covered; this is the difficult operation, provided that the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
For cauterization helps to finish wounds: this is why it is of greater aid for wounds. For the extraction of arteries, fill the area with old cotton and place well-made bandages; and when they are loosened, treat with dry medicines that generate heat, and bandages, until it is healed; and if there is a lack from the artery as much as you work on it, hurry to apply a cauterizing poultice, or fill the area with vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the opening becomes sealed; and if you do not have this ready, place ice over the area until it freezes, and irrigate the area with cold water as long as necessary, and then squeeze as needed; and those who are more skilled in artery extraction should cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery knife on two sides, but the edge be well blunted to last longer. For when inflammation is too intense, it retains less heat. by the (do-e est tre que bon'l; donce jugisle. Don't, and so that mon artoire ti; et y con le ou market; it: Stene
From tears
When the tears from the eyes descend into veins located in the forehead's front area, and medicine provides no relief when applied there, causing the patient's face to redden as if with fear; thus, their hair becomes wet and soaked, becoming dried out and scorched by the heat of the tears, for which this treatment is needed.
And they call the old one "contused cure," so make it at the back of the patient who has this disease on their forehead and then give them three cuts or evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead: one being like two fingers downward along the front until the nose, while the other two are as if two ribs above the eyebrows, and beware not to incise arteries that run across these two. Place your hand in line with the junction of the two mandibles; each cut should be the size of three fingers apart.
From the initial incision that goes from the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the skin that is between the two cuts across the spheno-mandibular region, then make another cut from the middle of the incision to the other end, and then extract this sterculet.
If you place in the first cut an instrument called "culterellum," which is very sharp on one side and also smooth but not cutting on the other, and this is its form. Position the chest bone towards the front of the body at the joint, and the ribcage away from the bone, applying pressure until it reaches the middle opening. Close all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision remains continuous up to where the airway is opened, then again make an incision in the midline up to the other side; afterward, remove blood evenly and express the area for any collected blood; next, place a tent made of old cotton into each opening, cover with dampened linens soaked in wine and oil or herbs, enscuire that no abscesses form; on the third day, loosen the ligament, then apply abundant compresses of boiled water tea leaves, followed by treatment with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
To examine the eyes
When cataracts commonly occur suddenly and make the pupils small and blurry, causing eye pain at the base of these conditions that often arise from multiple venues; and it is necessary to treat with such matters of poisons, which can be found in this manner.
Command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large cut just above it, and another on either side wide. Next, start from the cut of the left temple to the right temple, and keep cutting until you reach the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves in the temples when they twitch during eating. When the bone is exposed, let all the blood flow out onto a sponge, then wrap between the two sides of the cut with cotton wool; next apply linen. Then place cleaned cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and be cautious to prevent infection hot; when it begins to heal, continue rubbing until new growth starts, then treat with things that promote healing without irritation.
In such a manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of wool fat, and mix them to create an ointment; apply it to the wounds to encourage healing throughout.
To prevent the blockage of ears.
All that comes out of the ear is one of four things: grains or beast matter, stones from mines or similar substances as iron; seeds like peas and lentils, or fluids flowing like water easily and such matters.
When something comes out of the ear that is not naturally part of it or close to it, and does not grow in the ear, place a piece of cloth over the ear. If you see the object, then distil some violet oil or sage oil on it, then perform an extraction; and the patient will start coughing up mucus, and blow their nose when they feel the need to, and insert pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and tilt the ear upward. This often brings relief; if it doesn't bring relief, then a delicate extraction with forceps is done, as described here:
If it comes out with forceps, that's good; if not, then perform an extraction using a delicate single-hooked instrument; and if it doesn't come out this way, make a wax plug of the hole or open the ear canal well, and ensure that what is around the plug is softened so that nothing can enter with the plug; then bring it forth in this form, as often relief comes thus as we have said; and if not somewhat like that, one takes beeswax from which birds take their nests, and places a small pointed instrument of some sort for such purpose, and puts some cotton around; then press the wax on the injury or whatever it is, and bring forth. If it does not come out from all of these things that we have said, quickly pierce the abscess so that pus may flow and spasm occurs; then the manner of piercing is such that you first treat the patient's headache with a cephalic method, and draw out blood according to its potency, then seat the patient between your hands and turn his ear upward, making a small incision at the root of the ear near the fat or underlying area; make it like a crescent until you reach the bone, then treat it as best you can with your skill; and cure until healed. If it is a hard stone and swells, make careful extraction; if it cannot be removed, place this subtle balm in this manner according to this form.
But make an incision for the stone grain. However, do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that extractions be precise.
When the water then enters the ear, it is for the patient to use sneezing as a remedy first, and stuff the ear with soft cotton. Place your thumb on that same ear where the water entered; if it comes out easily by this means, it's good. If not, take many small stones according to the length of your thumb held lightly, heat them slightly over fire, then insert a piece or two into the patient’s ear and let it come out the other side, with another stone inserted undernecued on the outer part; continue inserting one pebble after another until all the water has been expelled, ensuring it comes out completely. If you see this is not possible, take a reed or similar object, heat it over fire until it's somewhat softened, then insert it into the ear where the stone was, and keep heating it until the end becomes malleable; repeat with other reeds as needed to expel all the water.
In the removal of an arrowhead, if it's small like a flea and similar in nature, treat as we have said in our previous instructions for wound care; but if it's a large arrowhead that can be felt inside, prepare extraction with forceps; thus, removing what is easier to take out from the ear.
En les incisions, en l’oreille avons. Si tu apere, que concoeur les pierres a nous desque li metre, se peignement et le tuit resi the planteur dese pence as cure; de les est la s pries estir, si coeur les oculsie, et l’oreille tu est ilz les ointes d'ou li apere enlienlite incoeur qui covent avons so.
And it is narrow below and wide above. Then insert the finer end into the ear according to the amount of suffering in the patient, then proceed thoroughly throughout the canal; do this often as long as all symptoms persist. If they don't exit after being inserted, stuff around the canal with cotton as I have described in the book; and if they still don't emerge as we have said, apply distillations that the ancients have tried in bee sting treatments, and you will find them or deal with distillation; then distil your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which has such a shape as you see.
And it is made of silver or glass narrow below and wide above for distillation; and to press the distillation through a small opening on top using a well-made glass instrument, so take a sponge and wrap cotton around it promptly, then pour in your oil or juice, along with any medicines you see fit into the canal, ensuring that the canal is filled; then insert all the cotton inside the sponge and press firmly until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; the patient feels relief from within, and there are numerous beneficial distillations as when it is heated on a fire for distillation in the ear; but ensure that it is not too cold because otherwise, the medicines will not be as effective.
And for the eaves by applying warmth from an ear and pouring thereof with oil or other liquids into the ear, and the beneficial properties they are found in the distillations; and then let it become so that li quidem.
No child is born without some form of ear canal or ears; and the same thing happens in men by an outpouching from a wound, or debris entering inside the ear, and these outpouchings come only through the front part of the ear, if it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is no way to look at them clearly.
Therefore if it comes out from the front and cannot be seen, it requires different healing methods in various cases, and where you can see that you must put the affected ear to sunlight; then examine inside: if you see an inflamed appearance, do this work on all of this area:
And use both a sharp and scraping tool before and behind all the way, so that it does not bleed from the ear; if the inflammation is due to debris or the body of the ear, then take your delicate pincers, and carefully scrape until all the debrebri has been removed.
If the obstruction is primarily in the ear, take a subtle and light pair of forceps and warm it by the fire, then place it on the edge of the ear. If you feel the obstruction causing the patient to have ringing in their ears, gently perforate it carefully, enscribing not to harm the nerves in the ear; then put a tent according to the width of the opening with wool soaked in Egyptian ointment.
Do not do anything for any day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and cover it with moistened wool in rose water, and powder with vitriol; and if you see an effervescence of the ear, make sure to remove the tent and replace with another moistened tent covered in cerote made from red oil and beeswax until the inflammation subsides; then care for it until it is sound.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cover with cold water towel, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that are used for treating blood by distillation.
From the papers of Char
This herbal remedy that comes from paper when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and tweezeback, then wrap the root of a spatulamine in its stalk; afterwards put it on lye broth.
Then apply them with a lepierre the cide que est les, and se nains moulde vrai unguet et pardre cotes; soient l’oil:
From scurvy
Often come papers with things that seem scurvy in their form and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "grey rot," and it is a collection of moisture large on both above and below; the treatments are as follows: beware if the grey rot moves from one side to another, but it's an easy thing to know. So, make them wide apart, then lightly scrape each part, then take them with tweezeboar, and cut. If you do not pierce without slightly cutting the paper, nothing will harm the patient; and if the fissure is large, bind it together with a stitch, and heal until it is healthy; but if it's small, don't exert force, because the ointments restore it quickly and prevent scarring.
are:
of the fat from the eyes
It is a fat that forms in the ducts, more commonly occurring in children than adults; it greatly bothers their eyes, causing them to have catarrah upon mornings and unable to look at sunlight due to tears rushing to their eyes; therefore they lie down on their faces till dawn, sleep with moist paper under their eyelids from which exinach has emerged, and when you press the area with your thumbs you feel its presence.
The method of treatment is that the patient puts their head in warm water; then take a linen cloth and make a tent-like circle according to the amount of exinach present on each part, place it over them; press with your thumbs from one side and another, so that the exinachi are gathered within the circle. Then pierce the moist area at the edge with a sharp spatula, making an incision no larger than the cut made to drain blood vessels; then make incisions along it until you reach the exinach; from various dispositions, exinach emerge from the incision, resembling a piece of white fat.
Pull the entire piece of patched cloth between your fingers and thumb toward the dislocation, turning your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; keep ensuring that you do not push into the gap too far, until all the torn tissue has been reached, without grasping it.
If the nerve does not protrude at the beginning of the gap, gently widen the gap slightly until it appears; then extract as we have said, moisten rags with water and vinegar, place them on the area, and bind tightly.
And for such patients who chew herbs and apply them to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat until it is healed. And if there comes a hot abscess at the place, then soothe with plasters until it is healed.
From the hairs of parchment papers
When hairs arise on parchment papers other than their nature, and are aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about diseases like tearing of the eyes and softening of the paper with mildew, until it causes destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in four ways: by fire caustery or medicine for ague as per its type or chapter on caustery, and done either by incision and suturing or by drenches, as I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the sick man in your hand, then turn the paper with its oil towards your left; if it's reversed, it's good; if not, then pierce every thread with a needle on top; and do this near the margin of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and pull one thread across all the paper until reaching from the great edge to the small; then remove a thread, and place underneath the paper a little tent made of cotton and linen, then press down on the paper with an outline as like a bellows as possible, and always ensure that the shape is according to the quantity you see rising in the paper that extends across all.
If there is a need to cut large quantities of paper according to how soft the paper becomes, then make all along the spatula on both lines that you signed with it, starting from the great edge down to the small; and let one of the fissures be close to the natural hairs in the growth of a root, then insert the needle into either of the two angles as desired, then scrape off entirely; then join the two edges with stitches made by a single needle with all the linen thread, and drain any blood, and remove excess filaments on both eyebrows using various sticky substances if you wish to do so; but if not, don't worry about it, leave the sutures and threads for three or four days. Then treat the wound without drying and compressing substances, as the paper will recover from the condition of the wound and its joining, though the stitches may be moved (as ancient sources say), but this work is done without fear.
And if you shape the paper to have the same form as the bellows of juniper, as we have discussed before with three folds cut according to the following pattern:
Then apply the force.
And if you cannot hold the pincers, and the condition is not equal, then take a needle or it has a thread, and insert one end near the face; and another thread close to the large ear, and the second thread close to the small, and join between your two threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have sutured, as we have described, then stitch together both sides of the wound by sewing, and care until it is healthy again; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe with cerote and similar ointment.
And it never happens that the hair on the parchment is converted; if it becomes necessary to use what we have described about the incision, but the suture in one and the other side is more artificial.
The treatment of this condition is as follows: and you convert the parchments and fold them inside according to what I have said, then make .ij. sutures by art, and .ij. threads thin like the width of the strips are; and hold the .ij. edges or parts where you keep the threads; then join the one and the other subtly above that of the oil on the parchment, and pull the .ij. sutures of the .ij. sides properly; and leave them so many days, and the skin which is pulled will die and shrink and heal, until it shrivels completely.
If it is delayed and the wound lacks strength, then treat until it is healed; and if the wound were sutured quickly, and the skin raised, with no hairs remaining; and this is the form of the two channels that you will make according to this figure, and this quantity of length and width:
For the operations are such that you take a fine needle, and tie one thin silk thread to it; then join the heads and weave them together subtly, with the length of the threads being the width of a palm; then arrange in sequence another very fine silk thread quickly, and twist both ends of this thread; then place the patient's head in your hand; and position close to the sun so that the operations are clearly visible, for these are subtle and minute operations, then insert the needle through all the length into the root of the hair near it, and pierce quickly until you have passed over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the thickness, inserting in there any one or two or three or more hairs; then extract your hand so that the hairs run smoothly along the paper with the natural hair.
And if the thread is woven and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the thread apart at the bottom of all the threads that you have arranged, until the thread shows through; and then pull the thread and clip off and leave two or three days or four, until the hair becomes hard in its place and grows a tuft on top; and if the hairs are long, accompany one natural whisker, and lift it up as high as it is grown and lifted.
from the decay of oil
When this disease called 'aleacrati' or decay comes to the oil, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It occurs through sudden wounds, cuts, or burns, and similar things.
And the way to treat this is that you split the suture and unravel its edges, then fill it with linen threads, leaving them until they are clean; and nothing else should be used in the treatment of it but things that dry and constrict. For if you do so, the disease returns worse than before; however, using softening substances, such as fenugreek; and rose water or distilled water with flaxseed, and ointments made from melted oil, one wraps a bandage around it, and this treatment is done.
And the essence of your care is to ensure it does not at all follow its previous form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely remedies for this illness, so that it may not return in its former form.
From the gall that comes into the bile
This illness, called "axacrati," is both natural and accidental in nature. The accident comes from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; and the method of treatment for this condition involves taking a needle with two strands of thread attached to it, inserting it into the gallstone, then pushing one end through to the right until both threads come out of opposite sides. Then stretch the stone away from you using all the slack in the thread, holding a spatula wide enough to cover the entire needle.
And if the alignment of the paper returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a rasor and place it in the fissure, then turn the paper, creating two fissures or splits within the paper; so let the head of both fissures be at the two angles of the incision you made, so when they are joined together, the figure is as if one were a letter with "j" strokes. Then remove that joint according to the extent its sides have stretched from, like how it affects the paper, then join the two parts needing repair, and their edges with woolen thread; then proceed with what we have said regarding mollifying medicines and bandages until it is sound.
And if the disease comes from a fissure or stitching or cauterization, then you must create a clean fissure away from the hairs of the paper, and as previously mentioned; then place between two leaves of bandage as I have said; and make the treatment according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters devise devices with all possible means how to return the figure to its natural shape; and for the sickly people likewise, according to what is required for treatment and applications in various positions.
And for patients accordingly as needed for the treatment and applications of different positions.
When this welding occurs in the hands so that the paper above is soldered with the white of the egg, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then you must place the tip of a razor underneath the paper, lift it upwards; and make cuts with tweezamoins until you scrape off what is hard at the suture, which should not be too rough nor too sharp so that the patient does not suffer from excessive tightening or softening of the egg; your incision should gently remove the joined area, allowing it to reform naturally according to its original shape; and thus healed without any touch of dirty water, instead use clean water with collagen. Then place a linen bandage between the paper and the egg, and lay wool over the egg generously in boiled form until after three days when using soft collagen and similar things until fully recovered.
From the nail of the egg
The first step of the nail and the oinse is on le bisele pain ou il ne se cuit li aie de oile, qui seme; et poignez les .i que se estomes eles cuidessiez la veue panier les paorne.
The method of making the incision is such that the patient places their head in a bowl, then works on the eyes; place paper in your hand, then cut with small scissors, and stretch above. Then take a needle, insert hair from a horse or pig or cow, and a strong thread; double the tip of the needle slightly and pierce into the nail fold, and push through the entire needle, tie the nail with thread and pull it upwards, scrape all hair down to the edge of the nail where the root is swollen and as far as the skin on top; cut off any remaining part at the base of a small lump subtly and gently.
Ensure that the incision does not touch or tear the skin and pierce the nail bed, and after the incision, apply a little oil of boiled wool fat and litargirio on it, leaving it until the next day; then treat as necessary until healed.
Et que li chet il ties ne iuie; car.
Gently lift the nail and if you see that it does not diminish or irritate in any way afterwards, extract from your mouth into an oil collyrium made of litargire and with red wax, soak until the next day; then resume the other work using this same method, until it is completely free of bone.
If nothing in the oil is against you as an abscess appears, then apply it, and first treat the hot abscess until it heals, then resume the work as before, until it is completely healed.
And if the appearance of flesh on the edge bothers in the oil greatly, soak it with a string and not completely but without cutting off all tissue, that no scars may form; then extract into an oil collyrium made of red wax which is composed of litargire.
From the cross placed over the pupil
Some people have red marks that sometimes appear over the pupil, covering it and restraining around the eyelids and turning outward. The operation is such that the patient places his head in the hand to relax, then works on his eyes with a cloth or bandage until one of them shows signs consistent with what we have described in the incision of nails and small forces used to remove scales;
And when the incision is completed and you remove all of it, if you use oil cloth or apply red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines to the wound, make sure to secure a cotton ball with beeswax there; and if nothing remains, and the wound heals on its own, and you doubt whether it is still hot, leave it alone and treat the wound with things that soothe inflammation. Then return to your operation until it is healthy again, and in this way, crosses will be placed in the oil by this method.
However, it is necessary to follow the treatment for each weakness of natural course; and in cases of accidental work with iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb has been healed by the method used.
The veins of the eyes
Red veins that are covered over the eye weaken vision and impair sight daily. Therefore, when you first look at an eye in which sebel is present, it should be examined thoroughly; if there's no other disease besides sebel, then proceed as follows: command the patient to place their head in a stable position, then gently pinch those veins all around according to your knowledge, and ensure they are doubled subtly by following this method.
And there are two screws placed by degrees within one body according to this form:
Then you carefully extract the veins delicately and bleed a small amount of blood at another time, as long as you see that those venous forces are removed from the oil; and ensure that you do not cut the tips of the stapules, and perform this operation in midday before the sun, and be fervently attentive to your work so that only the venous forces are severed; and once you have done this, allow red and green pus to flow into the oil gland to corrupt what is lodged within.
And if you cannot extract all of this within that hour, then apply a poultice on the oil with soothing substances for the pain in the eyes, and leave it undisturbed until the pain is eased and certainty of inflammation has decreased; then resume as follows until healed; and here is the method:
of the fistula of the eye
Those named "arissati" are fistulas: when you treat them with cautery and medicinal hot ague as I have previously mentioned, if they are not healed, then proceed to cut into the abscess where it should die off, and drain all moisture within until bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and darkness, then take all instruments of which there are forms; they are called "sharp point," made of iron with a .i. chief reent, and sharpened like a file in this form:
the ou n. Do soze. They are the d  t
If the joint is swollen and numb, and the body of the bowels is also swolculed, remains so for forty days, does not heal or become an abscess, and if there is no pain, it is healthy; otherwise, there is no other method than to bring back the fistula near the nose opening as described in this manner: and ensure you expose the bone a second time using iron and medicinal waters, and when it is exposed, take a suitable instrument according to this form, with the shoulder head being of three angles, and the shaft should be tapered up to the top as shown here.
Then place it near the bone by the temple, and move your hand away from it a little, then turn the instrument completely until it pierces through the bone and the patient feels nothing as he holds his hand near his nose; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when it becomes moist and hardens the dislocation, go to the nose again; this is an easier matter for the afflicted.
From the exit of the vein
When the bone is pierced through entirely and there is no disturbance to the nerves or reduction, it is necessary that you bandage the patient; then cleanse them, then apply compresses without causing harm by suctioning, then put on oil with a ligature made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla; then stretch the oil, and place gauze pads over it. The manner in which you wrap the gauzes is to take gauzes soft enough, doubling each one into four layers, and then put one on top of another according to the amount needed by the bone; then strain above a hard bandage form, and start again with compresses for suctioning without causing harm; then remove the compresses and leave the oil stretched day and night, and if the ligature softens greatly, it is necessary to change it completely; then remove the ligament after a day and night, and if you see the oil returning, that's good; otherwise, resume using gauzes, ligaments, compresses, and suctioning until healed.
The rupture of tissue seen
When dislocation occurs in the exposed and opened joint, resembling a grain of resin, it is difficult to see; then you must cover the area so that its appearance seems normal. Then insert one needle at the root of the affected part down to where there was an incision above, then insert another neednail or if it has two filaments from the part up to the lower rim; and pierce a hole, leaving the first neednail according to its position; then cover that spot with a double thread and tie a section of the vein around it tightly, then remove the nail and place a moistened linen in abundance over it. Leave until the threads are pulled out by the vein, then treat the wound with comforting remedies as long as the injury is healed; and never let the wound be restrained by the vein from any part of a circle of cloth, until fully healed.
And if the veins give a significant appearance, pierce through the delicate superficial tissue coming from the wound, and drain the white moisture and descend the vessels in there, entering immediately; then remove them all until it is healed.
And if the vessel to be removed completely.
This disease known as "alcunnati" is not solecups that appear like water flowing downward, but rather; the appearance of its work involves making the patient sit on a specially prepared and straight seat, then take his head between your hands with both sides, and feel until you see the soft tissue rise up toward your fingers; then it should be fixed in place, not allowed to descend further, and its light portion separated, and observe as usual; if it does not recede below, know that it is solecups, and since the disposition of the soft tissue isn't as we have described. If so, make the patient sit again between your hands, then take a delicate spatula and gently touch the horny skin near its base, until the tissue protrudes; when it does, pour warm honeyed water into the ear, or boiled fenugreek mixed with honey, then treat further until healed.
Of waters in the ear
este:le d les autres oin, ete;
After resting for a little while, the vein rises again on its second course, apply heat with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise, gently twist around slightly with your hand; then add a bit of pearl essence, and keep the oil within. Then place poultices or moistened cloth soaked in rose oil and abundant egg yolk, bound together with the pure oil. We, and those who are from our time, put comfrey paste with an abundance of egg.
And if it cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, as some people have very hard nails, you must use an instrument called "albert," of which this is the shape.
And so pierce the conjunctiva only slightly and not too deeply, but just enough to allow the medicine in; then apply as we have said; and at the completion of the work, provide the patient with an agreeable bed on which he sleeps on his back for one hour; and be sure to restrict all movements, and feed him light foods easily digestible, and do not move his head or turn it left or right, and bind according to its position until the next day; then remove the bandages in this same darkened room, and examine his vision, and let him see things, and then put back the bandage up to the seventh day; but it is not necessary that you do what you do so at the hour of treatment or after incision now, but it must be done as soon.
If an abscess opens, release the oil in front of seven days, and apply the remedy that soothes the abscess; when it is calmed, remove the veil and place a linen patch over its face for one day until covered, and keep it darkened thereafter. Then gradually leave the house little by little, and let it change into what it may be; know that no novice should intervene in this case.
And one day among us who was from Yrach said that we were making an alchemical perception in which water flows, but I have never seen any such thing in our land nor read of it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps this is a novelty.
And these are resembles of forms of alchemy because those who do not know them see them as such; and they are essentially rain.
And the head of these has three sharp corners.
Of the chir on the nose
No hairs or nose hairs ever grow in various ways, some appearing like scorpions with many points; and if there are any that have a fierce colored streak, or are fair of bone color. In those cases where the hair is fair and not streaked, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work on its nostrangs, and pour anointing oil into those hairs, and twist them out; then tie together whatever tuft you manage to pull up at the subtle end of a fine point, until thou knowest that the tuft is all pulled.
If anything remains that cannot be covered, operate on it with all the subtle instruments lightly, ensuring nothing is left; and if it swells or forms an abscess, treat as necessary; and if malignant abscesses occur, promptly cauterize until they are closed off and excised completely, then pour oil, vinegar, or wine.
If the treatment fails and moisture reaches the palate, ensure they are sound; if moisture does not perforate as needed, know there is decay in the bone above, preventing instruments from reaching it. Then you must tie a linen thread slightly thick with our hands, leaving space between each one of us; place the patient's head underneeboard for support and carefully pull until it emerges through the mouth; this method is often used by children in schools, and is an easy task for those experienced. Then hold the incoming part of the head with one hand at the nostril, and the other part coming out through the mouth with the other hand, ensuring each person holds their end of the thread. Continue until you know that we have removed all decayed bone, then remove the thread, extract blood if needed, apply medicated oil to it, and reinsert into the nostril as before; do this for three or more days until the ointment has corroded all remaining decay; then insert a plug in the nostril for several days until they are sound, using drying medicines as needed. This is the method of the instrument used to purge the head by distilling oils and other medicines into it:
And to the les cestement, si quoi de tout en la peignez si que li se euis le santeur nus sontes ce; et neis une gist cue vunt à un peu est lour oeirent fassaint les chiefs.
From the chariot onto the neck
Many times a disease called "telul" appears on the neck; it grows and becomes quite large to be visible by sight. Therefore, you must cut away from the beginning, completely removing any remaining tissue with surgical cautery or burning medicine. If not removed while still small, if it is hard, discolored, and has poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an incurable ulcer that worsens when incised; however, if the ulcer is soft to the touch without discoloration and you can see that it can be fully excised, then proceed without fear of pain for the patient, and heal other dry and constricting areas.
When the neck is cut into pieces and removed
When solutions for continuing treatment arise in any of these cartilaginous operations, they benefit little and sometimes not at all. Therefore, as with each case, one must examine if the wound is fresh throughout its blood supply; then bring together both edges to a stitch and treat until it heals; and if the edges are detached on either side, one should scrape off all parts of their flesh until they heal, then join both edges at a suture, apply pressure, and powder with dragon's blood poudre; also add incense ashes. Finally, place a piece of frankincense or another resin on it so that it can drain through itself, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
The way to suture it is as follows: you assemble the ends together - either with needles, as I have described in the abdomeincisions; or with thread, as I previously instructed you.
In treating lip abscesses.
When dense abscesses occur resembling grains of pepper, some smaller and larger; then it is necessary to return the edges, cut above each one, take with forceps and cover in each part; afterwards place the leather after vitriol incision broiling until the wound is closed; and then bandage loosely, healing the leather of dryness until it becomes healthy.
From the charring of gums
Often there is charring of the gums that the ancients called "albulus"; if it needs to be supported with forceps, and covered at its root, and let out the pussywire or blood flows; then place at the site vitriol incision broiling, and other desiccant powders; and if healing comes again after the cauterization, and often the second time, and the wounds. And these are of forms of treatment: it does not come to close by-soie;
From soreness
There are no soreness gathered at the top of the gums, between the gums and the teeth, which are unsightly and sharp; nor do the teeth ever become black or yellow with spots, as long as corruption comes to the gums, causing them to smell foul; if it is necessary that you make the patient sit with his head in your hand, and his teeth be under your holy cloth, and pull out any teeth or rough edges that appear, until there is nothing left; and thus cause darkness and greenness, and yellowness and other discolorations, as long as they are healed; and if you remove what has been the first reason, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, until you have removed all of them; and know that teeth require various forms of remedies to be cured, according to how their work shows itself, because those barbers who are unsuccessful at extracting teeth have different shapes than those used between the teeth; and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when curing the teeth of their pain that you delay with tearing as long as possible, because it must not always be done; for this is a matter so high until there is no excuse to extract them. Then when the patient is constrained by the tearing, it becomes necessary to be certain about which bone hurts. Often the pain troubles the patient and they think there is a sane or saintly tooth; and then you extract the bad tooth; but the pain does not go away because of this until the evil has been removed, as we have already tried with such saints; and when you are well certain about which bone hurts, it becomes necessary to scrape thoroughly around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides. Then move it slightly with your fingers or with delicate pliers little by little until it is properly aligned, then firmly fix the teeth; and let the head of the shoulder be in its place between your knuckles, so that it does not move.
After extracting the toaster straight without breaking it and if it does not fall easily, take one of these plugs and push it inside from each part lightly, then move it as you did first. And if the nerve is pierced and mixed up, it becomes necessary that you fill it with a cloth, where its pores are; and gently strain it with pliers so that it does not break when pulling out; and work very carefully around the gum to protect the tooth.
Ensure it is not broken, and retain a portion of the joint, allowing it to return to the patient naturally without causing greater pain from the root. Be careful that you do not act as ignorant surgeons do, who hastily and recklessly break the cartilage every time without proper care; but they bring about great diseases for the roots that remain or the cartilage they damage, as we have described; when the tissue is torn, wash the area with wine or oil and salt, and if bleeding occurs frequently, which often happens, fill the hole with vitriol paste; and if this does not suffice, cauterize.
The forms of the strumas are where teeth move first, with long points and large mats, do not double when you pull them; these are the shapes.
And be of large teeth such that they do not bend while pulling, and be well-crafted of iron, and have teeth to grip when pulled.
From the root of the spine When the root remains in place after treatment, it is necessary to apply cotton dipped in butter for one or two days until the area is softened. Then insert "algefri" pins (splints), causing the shoulder to resemble a priest's beak; and internally constructed like a file to restore shape.
And if the roots do not pass through all these pins, it is necessary to expose the entire bone around the root and insert an instrument called "althali" (a splint), which resembles a staff:
And if large and thick enough so it does not break, and the root jumps out from this, that is good; if not, use all methods available, which will bring forms as follows.
And if you use this instrument with two tongs, the form it creates is as follows:
and other tools in front of him for teeth, and from this instrument that looks like large pincers, the form it takes is as follows:
And this is the condition that it cannot be broken, and know there are many densities; and so with other conditions which are not counted; and the wise masters find by themselves their instrument according to what their treatments and the disease show, for there are certain diseases or the old did not teach any instruments due to variety of parts and bones that do not break under a cart or from others, but seek where it is necessary, as I have told you, and help with gestures, which follows this form: Let them be large and well-held for grasping the bone, so it does not escape but can hold and extract; then restore to its place with appropriate medicines, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, you possess all this instrument.
When the teeth appear not naturally aligned and the shape is unattractive, especially in young women, you must know if the densities are behind the tooth and they are not on the right side, and it cannot be filed or trimmed; then scrape them. And if there is a bump with the tooth, take this instrument as shown here, which resembles a small beak, and it should be made of iron inwardly sharpened:
Et place the coping piece by piece over time due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can be filed down, then file the coping so that its shape resembles this.
And it is similar to the shaping of needles; and in filing the tooth, do so piece by piece over time gently, until it no longer moves when bitten; then smooth it out completely at the end with a razor-sharp finish, and if it's too sharp causing bleeding on the tongue, file down the harshness until even, so that it neither cuts the tongue nor corrupts speech.
Whenever the tooth chips
When teeth loosen due to impact or fall, and the patient cannot bite down on what they chew without salivating, having been treated with restraining medicines which are ineffective; then it is necessary for them to be constrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and deteriorate, but gold does not change. The size of the wire should be average, depending on the space between the teeth. If you observe the need to straighten the teeth, take the wire and loop it twice around healthy teeth; then place the ends between the teeth that need adjusting, as long as they are securely fastened until reaching a healthy tooth on the other side. Then proceed with covering up the area where you started and subtly extract gently until there is no movement; your aim should be at the root of the loose tojamant such that it cannot escape. Then cut the ends of the wire using pliers, rejoin them, and position between healthy teeth so as not to touch the tongue. Let it remain tight for as long as possible, if it loosens or breaks, restrain with another wire; this will hold until needed, forming the shape and appearance of properly aligned teeth:
And when teeth fall out and are placed back in their original position repeatedly as we have said; one should not be involved unless wise and patient, without ever aching like a wild boar's tooth, and placing it where there is a deficiency, straining it as previously instructed, remaining stable for long periods.
:  And so, they should be ong-pie if the w such that heal;
Never is this dislocation that arises from below the tongue or nature, that we create so; or by accident of burns; and treatments are such that you work on the mouth with the patient's head in position, and lift the tongue; then cut off the nerve bundle wide, until the tongue is displaired from its place, and if there is hardness or outward swelling, and it's from burn injuries, so apply a pinch and cut the wider bundle; and ensure that the split does not become too full, near to the artery below; and once you have done this, raise the lump of flesh with rose water and ease, or cold water, then place a linen tent beneath the tongue; and anoint the patient's eyes each night so they cannot close. And if bleeding persists, apply vitriol paste on top of the swelling; and if it still does not heal, cauterize with a slow-burning caustic that is good for this; then treat further until it is healthy again.
And if you see it of a color or black or hardened, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch, as it is cancer; and if it is leaning towards blisters, and there is moisture, pour on the pinch oil until it's absorbed, then apply a thin spatula evenly on both sides; and if it fails in your treatment, place vitriol paste there until it's healed, then return to your procedure as long as you treat all thoroughly; then raise the flesh with rose water and soothing lotion, and further treat until healthy.
by sore lese ire ou d’or is a l’in such as both, that et cure it even, and your own teisso; and m both est and the e is the lier. And so and of and swell too much leu si on les de la testee is and s and then oint eau or they are treated with salt and reactions and a tu heal of to l’est et les, and if themes; and both lese est, and the cure;
At no time come into the throat masses called 'godath', and properly known as two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healed, be cautious: if it is a hard abscess with little sensitivity and a swollen color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either, for the bleeding; but let it remain until it turns black, and then you will remove it, or it may break by itself; and if it has pale-colored skin and delicate roots, prepare the instrument for cutting, but first ensure that the abscess is at rest and soothed. Then make the patient sit facing the sun with their head upright, and they work their mouth and you pinch between your hands, and press the tongue below the entire instrument; and it should be made of silver or fine iron as a knife:
You must press the tongue with the entire instrument and observe the abscess; if possible, take a needle and insert it into the almond, and pull upwards as much as you can; then tie off any vessels without tying anything on them, then wrap with the bandage at the instrument's shape, which appears to be like a force, but always the head is curved, from one place to another, very painful, and made of iron wire or fine silver.
:
And be sharp on one hand, and the other nameless; and when you have caught one of the almonds, then catch the other in the same manner, and after making an incision gargle the patient with warm water, water and soothing substances, and if bleeding occurs during this process, continue to gardle with warm water or grated pomegranates cooked or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is closed; then treat it as long as it is healthy; and at no other time do new abscesses form in the throat except for the two almonds which you should catch thus likewise.
And I treated a woman who had an abscess deep in her throat, that is to say, one small abscess; and the entire throat was swolcued shut, such that she could not breathe through the passage which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if it continued this way for one day or two. The abscess was so raised that I had inserted two streams through its two openings at the neck. So immediately I took an onion, then opened the tract with a tool, and drew out a large portion of pus; then I reinserted it into the other opening, pressed her mouth shut, and pushed against her tongue; afterwards I inserted an onion into these abscesses, and cut off part of one, from which only a little pus came forth. Thus was the passage in her throat cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease treating this abscess for long periods of time; and the abscess would recur, filling up with as much material as I had previously drained, until it became very large; therefore I deceived and cauterized inside her throat: so that it ceased to grow. And then I left those parts, and only God did afterwards for her.
them. 7-30.
When they are removed from the eye, and it is closed and elongated, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called an eye. When it has been shaped as we have said in the division, and the wax does not help at all, and you see that the abscess healing is soothed, and it is subtle, then you must excise it; and those which are rounded, gathered together, and are not lengthened; and they are bloody or of fat color or black, it should be incised. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it as I have described in terms of shape and size, make the patient sit facing the sunlight, and press the tongue to the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, push downwards, and cut at one or two points that I have said about the incision of the two almonds. And you must not excise more than what is beyond the natural boundary; for if you excises too much, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, follow as we have said in the section on the incision of the two almondangs. Then treat until it heals completely. And if the patient fears cauterization, then use devices to prevent this fear during the process. The manner of cauterizing is with sharp clear water. It is such that the patient puts his head in a bowl and then presses the tongue to the instrument we mentioned earlier; confit with clear hot water so it is not too thick or too thin, and apply the mixture from this instrument as follows:
When the head has a hair or an ulcer, apply the medicine as you would fill a spoon, and place the instrument over all of the medicine on the eye; let the patient lie down with their mouth near the medicine so they can saliva and expectorate it without going into the throat and coughing. Then hold your hand firmly on all the medicine for the majority of an hour until you see that it has become clear, and the bites from the medicine are soothed; then take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument into the groove above the cotton as long as the cotton turns reddish inside the eye. Do this repeatedly until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. If you need to restart the medicine cauterization, do so; afterward, drain around the eye with a cloth stuffed in butter and cleanse what's inside of the medicine. Then rinse with cold water until healed, and continue gargling until well.
This treatment is better through incision than with the cautery; if it is treated by smoldering according to this method, take calamities and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and chamomile, and avronne, and similar herbs, all together or some of them in a pot, and let it boil softly; and the pot well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot has an instrument tied according to this method: And it is of silver or copper, and one of the eyes placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to their brain through the canal; as long as the vein swells, and after each recurrence, until the vein dries out; keep from doing so at the beginning of a hot abscess's development, for many things happen; do not only use this when an abscess is declining. And if this instrument isn't present, take a tube and put inside its head a wad of hay, ensuring that it doesn't become too hot in the patient's mouth; for a hay wad does not weigh down the vapor on the mouth, and together with salt it is good cure and healthy.
Li mettres les eulz qui mauves en a l’est par lou pot, ou telque il fait escomenil; et lie un peceux cheveue li cuit la poinz se tu mei.
And let the endoscope be bent towards the head so that it can more easily enter into the throat, and raise the head up high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglote, so as not to cause spasms or push the bone inward; move your hand such that the patient inserts the instrument themselves because it should be easy where things are clear. Then they pull out with all of the instrument equally, until it is firmly removed.
Of throat constriction
No medicine is for strangulation, as I have said in the division, by means of medicinal cures; and when this does not work at all, then look into the throat of the sick person with sunlight, after you press their tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see swelling, treat it entirely with small needles or delicate pincers as needed. If neither works, take a heated iron chain and apply it to the patient's throat, then use cooling techniques often. And if the sick person is sweating all day, fill a jar with cold water, work on their mouth, pour the liquid into their mouth so that they can swallow, and move it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the strangulation feels the water, it goes away.
If it does not come out as we have said, then smolder the patient with aromatic herbs using the instrument mentioned in the smoke treatment of the eye; do this many times, for it will seek its place. The method of fumigation is such that you take a pot filled with coal and cover it with a cloth pierced at the center, and position the head of the instrument therein; then pour your fumigant, and the patient places their forehead against the vessel's opening, sealing their mouth so smoke does not escape but travels to the brain; thus the smoke will find its place now, and if it still doesn't come out, repeat the fumigation multiple times; endure thirst for the patient, consume filthy things like pus and blood, avoid drinking water; then this method must be employed.
The form of the instrument used to treat the throat is such that when it can be seen, it appears like bent tongs designed for entry into the throat; and resembles a healer's beak, with roughness similar to lime so nothing taken in cannot be spit out. Here is its shape:
The form of the instrument that looks like it must not be swallowed. And here is a healer, and here.
There are many kinds of abscesses, as memory comes after one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and cutting; and there are two ways of handling them, one being the same kind, because it holds moisture. And the second manner is for lumps within the body. For an abscess on the head is different from that at the base, and an abscess in a limb joint is different from those occurring in joints, and each has its judgment in practice.
And if there is an abscess that one must not pierce until it is fully formed according to its completion; and in the case of such wherein perforation is necessary when they are ripe, but do not die as they should upon their completion, like those near joints. For when abscesses come near jointangs, if left until they become rotten, then the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the main member, if perforation is delayed until it has matured, harm will come to the principal member; or if near the base, pierce as soon as it is ripe; and do not pierce an abscess before digestion is completed, except for those near the base, where they may spread outwardly, become a fistula; and cannot be healed in a great length of time.
And that one must know the abscess is fully formed according painless, and then comes on; and other times of it, and are no dose behead or ache and cen est lesions; and li. And dose ducter leu as. And also pain of de pains ou heal infection from the head. Do not is abscesses and so to les plouez pain d’pabece, et pain ou les same plee of aposteme coulue. ounteau, et est li cen de leus de perforation; li celes qui pain de les dose in a heu de thetasmei pain and dues la plie s's m, orde of pains oles se de is the same eus ouli de.
When they bulge, in the affected limb. And when abscesses are in place, let them be drained until digestion is completed, as we have said. For if you pierce before it, it will spread toxins through the body and become full of much filth; and by chance they may harden the lips and deep openings within. And for any abscesses that are felt according to the width of the body, according to what the limb needs. It is necessary to treat small abscesses with small punctures; and large abscessebs with large punctures, and many fissures in accordance with the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses that require sewing up or covering, when it has become as soft as a cloth and fallen off, treat them as you would blisters: and for those whose edges are split into three angles, treated like bellows leather, similar to arm sores; and others with round incisions and other cuts and shaped coverings.
For those without a head, if the abscess is superficial like, pierce it plainly; and when the abscesses are large and have thick walls, puncture them but do not drain all of its contents at once, then pack the abscess until the next day, then leave nothing else to be drained; perform this multiple times gradually from thin to thicker, until the wall is completely emptied. Particularly if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman, small children, or elderly individuals of decrepit strength. For sometimes with the drainage, the abscess bursts and causes death in the patient; so be cautious when using this treatment method, and after you have located your abscess, cleanse the wound, and check if the wound is small; and if it's a neat incision, dress with linen or old cotton threads; and for large abscesses with much drainage, place one tent over another so they touch each other; and if you have sewn up part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old linen thread or old cloth fibers without moisture, and secure it until the third day; then remove it, and apply ointment until healed.
the (s t
And this is how one must generally proceed in the treatment of abscesses: but I have told you how to approach treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
Of pus-filled collections.
Cases where small abscesses appear like wool on sheep, and there are many of them; some are fatty and moist like hairs, others hard to the touch like a tailor's thread, without any doubt causing harm if disturbed. The treatment method is such that you test with every instrument called "entromissorial," from which the formation occurs subsequently based on what it contains. If it contains moisture, it secretes above its length. And when the moisture is evacuated, scrape without leaving any hair in place as it returns if left alone; then soak a cotton swab in Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise, in water and oil, and apply to the wound until the next day; then wrap again with cotton as before. Continue with the cotton on the second and third days, until you're certain there's no remnant from the previous night. Then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed. And if an abscess contains fatty lumps, trim according to this manner along its length; squeeze out any pus, scrape off all parts, and apply your entire treatment as you would milk from a cow's udder; if the thread acts against me, do what I have told you after. And similarly for an abscess that is hard like leather, trim it accordingly as I have instructed before.
And the swelling at the abscesses of pierced wounds and wet ones is easier because there are few bloods. And if any of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and among them were those I cut out from an old woman; and found the abscess like a long thorny, rough stone that could not be broken; and had someone struck it, they would have made a wound as one of a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads at the roots of ears, let the opening always be high up for pus to come out; treat them as needed.
Of scrofulous tumors
Oftentimes such abscesses occur on the neck and collarbone area, at the roots of the ears; they are very large and close to each other. Each scrofulous tumor is properly within its layer, as with the top and the abscess head; and the appearances of these scrofulles are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In those then you see in good disposition at touching, and is similar to the body color, and does not move from either side and neither into artery or the vein nor near. And it's not deep; therefore cut through it by above, and scrape each part, as we have said with abscesses of the head; and heal them, so that you must be done incisions leaks out all.
When you open a vein or an artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriol paste or powders that retain blood to the wound, compress the wound; let it remain until the abscess is calmed and the wound softened, then begin to decay. And when blood has stagnated, return to your task until completed; then proceed with proper indications if there are no small scrofulous growths, remove them and cleanse them. If a large vein is present at the root of the scrofula, do not cut out that scrofula at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, let it hang freely without harm; then dress the ward with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment.
If you cut out the entire scrofula, it is proper to bring together its two edges of the wound and secure them, then ensure there are no remnants for the size of the scrofula; if needed, proceed to cut into the root, drain well, and sew as we have said. Scrofulas that cause excess fluid, pierce where it opens widely; and pierce in the same manner as previously mentioned, then treat with ointment and similar substances so that what has remained from decay is consumed; and when the wound is properly cleansed, apply healing ointment until it becomes healthy.
If you are treated by applying a tissues to ensure there's no longer remains of any dead tissue, then as we had said previously mentioned, so forth; and when the wound with substances so is that healing ointment and other until it properly cleaned becomes cured.
The ancients spoke and talked about the treatment of the throat; but I have never seen in our land that it is made, and this is according to their writings.
For those with strangulation, it is necessary that the fracture of the throat called "epiglote" be removed; and this cannot heal by itself because all the veins and the main source of pain are present in those who have abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds. When the disease is in the channel of the main source, it is necessary to remove the epiglote to avoid destruction that comes from strangulation.
When we wish to split the epiglottis, let us split it just below three or four circles or one small slit across, between two circles or through the quantity of the incision without reaching the trachea.
And if these eyes are connected to the splitting of the ep#glottis, there is no pain at all, and the vessels are long within it.
And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to its full length, then split the head as much as it reaches the spine; and avoid blood vessels, unless you see something, and then close the abscess, as we have said.
It is shown by the severed tendon of the neck which breaks at its root, and due to the loss of voice.
And leaves an open wound exposed for a while.
And when the hour is passed for which there is doubt of strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound near the cheek, and tie a bandage that tightly presses against the jawbone; then apply medicines that induce warmth until it becomes healthy.
the uzerd: and  (or they:s. Then block off the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
And so they order the physicians to leave the wound open until the effects of the illness are passed, which takes three or four days. Then they command it to be sutured and healed once it is fully healed.
by the I saw a maiden take a knife, and stick it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe on the left side;
and so I rushed to help her, finding her as if already dead.
I examined the wound and found that blood had come from it; however, she hadn't bitten a vein or other tissue, just her throat, and the blood flow was coming through the wound.
d le:d. So ift e:
And it did not happen to the lady until she was red of voice, and afterwards returned to her previous state.
Therefore I say that in treating the epiglottis there should be no fear.
of the swollen throat
1 are the pain theye: and there.
There are two ways: natural and accidental; the former does not involve any machinery.
And the accidental way is in two ways, one seems like fat coming to us, and the other manner appears as an abscess that arises from our veins. and there is fear, and one should not work with force except in those who are young, and test and search for everything related to the case. s said: (trapzard, and so que sonn'shoe in the text l. And search thoroughly, and treat it as it ought to be, until it is perfectly healed.
And let us know.
There are many ways for us, I will tell you all the resemblances.
And so it is necessary to tell all the differences between dislocation and luxation.
I say that fever and inflammation are present until the boiling over is past, and the putrefaction is complete; then rests the fever and heat.
With us there is no heat or fever and pain in the joints; it becomes like its own flesh and according to the body's complexion, and begins as waxen chyle, which grows.
And they are of similar appearance, or grease, or moisture, and greatly vary in color as I have described in the classification.
It is necessary when you come to the care of us that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermitted", according to its form or chapter which follows.
And the manner of inquiring about our abscesses is that you grasp or find more moisture where you see it in the abscess, and turn its two ends slowly until you know that the pus has been felt by the skin, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the intermitted instrument and be careful in this regard: it may cause pain.
If moisture runs out from a wound, and it has the same color as I have described for other abscesses; then follow these instructions.
And if after the puncture no moisture comes out, suspect that it is fatty, then pierce accordingly in a cross pattern, and take with pincers, and lightly scrape from each side, keeping the coat where it lies to treat it healthy with wine vinegar.
And if you cannot make it whole, then cut into pieces so that nothing remains.
If he remains there for a while, it comes back to us many times.
If it remains there for a while and the wound grieves, apply powders of corrosive agues to the wound, press the wound, and place calming substances on the abscess, and treat other wounds until healed.
And if it is large for us to remove, cut both edges of the wound, and treat what has been sutured with silk.
And if the pus is thick or contrary in any way, hasten and mix it with white vitriol paste, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound dries out, then let the sanguineous effervescence rest; afterwards return to sewing what was left undone.
Look at the forms of entromised swellings, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters which are called "albaret," and one that is called "breb," and there are three ways to encircle abscesses of fistulae.
And they are like needles which one uses for sorcery, and made of brass, iron or silver, sharp ones are valued as those that are yellow, and more effective for exploring the boars of a fistula when blackened.
And they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of openings.
The shapes of the bumps are mostly similar to what you see here: large, medium, and small; and those with two boars in three sizes as mentioned.
And if there are hernias with three bulges, and they have three ways to be treated; and if there are hernias with two bulges, and only one bulge, and they also have three treatment methods; all of these require being in their place for treatment.
The head of these is cutting, and some are cut only on one side, from which the nerves are scraped, so that neither vein nor nerve is severed.
And these inserted ones are the stitches replaced close together so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses.
There are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and it is only used where there is dislocation in the joints such as knees, elbows, cheeks, arms, and similar areas.
And at no time is another instrument used, one small, resembling the shavings of splints, according to this form, through which blood is stopped.
And it is placed at no time back into its proper position of veins and arteries, and does not return according to this grand form.
At no time do the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupted, until they appear like women's breasts.
the: Then scrape the fat, and dress the wound with healing salve made of carrots, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and close it until it is cleaned.
and if the membrane falls downward, and becomes softened by its size, as it happens in women, then cut two ribs above it, with two similar incisions. so that the larger one holds onto the smaller at the end of both, and the largest contains the smallest according to this method, from this line b to g; Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat. Prepare as we have said with stitching and powders, and all that is necessary in the treatment, until it heals cleanly.
and if it is not healed properly, or the incision isn't completely made because the patient won't rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a cotton poudrin soaked in a corrosive ointment. and let it remain until all fat and residual tissue are consumed, then cleanse the area thoroughly so that it becomes healthy.
Of abscesses and fractures of the arms and legs
These abscesses that arise from the limbs are hard sores or ulcers, and some that contain pus.
However, those containing pus must be cut according to this method, from the line b up to the line g: an:
And if the abscesses are similar to hard tumors, treat them as we have described in cutting open hard tumors, and if the wound reopens, prepare the fire cautery as we have said before.
For rupturing of an artery
When the artery is ruptured and there is hardness above it, often abscesses occur as well as bleeding from the vein.
When it is found there, as when done for an artery, so are the abscesses large at first. And when you feel it in your arms, there is tightness; and when done for the vein, then there is blood appearing abnormally;
igne et que l'avoir is done oint;   thet les tond les s. It is necessary to clear the iron wound and similarly for those in chief position, as well as for those with long artery bulges above the skin.
It is necessary to clear the iron wound and similarly for those in chief position, as well as for those with long artery bulges above the skin. Then work on the joint swelling like galls and gently remove the artery from its sheaths until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle from below and pierce until the opposite side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places as I have shown you during the extracuction of the two arteries that are on the temples.
Then mark the joint that is between the two ligaments of an intervertebral until the blood flows out from it and let the abscess be released.
Then treat the wound by suturing, as long as the ligament bleeds. Then apply suitable ointment to it, until it is healed.
they *; s. Don'quiet le peop�: she suppt the eye as soon and c, in �ile and you ouner: M. Let's toz is t; they so fat, by its effect : Droit line. Then insert the needle above the place you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, so that there is a double thread on it; then pull from the opposite side. Then secure the abscess as I have told you, or tie off one of the two parts with both ends of the thread.
And if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then pierce with another needle through all of the thread at the incision site of the first needhole, and strain the threads into four loops.
First cut the abscess until excess flows out, then cut away the excess flesh and leave what is attached.
Then apply a compress of wool soaked in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and salves until it is healed.
From abscesses to nerves
As abscesses come in arteries and veins, they also appear on nerves when struck or from excessive work, and similar things.
And this occurs more often in shoulders and elbangs, at all places where there are joints, it is an abscess, its color appears as the body's own color, and causes pain in different ways.
And when it is tightly bound, the patient feels severe pain, not within their entire body but outside of their core;
Et être solide dans tout son corps, ni vers l'avant, ni vers l'arrière, ni sur le côté, ni vers le haut ou vers le bas, et celui dont les articulations sont touchées ne doit pas être traité avec de la ferraille; sinon il pourrait y avoir contraction.
Et celui qui a une blessure à la tête ou au front fait craquer les os du crâne. Si l'abcès est petit, alors utilise des pinces pour couper son origine.
If it is large, if the ligament is supported by a thread, and skinned, then the bone and sew the wound closed along the stitching, and care for it until it is healed.
Large hanging sores and pour. Et puis que tu puisse ventres à son place l'air doucement ceste les auctez par, qui esprouvies ne le air d’ochez la teste mal, alors est semblante est quitte ventre en taine the li alainte et la place de li, ainsi quai.
And I saw one man who had two bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, with no difference between them; they were white, had fine roots, were split open, and brought about by moisture.
I copied them and found that in one there were eighteen ounces, and in the other five ounces; when observing the work done by incision, you should see if it is moist on the patient's side, with a pale and wet color of flesh, and fine root.
If you copy the spatulum broadly, and be with you the fire cautery. For in cutting often come great losses of blood, and if it does not stop, then quickly apply the cauterizing tool.
And if you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread of linen, and bind it as we have said, leaving it for two days.
And then release the binding, and continue to restrain with the linen thread until it holds the joint, while avoiding excessive strain; and if the roots are thick, be wary of applying pressure directly on the abdardomen, but ensure adequate coverage.
Then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound and ensure you do not cover the sore which is of a sickly color, poor in sense, and lacking redness.
This is an encrusted boil, and I will come to treat this syphilis hereafter.
When the mouth is forcibly closed.
est cest l'air.
And if it is due to the rupture of the sinew and the opening of the bubble, then the appearance of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light matter without pain, with various outcomes. And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then there are various outcomes; and when one presses on its extremities, it recoils, then returns, and at times it may be hardened, with significant enlargement at the entrance of the bowel for intense work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and readily becomes apparent when pressed with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, then the abscess appears large and hard, and extends in accordance with its quantity.
And if it is for swelling, it must be softened by touching, and the work should be such that you examine whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or swelling. If it is necessary to let the wound heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the treatise on abscesses, for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, it must be commanded of the patient that he washes his arm and stretches it straight out, then wrap all around the belly. Then command him to lie down with his hands between yours. Then go around the joint that you have set in all of its ligaments, Then extend half of the abscess above along with the entire large bone;
Then work on the extended abscess by placing your finger over it, and gently press down. If you find the abscess attached to the ligament, if it is loose, then push the intestines towards the opposite side of the belly.
And if you find swelling, if it takes hold on the sinew, and then remove the excess tissue.
; (and d, and do not: the t s m s, so n' 1, also the ou parlé fault y tre estrop qt’m: that you give et le cxte: the ph� fidste or.
Then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and let it rest until healed, and remove the dead flesh by yourself. Or cut when it is thin and ripe, then treat as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said.
Or cut when it is thin and ripe, then treat as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or pus that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and bandage it.
Of burning sore
In the division of similitudes of ulcers, and how one must work with medicines, and how to cleanse a wound caused by iron; and let us say about the ulcer in bone marrow, which requires great caution for treatment, and according to the ancients when ulcers are present or can be removed like those found within mammary glands, thighs, and other similar areas, they should all be completely eradicated at their onset; but if they become large and old, it is not adviser that one approaches them, for I have never known any cured from such; nor has anyone ever been healed in my presence before.
And the treatments for when they are present or can be removed as we have said is to purge the patient of black bile once, then if he has obvious repletion make him fast, prepare a suitable location for treatment; then pour your salves or ulcer, and hair from all sides, and bone fragments from all directions leave nothing behind; let it bleed fully, pressing well with your hand or something else, and the blood flow in reverse of the incision on an artery or vein makes you counteract such by cauterization until its vessels are sealed off; then use other remedutes until he is healed.
From dropsy (edema) In the division of resemblances to dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is formed, and the signs of each type, and the treatment which is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; it only sparkles slightly; and one should not use iron on these two types: namely tympanites and hyposarcoma, as it is a deadly matter; therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropseriness called "eclites" with medicine, and the treatment does not work, look to see if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as bloating and similar things; do not use iron there, for there is doubt; and if you see a very strong patient, and they only have dropsy without any other illness, and are neither too young nor too old, then treat them in this way: Lay the patient flat and press down on their stomach to push the water towards the lower part of the abdebdom, then take a spatula-like stick according to this form: And be needle sharp at two points. Also, make sure it is not so pointed that it can reach the intestine when inserted, and do not allow it to bleed;
Then examine if the jaundice is affected towards the intestines: if it must be that you make an incision above the elbow, three straight cuts from below on the forearm; and if the jaundge is by the illness of the liver, then do your incision on the left side of the elbow, three times; and if it's due to gallstones, do so on the right, and ensure that the patient lies with the incision so that excess fluids do not flow towards the weakened area.
Then puncture the skin with the instrument and pour out blood, then lift your hand all along the spatulate area between the skin and sinew as when scraping a quantity of an eel or somewhat less; then pierce the sinew until the spatulate area reaches eight layers, which is the place for water, then cut the fascia, and pour out this instrument in its form: It resembles a silver filigree chain delicate, made of brass or copper light, with one small hole on top; along one side there are three holes; two on each other side, and one more; it has tailored edges like a feather, and the shape of the incision is as when scribes cut a quill:
If the spleen comes to be filled with fluid, then apply now on the instrument; drain out half of it or one-third, for if you empty too much at once in that hour, lest the patient may die from weakness due to his spirit'amooring, where he approaches death;
But in accordance with the amount of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's illness signifies, and his hair; then prepare the instrument and hold water, and it is held now for the key that pops out the pus which is under the sore, as I have spoken about, that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument on the following day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw a small quantity of water.
Do this every day, and avoid spitting until it stays but a little water. And if you doubt the patient, and leave out much water, then treat with burial dust or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and drink of wine; and treat with dry medicines until they are healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting pus, as I have said before.
Of erecting the penis. At no time do children appear who lack any openings in the penis, or if they are small, or not properly placed. If it is necessary immediately that he must be pierced through a very fine tube: then insert a thin plug of lead, and leave it for three to four days; when urine comes out, remove the closure, allowing him to urinate, and then replace it; sometimes this may not be needed as the urine does not re-close the opening. If the opening is small, then it can be dilated using a lead plug as we have said before, it will widen; those who do not have the opening in its proper place are blocked because no one is born with the opening at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until their foreskin is lifted upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the testicles, which is a serious illness.
And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on their back with their head and foreskin raised up like a pen'amolet, so that the opening is completely closed if necessary; and be mindful to prevent blood loss which often occurs, and if it happens, treat the wound with an iron rod causing bleeding until healed.
Of pustules of the penis Many times these abscesses come in the penis, and there is an appearance of ugly lesions; they can be benign or malignant; it should be treated by gently pricking with a fine needle, cleaning and sterilizing them all, then applying cotton soaked in refined Egyptian ointment; afterwards treat with the finest ointment until they are healed. And if the abscess is malignant, of pus color and draining, you should treat it with a fire cautery. After cleaning it, if the abscess is on both inside the shaft and outside deeper parts, then remove the abscess that lies within; once removed, treat the external part. For when treating them together, do not make incisions in the head of the penis lest they be pierced, leading to blackness and decay in the penis and at the joint; it is necessary to address all that is blackened and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and ground almonds made from pomegranate bark and dates, then treat with other medications until they are healed.
When the flow of blood changes, if you arrange the lunar cautery as follows: The cautery has two positions together - that is, for the change in blood and corruption; and when the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, one must thrust or lead a plumcake from the penis so the patient urinates among them. And if the hairs are moist at the top of the penis that occurs in those who have not been circumcised, whether for wound or abscess, it is necessary to scrape with an instrument until the bonds are loosened and released from all sides.
And if this is a serious matter to consider it so, then scrape with any spatula slightly on the head of the penis and hairs; then carefully separate them by two, and place a subtle linen cloth in cold water, ensuring they are not completely moistened.
For circumcision
Circumcision is not a disjunction in continuation like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will, especially for children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest work for health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have seen the most part of masters and priests who practiced circumcision before one day, in times of plenty, and at any new moon; there were keys because there are two locks, and sometimes a cap was placed on top and below it.
Now it recovers partially, and the pain doubles, and the healing which is not quite sure does not secure the point of the limb; and in the trimming of the nail by chance escapes the knife, and cuts into the tissue, and many times such wounds occur that do not require further treatment and I have observed this.
From the trimming which is done using force on all parts of the sinew, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as the force cuts equally well above and below.
For when you press your hand, trim equally on all parts of the tendon; but let the thread be well stretched around the skin; and make the manner of the first work such that it seems to a child (if he understands), that you do not tie the thread only inside the sheath, but rather loosen in all ways that you can. Then the head is placed between your hands straight up, and restores strength between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them or any strains; then put your hand on the rod and blow or sigh, and pull it up until the head of the rod reaches there; then cleanse well from the filth collected therein; then tie the joint with a double thread; then bind below. I a second tooth by another string; hold as between the two tied ends at the pouchet and index finger, joining between the two strings; gently lift the root upward and guide the head of the rod;
Then the head is placed between your hands straight up, and restores strength between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them or any strains; then put your hand on the rod and blow or sigh, and pull it up until the head of the rod reaches there; then cleanse well from the filth collected therein; then tie the joint with a double thread; then bind below. I a second tooth by another string; hold as between the two tied ends at the pouchet and index finger, joining between the two strings; gently lift the root upward and guide the head of the rod; Then allow the blood to clot gradually and gradually, for it is a sign of healing; and place powder above and below the wound with a dressing made from one egg yolk cooked without salt soaked in rose water, mixed with good rosemary oil boiled and fresh, leaving it until the following day, and treating it again as necessary until it is healthy.
The form of strength for cleansing should be such that both eyes are equal and sharp, and the eyelids as equally large as a hand.
The error of the inflammaturgy is when the core within escapes through the incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend it with your thimble, just as if the lungs were to form an abscess; and cover equally, and if you cannot hold by your thimble, then use pincers, and then cover.
And if they trespass for three days, and what is under the rod is swollen, leave it to be as if the abscesses are soothed, and lightly scrape; cover as you wish to move, and guard from the part of the rod, it will neither harm nor benefit.
Then heal the sudden wounds of powdered things that we have said or dealt with powders, and if it is covered too much, and it goes above, it will not harm; then treat as we have said, until it is sound.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to an obstruction such as a stone, frozen blood, bowel, or other causes that we have mentioned in the section.
And if the urine is retained and you see that it is due to an obstruction such as a stone in or near the bladebowel junction, then the patient should be bent over on their knees; place his feet on his back, and extend his abdomen towards the upper part of his back, and restrain the belly tightly as much as possible; and consequently, it is forced to strain the bladder valve for stone expulsion above, so that urine is released.
by the ben'iz C. And thene and:t; a s them* JB cure the t the same pr tre that
The method for urine release is to take a double thread and tie it at one end with a small piece of wool or cotton, then insert the other end into the syringe. Trim any excess wool or cotton until reaching the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and balm of Uffa; have the patient sit on a stool, and apply oil to the bladder and penis using moist oil, olive oil, and water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, reaching up to the base of the penis, then double the penis towards the buttocks; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladader and allow the patient to feel relief as they empty their bladder, for it is not done in this order due to the direction the tube goes being twisted; then remove the thread gradually with small pieces of wool until all are removed, allowing urine to follow the thread, which will be extracted.
And resume using the syringe as long as the bladder is emptied and comfort the patient.
Of diseases of the bladder
When incontinence or blood appears within the bladder, with pus accumulating there and you see to distill waters and medicines, do all that is called "clêpesdre," which is its form.
What is a.
When you see your medicines in the bladder, place the head of the douche in the moisture, and pull towards the string that is inside; then pull on the string to draw out the moisture, then firmly reset the string inside; if this allows the moisture to enter, it will come to the bladder now, so the patient will feel it.
And here is the form of the subtle enema used to clear the bladeb: this is how it is done.
It is made of silver or copper and has the head higher than usual. Then from one of the nipples it falls off; then take an ox-bladder, put in there the moisture that you see clisterizing the bladeboil a string formed with good double thread, then heat some of that moisture over fire; then insert the head of the enema into the phallic member, and squeeze your hand against the bladder so all the moisture enters at once until the patient feels it in their bladders.
If you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle on it, then puncture around it evenly; then insert a strong thread through these holes, assemble the circle as one would with ivy stems, and put inside oil, moisture, and water, sealing it in the instrument; press as you did with the bladder until the moisture reaches the bladero.
Stone
We have already said in the section about stone extraction and remedies; and I explained how to differentiate between stones formed from rainwater and all signs, and the types of stones where you must work by cutting; and with bladder, and penis; and now I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that stones which enter the bladder occur more often in children, and this indicates that the water from the bladebeels like to jump as a hare in its subtlety; there is much urine, it troubles the male organs, causing them pain many times, then hardens; it affects most of these jumps at their foundation; healing for children until they are four years old is easy, but severe in older individuals, and moderate for those between youth and age; treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to expel all feces from within the intestines; for sometimes this prevents seeking stones.
Then take the patient by the feet and stand them up straight, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and it does not ascend again; then place the patient between your hands appropriately, with their hands under their thighs, so that the bladder is fully inclined downwards; then you search for and touch upon it.
If you feel the stone in the space, haste to cut into it. And if it does not come out with all touching, moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, and if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is a grown youth; and push it firmly at its base, and extract the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, squeeze above your finger joint; then press downwards towards your finger, and let it fall out where you see fit to cut.
And instruct the minister to press the vein into his hand, and command him to stretch out the sinews towards his right hand above, and from his left hand remove the skin that is below the sinews in the area where cutting is done; then he inserts a spatulam orifice, which gives it its form.
And make between what is between the sinews and the base, not too wide but close to the left side of the neck; and be right above the stone, and your fingers should touch either the base or the joint, and tilt it over so that it is broad towards the front, and narrow inwardly, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
By chance the pressure is applied to that which lies as foundation, so it jumps without exerting effort; and know that there are stones or angles with margins, if they are grained to be removed; and if of a round shape like a pearl, whose release is easy.
At the location where there are angles and margins, make an incision larger; and if it does not come out, you must extract using tongs similar to a file on its tip in order to grip and remove the stone so that it cannot escape; or blow from underne.i. subtle instrument bent at the top; and if you cannot engineer this way, enlarge .i. small opening slightly, and if there is no perforation, strain with vitriol.
If there are multiple stones, first remove the largest at the bladder'cuff', then move on to it, and then extract forcefully, and do the smaller ones if there are more. And if they are very large, you must make a larger wound; for two things happen: either the patient dies, or urine comes out as well because the urethra cannot join again; but nevertheless, strive to drain with traction, or debrize with tongs, until it is drained in pieces.
When you have completed your work, clean the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, apply a bandage, and place a linen cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil, rose water, and cold water to cool the abscess; then bind the patient's neck securely until the third day.
And when you remove it, wash thoroughly with oil and water; then apply the final ointments of dafinicon and basilicon until healed.
And if the abscess comes out in the wound and causes blood congealments in the bladder, and it is retained causing urine retention, which is known as a difficulty passing without strain during urination: place your finger in the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrode the bladder and prostate.
Then lift the wound clean and easy of water and salt, and treat it in every way you can, until it is healthy; and it must be that all ointments you use to heal him, bind his two thighs together, and assemble medicines at its place.
And if the stone is small and it protrudes from the urethra and lodged in, and urine cannot pass through; as I have said before, you must dilate him many times for this treatment. I have seen such cases thus.
Take an iron rod according to this form and it is pierced at four angled tips in one piece:
Then take a thread and wrap it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the plug on the shaft gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the plug slowly to your hand at the stone bit by bit, as long as you can pierce the stone from another side; urine will come out soon afterward, then press with your hand where the remains of the stone are lodged inside the shaft. It is quickly broken apart, and it jumps forcefully with the urine, and the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do so due to any reason that prevents it, then take a thread below the stone and another one above, then make the shaft where the stone lies between the two threads, then extract forcefully, remove the ligatures, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; treat until it is healed.
of women's stones
Sometimes stones are inserted in women and if it happens even once, the treatment is difficult, and there are three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and the second reason is that no woman can properly find another who knows how to undress at the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps you cannot find a woman who knows this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone in the woman's body may be larger than the man's stone, so it requires a deeper incision and causes much fear.
And if necessary, you should call a very skilled midwife and pay her well for it. If you do not find one, then there is no substitute as a discreet chaste maid who knows part of the art, or a woman familiar with some aspects of women's healthcare; she must carry out the stone examination according to your command.
And look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then you must insert your finger or instrument and search for the pearl; and if she is not, hold it down from her hymen, and instruct that she place her finger or with the patient's left hand above the swelling firmly.
If she is not a virgin, then it should be that she moves the pearl gradually from the entrance of the vagina towards downwards until it reaches near the top of the thigh; then cut at the root of the thigh against the pubic bone where it appears to bulge out, and feel for the pearl in that area; and do not move your finger over or below the pearl, but be quick with the cutting motion.
Then insert the rod in the groin, and if you feel the pearl, make a cut so deep that the pearl can come out, and know that there are many ways pearls can be found: they can be small or large, sharp or blunt, long or round, with veins. Knowing these forms will help to predict how it will emerge.
If the blood does not stop, then apply powdered alum until it clots; then return to your work, as long as the wound is closed, and use remedies I have mentioned for helping with stone removal.
If the bleeding does not stop and it is from an artery that has been cut, apply powder at the site of injury and tighten bandages and ribbons, do not reopen what you have closed, leave the wound alone unless the patient dies suddenly; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of blood is subsided and the pain diminishes, return to your work as long as the wound remains closed.
Of swollen hernia
This swollen hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture or white sap, which originates from below the skin's surface, contained within the egg; it is called "siphaca," and never properly in the egg's membrane, if one believes that to be another egg; and this is the leather between the white siphaca we have mentioned, and such occurrences do not happen.
And the creation of this hernia is due to weakness in the veins, where that matter expands.
At no time does it come from blows to the joints, and this moisture has many colors: where there is a hue leaning towards yellow, or without red, or black, or watery white, and this occurs more frequently.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white and fuzzy as we have said, then there are abscesses like small swellings resembling an egg, and they do not open the joints because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper skin, then these abscesses have part of an egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg.
If the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white sinew, if it feels quite well; therefore, when you see to know the color of the moisture, try throughout the entire interspace, from which the form was previously. Accordingly, after the interspace, judge what is within it.
Accordingly, after the interspace, judge what is within it. And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary for the patient to be well-nourished according to their ability and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back, upon something slightly elevated, and places many layers of cloth beneath him.
Then sit on your left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, extending the rod to one of the two ribs near the hip joints.
Then take the spatulum and cut through the fat around the long part up to near the wrist, making a straight incision through the rib tissue until reaching white cartilage, carefully scraping it off as much as possible.
Then puncture the white cartilage cleanly with a hole of one sizeable diameter, and drain all the fluid, then insert your fingers, and stretch the cartilage backward. Do not touch the ribs' heads but only the cartilage; cut it out entirely or piece by piece carefully so that if you don't cut precisely sharply, the fluid may return.
If the joint springs forward during your work, reset it to its place once you have completed the surgery; then join the two sides of the knee with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until healed.
And if you find the joint affected by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are dilated, carefully considering blood loss; then cut out the entire swollen area and treat it as we have said.
And if the abscess is assembled in two parts together, recognize that these are two branches; cut out the other part similarly to how you did with the first one, then drain the blood, and place linen soaked in oil on the wound.
And place other cloths soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two cuoins, and put over doubled cloths, and tie above all the bandage that follows this form:
Then take two cloths and place scraps of linen rag according to this pattern and be sewn together along the girdle of the breeches, with one head reaching from the foundation up to the back, and the other at the lower elbow area; and the other two heads on the inside of the ankles, and all be bound together in a loop around the waistband.
and this medicine of the fire cautery does not require a heated iron bar at the waistline, but that you use a delicate small-bladed cauterizing instrument and shave the leather of the cuoins (braces), and prepare them as we have instructed so that the white paste containing water is exposed.
If you take the fire cautery according to this method, and pierce that sack with an awl at the nodes, and the skin peels off from this subtle hot cautery.
And the wound in all ways you can, as long as you reach everything within it; and ensure that the flame does not touch the skin; know that this work is more healing; and keep watch for any blood flow issues, and be mindful of abnormalities from cutting.
And if anything seems contrary to you, or pus appears or blood issues occur or any other thing, then treat what is against you, according to that which was previously said.
If the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this procedure due to its severity, then perform a puncture as I have instructed, when you are certain by the meanings we have explained that resetting is necessary.
If the patient lies down on their back with the bed raised; then puncture the abscess below all the surrounding fatty tissue, and place the puncture long enough to reach deep into the body; ensuring that the wound is sufficiently wide so that any fluid can flow freely.
then place a swab over the wound, and bandage it up, leaving space for any remaining fluid to drain out; and treat it until the wound is healed.
If the bandage does not allow water to escape from the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you insert a pen or instrument used for treating eye conditions like this; and open slightly one hole of the wound, ensuring that the water returns, and comes together after 3-4 months or so, and when it has come together as before, then the patient will pass through their days.
Of abscesses from boils
It is said that in this part of the chapter there are fearful conditions due to which I think it may be best left untouched.
And I shall tell you about the work and resemblance of an abscess.
Thus I say that many an abscess comes upon the body, especially on joints; and this happens in numerous cases.
It is known to be due to excessive acidity and water retention, which spreads on joints or from impact.
And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body part; and it causes no pain, but is a severe abscess.
the'l's; they can be or benue: by and the: 8-King a: so that proth;
When it is by our artery, known by the position of heat in an abscess when you press with your hands. and one must not even touch it.
Those who are affected by vein inflammation are recognized by their condition when touched on the fingers.
de l’m unt not the so fe (d are similarly: heal est that covse; as a covid: And it is that you cut the head of the clavicle, then extend the joint upward, and tie firmly with a white sash, and free the shoulder from all parts of the socket.
If the socket is already sufficiently tightened with these stitches, then it is necessary to treat and cut the socket.
And if there is air in the fistula or within the tissues around it, then you must release all that contained matter and cut roundly.
And if the birthmark is present where it should be, one must excise it completely and remove the bone, as we have said.
And once your treatments are complete, apply the woolen bandage with rose oil and wine to the wound, then dress it with other remedies until healed.
Then cauter la le plasters tale of les art, dont the bleu:
This is an abscess surrounded by swelling resembling a lump, with the softening of the tissues. and it moves quickly when touched by the patient;
then the treatment of this disease must also be approached with great caution as that one before mentioned.
And therefore we shall tell you the procedure for it, as the ancients have done.
It's necessary that you make the patient sit on the seat of the chair and then attach the straps to your shoulders. To all instruments near at hand, and to cleanse yourself thoroughly, and extend them properly.
then cut with a sharp scalpel in the middle of the vessel, until it is fully opened.
and then scrape from each side as we have mentioned in the extraction of arteries that are located on temples;
Then insert a needle where there is a thread, and tie it at the point of first appearance, then securely to the other end. Then wrap with bandages straight along the length of the body and treat any corrupted sores.
Then heal the wound as you would with others or bind it in a bow if neither of the tendons are torn.
at so far: (s. If the bone loses its stability due to the incision of veins, they shrink and cannot be healed.
For the treatment of scurvy: To heal this part of the dislocation. Here is made, then to be able to dry it so often done, and that section over.
This procedure occurs in the skull or from its extension, and there are many ways of coming about it for various reasons: by impact, jumping, screaming, lifting heavy weights, and similar causes.
And the signs when it is from the skull's extension are that it happens slowly over time and does not come suddenly. And abscesses appear equally towards the front because the skull accelerates the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of severed snake, which causes sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse abscesses appear near the skin, due to issues with the intestine and the body after being bitten by a venomous snake.
And it never leaves in circles with the intestines, and is retained within, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these treatments of iron which cause fear, one must be careful to remove them.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to reset the intestines back into place with their hands internally in the wound if they can be inserted. Then gently grasp his neck between your hands, and lift the legs.
Then put it well with the worms on you will be fed for a deafarmete ou mtie the stomach bones of; Then insert into the hips flexible ones according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the bones can come out.
Then scrape off the sack which is outside the skin of the joints, as long as all the white flesh inside remains covered.
Then insert your index finger into that which supports the joint, between the white flesh outside and the skin of the elbow, and between the second sack.
the ma; (with ca cis by ça ; and Ch�nt is they. And so. And command the minister to extend the mouth upward, and tie that which is behind the ligament.
And if there is any intestine wrapped around or white feculent hardness found, and if you find anything, bring it to the belly from below.
ond Then bring them together in the shape of a cross and bind the socket, which we have said is under the skin covering the joints, with a strong ligament from two parts; Then wrap the heads of the bones, and bind them with two parts so that no object to be worn can enter in between, lest an abscess should form. And place the ligament according to the first long two fingers of it, and after these two ligaments leave the socket which is under the skin covering the joints with a large diameter of one finger.
After that according to the roundness that the head carries; then wrap in the part that is below the skin of the neck, as long as it does not reach the bow, as we have said before.
Then prepare a linen cloth with oil and apply to wounds, and then apply the bandage as we have said. And never is the face that we have mentioned cauterized, after incision, due to fear of blood loss.
This often happens, leaving the bandage on until it falls off by itself; and if it lingers too long, then apply warm water as we have said, until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
For a carnous hernia
In this method, I have never seen anyone who dared to attempt treatment with iron.
And the ancients said it is made like screws that are assembled with a vice, in such manner that you adjust the bolts after sizing on either side slightly apart.
Then bend it back to me, and treat the abscess caused by what works there, as long as the bolts tighten; and heal them as we have said, until they are sound.
Never comes out any parts of the arms, as we have said, and opening the eyes; and none of the intestines come out at the joints, and if they do come out, it is little, and return all hours.
If it remains too long at this spot, either a wound or an abscess forms until the intestines burst.
And this happens due to the extension of the abscess which is swoln, as we have said, because it becomes extended, then softened and enlarged in its cavity and mouth.
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have before said; and nevertheless it is not treated with iron in this manner:
And it is that the patient lies supine with their hands between their back, then cut the swollen area of rotation three widths according to the quantity of three grains;
Then extract the sphacelated tissue that is below the skin to be cut, then take the thread and place it on the visible area of the sphacelation.
And press at the front of the belly, then sew the two visible areas of sphacelation above the head of the thread and sew both ends.
the her, and s.
Then treat by treating wounds. And when you bind the threads, if it swells and heal the wound, until it is cleaned.
The sinew is bound, and it has no appearance in the rotation, and the cautery wound heals quickly here, and closer to health.
For softening of the leather of the joints
; so fat de la pigu* bonse t1, that vothae êtes des lefa mous. Doe est; Ifs:d on ma. Ch a ben tre the f. The is some n'sce. A but they.
By purging
Purging is forbidden by law in our realm and I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; however, there are two necessary reasons: one being that a physician must respond with the treatment when asked, and another because we often need purging of certain animals for assistance, such as goats, sheep, rabbits, and other beasts. Therefore, I say that purging is done in two ways: by attraction or cutting.
Hermaphroditism refers to a condition where an individual has both male and female reproductive organs or characteristics of both sexes. This term was derived from Greek mythology, referring to the deity Hermes/Mercury, who was born with combined features of his parents Zeus (the sky god) and Hermah (a nymph). In modern times, it is considered an outdated and potentially offensive term; preferred terms are intersex or transgender.
Hermaphroditism is according to two modes as in men: one where between the two glands it is open just like the nature of a woman, having hair and sometimes urination. The other mode is found in women, with a swelling above the penis and two glands. The treatment for hermaphrodites (both types) consists of treating all affected areas as other wounds; in the second case, men from whom urine spurts through the skin of the glands have no cure.
This section discusses an enlargement that may occur on the testicle or scrotum, which can be treated similarly to other ailments and conditions affecting these areas in men.
Tumor is an enlargement located on the testicle or scrotum that can be unpleasant to look at; some women may have a similar size as their hand, and this is treated similarly. It is advised to remove the excess of the tumor with your hands or fingers gently; do not cut too deeply so bleeding does not occur, then treat it again with other remedies until it heals completely; for another condition occurrebeing in the mouth of the penis and protruding, which may occasionally shoot out forcefully, resembling a cow's udder, and hence they called it by ancient physicians "cow disease." If necessary, remove it as you would with the tumor mentioned earlier, and treat until healed.
Of quaking stones
Erratic if the nature of women is not well perceived, or the vulva is small; and it's natural by birth, or caused by illness that comes upon her; or it's due to close contact, or a subtle serpent or insect bite, and forms in front on thighs, hips, or buttocks, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes the ability to bear children; knowledge of this is obtained by observing the belly. If swelling occurs frequently, it can appear near both groins or the anus. If caused by a subtle serpent bite, and it appears on two sides, quickly bring her to bed, spreading her legs wide apart; then extend the two fingers fully, as long as the snake remains active, until it covers the swelling; then take wool, grease it with oil, and apply it over the area, and let the woman lie in each direction daily so that she cannot move. And if the serpent bite is hard and venomous, you must treat it as a fig leaf of myrtle appears. If swelling due to friction or chafing occurs, suspend a pound net on either side; then apply healing ointments like dragon's blood, frankincense, along with rose oil in abundance; then create a wide linen bandage so that the wound cannot close; and do this for a long time, followed by a linen tent drying agent; then treat it until it is healthy. And when swelling due to friction or chafebring occurs, one must cover according to this manner, unless it's an infected sore that has opened up. Because with the sore of infection on thighs, nothing should be rubbed against them.
Hemorrhoids are a condition characterized by swollen veins in the lower rectum and anus areas; it's often due to straining during bowel movements or increased pressure in that region from various causes such as pregnancy, constipation, sitting for long periods. For treatment: encourage gentle hygiene practices to prevent irritation, use of mild soapsuds and avoiding harsh chemicals; recommend softening stool with a diet high-fiber foods like fruits, vegetables, whole grains. Regular exercise can improve the blood flow in the body also important reduce pressure on veins from sitting for prolonged periods or straining during bowel movements to facilitate easier passage of stools; warm water baths sitz. For relief swelling treatments may include topical creams and suppository, cly-dilated veins. Apply aids ointment that can reduce inflamed areas swellings with the following: Wearing tight clothing or undergarments snugly socks; as they cause worsen'tilize after bowel movements to the area with warm water and sitz baths twice a day until symptoms. Improve; avoid pressure irritated itch, swelling painful hemorrhoids do not sit too long periods on seat:
Swellings are openings of veins which without customary treatment, and when swellings become old they turn into hemorrhoids; and we have already discussed in division their types, signs, and symptoms, and I will now say those that receive cure. I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosis, when fully formed inside the rectum so that they cannot be felt except by a probe. Those that are at the mouth of the rectum can be felt and can be treated. Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold house, then apply heat to the affected area with tongs, and bind it close to its roots; then powder above with binding medicines such as dragon's blood extract and incense, and similar substances; then insert her fingers into the anus for an hour, then place her in cold water. And if bleeding occurs from this process, make her sit in a decoction of sumac bark and pomegamoide rinds and gallnuts and similar substances, then give her wheat flour mixed with honey and oil, and let her take an enema; and if it does not improve, apply wet bandages to the back and buttocks without using a probe. Then make a poultice of linen soaked in plantain or aglet juice with wine, and apply it locally. And when the abscess rests, treat its edge with ointment until healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and appears as if from a sharp edge, so cover it as I have said for thrombosis; then cure it until it is healthy.
Abscesses of the anus
tuesse cistantelysfescs ce marezeze dresitters:s8, l’lir;nkzy aise aseg20 cze onfrose
Of childbirth
First at the delivery one must know the natural figure of childbirth and signs if you see a woman press her abdamen to urinate: then hasten for the baby to be born; thus you know that this kind of childbirth follows the natural figure, with the issue coming from the head, and the second in line with it. When you see these signs, gently press on her belly so that the baby is born quickly because when they come out atop the head, the second also comes down with it, and the marrow of excess bones are removed by good hygiene; those who do not come otherwise do not come naturally. Because he sometimes comes onto his feet, and forces his body or ears to be delivered, or turns about on his neck, and other malicious figures; thus at delivery one must be wise and subtle in these matters, avoiding errors and deceit, and I will show you all the figures as how one should assist.
the w should docter and the vites. And split the second ribcage, and cut until the moisture that is deeply embedded flows; and rub the woman's belly as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then one must administer an enema to the woman with a muscatel solution of fenugreek mixed with oil from sesame seeds; then press again and induce vomiting for a condition, and keep her mouth and nose open for an hour: now extract the child. And if both hands emerge forcefully, one must gently reset them bit by bit; and if they cannot be inserted, place the woman on a stool, and elevate her feet upwards; then stand the stool on the ground, and hold onto the woman so she does not defecate while standing; and if the hands cannot be inserted and the child is dead, cut the hands at the cords that were previously tied, and extract the child, and reset both sides equally.
From the release of the child's feet When the child comes to its feet, it must be lifted upward. And then turn it little by little until they are equal.
Then pierce and extend it slightly by small pieces.
If it falls to the thighs, if ordered to pierce, make it sneeze of condition; If broken loose, if God wills so.
And if not as we have said, slowly and gradually until it becomes according to the natural form. For then it is easily done.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take musk oil, and linseed oil, and melted gum, and mix all in one mortar. And apply to the affected area inside and outside with this ointment, Then have her sit in cold water until just below the ribs;
t; If youttily (d. Then let it sit on a chair, then make it sneeze and strain its mouth and nose, and the priest pricks its belly gently, for the child now urinates. For the dislocation of the child in his knees When a child comes to this condition, you put the nurse's hands gently and gently.
From the dislocation of a child who comes forth with one hand extended wide. It is necessary to engineer resetting the hand: If it cannot be brought back, then lift up the woman and go.
without any le t:
Then treat the dislocation as I have described;
and if it does not return on its own, make it sit on a chair, then study how to reset the hand; and you should guide its growth according to natural form, and make it sneeze, and command that it pegs until the fetus grows fully.
by c, and lire iste et sof; And that they n'l. It is necessary for the bailiff to dye his hand, then turn it slowly and slightly, and bathe it gently.
And when it is evenly balanced, if you apply the musk-scented powder and oil as we have said, then command that it moves slowly and slightly.
also the t aide, main the il peculte pecesse to drye  (or vign: bon and d. In this same manner, reset it all at the second attempt
In this same manner, reset it all at the second attempt When it comes to be in this way upon the second try, perform the second reset on your fingernail until the moisture is dried.
and if there are swellings on his face and neck, when you treat the bumps, they should not be retained and let the flesh move.
thee as you can the gobe;
From the displacement of nerves One should know that many times glands arise, and sometimes none at all; this is not a strange occurrence, and rarely happens. an d, and it so on:
I know such veins that are multiple and opened by their sac, which is attached to the bladder.
and they do not open as naturally like all others of them, as we have said.
And if they open quickly, so the treatment is as we have said, and be the skilled healers, and make promptly what they do. n's s p, d, Et lesse: If it. Of many children
Of many children Never are formed in the marris: i. or ii. or iii. or iv. or v. or vi. or vii., or more up to xv., and are all shaped into a child by the measure of their glory through divine grace.
And it is necessary for the physician to know everything about him, because similar occurrences may happen to him. If done according to what is proper.
Of the dead child.
When treating a woman who has lost her child or is pregnant as I have mentioned in the section, and there is no flux, and you are forced to perform manual work. If it is necessary that you ascertain if the woman is of sound mind and has not had an incident or fears death;
If it is necessary that the woman be lying on her back with her head tilted down and legs raised;
f: s, so far le estl'ign les tr� ser cat. I have are not the.
Then rub the mouth of the bruise with oil from sweet almonds and fenugreek seeds, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and mixtures. Then bandage it gently, then insert whatever is needed to bind the joints securely in place.
and be careful if the child's head appears enlarged, that it does not descend towards his chest; If swelling occurs in his eyes or neck or mouth or under the palate or from below the beard or on the throat or near the ribs,
And if there is swelling under fingers or thumbs, if it becomes swollen or painful in the mid ribs;
And it is fitting that he boils the oncine in his right hand, places the cap between his thumbs of his left hand, and rubs all his hand lightly, and makes the oncine into any one of these places we have said, until it fills with the thing;
Then fix it against another hook or use a similar tool if needed so that the extraction be equal.
And then extend it equally from both sides to move and have the hooks bitten for holding, as shown in this form.
a. And if they dose them and sofornc and the: irt, that ine iste nott And ement, but they so conniçm de le chier toge. The wordst it c un est prise;
If none remain, place this incision higher or elsewhere, and do so as long as it fully recedes.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to grasping too tightly. est f; d. And such as ce:
Then apply a bandage to the joint of the sole or heel, so it is necessary that you do likewise on the other hand, and for two feet.
And if the child's head is large and difficult to deliver during birth, or if it has its forehead shaped in such a way. If it is necessary that you push the fontanelle with your two fingers and guide the head and extract the molding; the forme. Do the t are also byt; and them; (some that line.
And so too does this happen naturally with children of great size. And then treat the bones with pincers.
And if the head falls off again and it is held tightly with ties, so be they split until the moisture that has caused this is gone.
If it cannot exit, cut it open with your fingers as you are able.
And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must puncture until the humor flows properly.
humdroit, And ils s'e d’est as it; if the tisnt eyne, and; In the lespie until you is to them so much li byttir, they of lits:
And if it is difficult on the belly or breast, you should stretch it with a cloth wrapped around by hand; and so forth as to the other parts of this dislocation, for li estraint plusors joes par les membres. And when the belly or breast is made to swell, until the moisture there is corrected.
And if it well and not to the members is oft sore, si couvrement, en l’on ou il ne peur bien la cest; If he thrusts his hand inside to the root of the ulcer, and pulls it all the way up to the mouth of the ulcer. Then he inserts one or two pincers, and grasps firmly.
And if the mouth of the ulcer is closed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, then one must not attempt to treat it. so le t c p m n’t e's, and o s inder they, lesi est paspe jouht theli; que that: s et se la ouge line. And the inflamed parts are softened and moistened with water.
And if a child is under its ribcage, and you can place it similarly, apply what we have said for the living infant.
Et to le cuid d’sis untant by the on the ou les tels iste est ce que li tre tu ne doit too much; iciens et the cide if you are as so that too, oignes prite too loufferent:m.
And when you have done this, if there are pus coming from those places we mentioned in the bone marrow, then...
And if there are signs of blood flowing out, they should be tied up tightly and treated accordingly.
And I see a woman who had a mortal wound, then treat the other as described by. After long time came an abscess on his buttock, which swelled so much that it burst open, and began causing great suffering.
I went to seek treatment, and thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
I placed it under strong attraction, and an bone emerged, followed by others after some days. lesse et so that t;t, the: ziz quet, eus;l.
If I thought they were bones of a dead child.
I seek the wound and treat it with herbs until the woman is better. And she remained thus for long periods of time, and there was a little less pain at rest.
the f so I dont's doctavise:
To return the bone fragments to their original position
After that comes the form of pressure, where one finds books; and two handles with two heads on each chain. However, the horns should be more delicate for restriction, and made of flat or boxwood;
them: 1 tes, se a bonts the teir est it iste as heal: And among the two limbs there are shoulder dislocations of the same kind, which should be secured in both, a half palm long or slightly more.
And these two dislocations are held in the mouth of the hammer to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, is made of maple or boxwood according to the shape of pliers. ki s; 0s. O.
When you see that all instruments are open, make the woman sit on a bed with her feet and hands spread out and legs apart. Then insert both splints together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument out from between her thighs. Then work your hand on all the instruments, as you have done with pincers equally, according to the amount that opens the mouth of the wound, until it forms what the bone wants.
le phuman tre ployt.
If do not disdain the instrument that you have prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to instruct the patient to hold her sphincter and then perform a forceful coughing condition, and restrain her hands at mouth level. If it does not be.
If not, take a container and make it fit with holes or a lid, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the ulcer, such as lavender, rue, anise, chamomile, fennel, and caraway.
Either all these herbs or none of them should be boiled in water over fire; then place gauze or cloth on the hole of the container and put the other end into the mouth of the ulcer.
And hold it there until the steam comes out from within the ulcer; then make them sneeze as we have said. If you hastily grasp the shoulder blade. And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, as commanded to the healer that they anoint their left hand with oil of resin or high-quality musk, and then apply it to the patient.
and if they need another shoulder blade; and when it has been found, grip and stretch it slowly but straightly so that the marrow does not come out during extraction. be they s c (tum; The cat:l’s.
And if the mouth of the gristle is stretched out, we have said the remedy is to sneeze and fumigate with herbs;
And if it cannot be achieved through all that we have said, ensure you do not rush to tears.
But it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the gristle, you bind to the thigh of the woman, then enema with medicinal concoction from the four-part pharmacopoeia.
by nud aya ac far l's siles that le turgu the h�le; igne.
If it is necessary then you must apply smoke envelopes to this wound: none of the old ones have tried smoking with parsley and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to smoke the woman for holding flowers and string is as follows:
And it resembles a hollow tube, with fine ends inserted into the body, and wide nostrps near the fire.
And so there are fumigations over the coals, and for the tinea until it is consumed, then start again with another.
Of Percy establishes the foundation.
By doing;  the. What yout; it isle they should that can noce c: Then it is necessary for the healer that they pierce the shaft at its root, and do not cut with a pointed instrument, and ensure the dressing does not touch it.
Then apply cloth soaked in wine and oil, then use medicinal salve until it is healed.
And if you suspect that it may reoccur, then apply a poultice of mashed plantain and let it rest for days; remove the bandage when the child wants to get up from bed.
and (...)  s; but; they; the present that t.
Of the fistula at the base of the bladder Fistulas that originate below the base are inflamed and grow larger as they come closer to the base, or within two-day periods.
if there is one fistula or more; and when the inflammation of that has been long-standing, it works to extract and remove subtle or dense pus.
the b, and iest as sucht one fat:
And if there are fistulas that reach up to the bladder, and up to the middle of the penis; and they come as far as the hip joint, and near our back of the thigh.
And thus one finds a leaking pus at the foundation, which is not weeping. And take your index finger or base and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula if it is not curved.
If there is twistedness, then apply a small tent of fine thread or horse hair as long as you feel the tent or hair in place properly;
And if you do not feel movement and there is no leakage of pus or windwasting, as we have said: Say that it does not pierce; if you need the cure.
And when the fistula is close to the bladder or the urethra of urine, then he soils himself with urine and cannot be cured by any medicine.
If it is pierced down to the hip joint, then the tendon comes up to its place. If there is no twisting and the creation of pain inside, it is such that he will remain bowed, and there is no cure with medicines or salves.
And in these chronic ulcers that have not a remedy other than hard work, and the foolishness of women who interfere with them.
In those who are not afraid and not old, with hope of healing by iron, as I have tested.
and let the patient lie between your hands on their back; and lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs tilted towards their belly. then apply a tent of wool or cotton if there is twisting, until you know where the tent comes from.
s and also.
If at any time you feel it is touched; and if it is discovered or between your arm and the thigh or chest, then realize that it has been grasped. Do not work on it unless it can be healed.
In any case where one might properly heal something, but seldom does this occur;
the e:t. Mat; And the point heats up in the fistula, until it nears the foundation; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these false tracks have settled, which are similar to an eagle's feather.
And then the treatment of soiled bandages should be changed with a fatty substance as long as those tracks are swoln, then apply an ointment that heals and unites it.
If thus sanitized, well done. This is no other way to be cleaned;
and if it is touched between them, not penetrating all the way to the foundation which lies beneath, and between your two fingers and the tent an extensive covering of cartilage or syphac (fascia), and you see the fistula where the covering curves. if you apply pressure at the beginning of the fistula and push it in place before the tentacle, then after that, burn with the cautery until it reaches the tip of the tentacle.
and it will be freed from there, and shall heal; then shape those distorted cartilages that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none behind.
If blood is lost, and it cuts between you and your work, cauterize with fire or medicinal oil.
For the fire cautery assembles two things: that is to say, the drying of dislocated joints and the stopping of bleeding and the removal of moisture.
then the treatment of dirty bandages with butter or crushed charcoal, until the wound weeps, and press firmly so that the joint dries in the wound.
tur t. Jaugent: it; they le by s (it’s s.
When it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
And when a fistula comes near the root of its foundation and is distant from the body, if you push with your thumb or finger into it and explore it.
If you feel the swelling and it is between two veins or arteries, or near where they can be pierced, there are no forces but trust and hope through the management of one of three methods:
If you cauterize it as we have said, or until the bone is reached, or if you can see and treat accordingly first.
And do not go too deep, lest you cover the structure holding the foundation, and let evacuations occur as they will. Then heal it as we have said.
Then heal it as we have said. by, and so fars Then make the appropriate bandage for the wound as you see fit.
Then study to restore the wound and stop the fistula in the posterior part of its base; it would be easier for the patient.
les dents le place et to lesmau. Aigaront par exemple the legis; and les plus oint the les hand more so as tu oun:nuit est s’apost-dement isle bled pus to it are to, lest the fist If one takes a tent pierced at the top as follows: And take a thread twisted twice and insert the tent into the hole throughout until it reaches the top.
If it is persistent at the edge of the bottom foundation, then extract that thread from what was pierced, so that you can insert your two or foundations.
And treat the wound with thread, and join the two heads together, and hold one to the other, leaving it for one or two days.
And do not rebind if at all possible until the threads have broken through the skin and healed.
Then care for the wound until it is completely healed and cleaned.
; they totir; a (1: The 1 (uze the first.
For it is not fitting to first bind too tightly for support, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is well-adjusted.
The form of the surgical tool for making a fistula which is very sharp and pointed; And on the other hand, do not because this is what you see here and should not be done.
Boils are in two ways: some are within the foundation like pitch shavings, and there are small and large ones, and from them flows blood. and there may be one or more of them, and they are close to the foundation and atop the foundation; but those that ooze have little moisture.
so much:  t unt;
And the treatment for those who have them deep in the foundation is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves by going on a journey in beds, until their foundation becomes loose and cracks appear. If you hurry, and make a pincer (pincer being an Old French word for pincers or forceps), then hold it to your fingernail, then cut near its roots.
And if the nails cannot be held due to their size, then take them with a strip of cloth or cotton, or a small piece of calamus (a type of cane). And the arrows are extracted from both feet, then bandaged with hot powders placed on them in preparation for cautery. Or you may cauterize as mentioned by the chapter on cautery, then treat with other remedebefore they are healed.
And if the foundation cannot be expelled, then enema the patient with pungent and bitter cleansing to wash out that which is at the base, so it may come forth openly.
the tïs: (the bont, and thas tretirage the text as son And it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or pliers, and cut the skin, then heal as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not cutting with iron.
If it is necessary to mend the stitch in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread upwards, pierce the needle from the other side, and turn both ends of the two threads away from the neede. and make the thread wide; and hold the thread tightly, then cut the thread, remove the needle, and do so for all others, leaving one to close the excess of blood.
Then place upon the base a drapery of wool in oil-rosemary or clay paste, and place it on the foundation, instructing the patient to rest.
Then let it remain until they fall off, and when they are shed, treat with ointment and other remedeus, until healed.
Of the bandage of fat or foundation not t: (x1, c; and s cont :
If it is necessary to scrape at the tip of a stump or under a fingernail, which does not allow it to become moist. then treat until it becomes dry as needed.
and if it cannot be cured, resume scraping more vigoramen than before until it heals enough to be scarred. Then treat until it is restored to health.
In trembling A maggot is a small deformed thing found on the body and wanders greatly;
; t� (prenfle mal ;
And the remedy is to take a quill from a goose feather or a strong cattle tail, and place that quill on the friction, until the purple circle completely surrounds it. Then turn your hand to wrap around the quill entirely along the friction and firmly press it down, removing the friction from its roots.
And if you see, make a quill of copper or iron as in this manner, and be subtle from below and traverse across.
does not feel, to hold the head in place, and pressing it; if you see it, then apply heat as is before or with fire cautery.
of the form of an enema Never made an enema with silver or gold, or melted wax or leather; and never made from these extracts small and large, as is appropriate for those to whom they are administered.
the I:
The shape of the small and large enema is as follows: if the belly is tied thus -
And it has an inversion or the belly is tied so - and if you see this, and the head is pierced inside; and have on one side two openings, and on the other one; - <|user|`
And the belly or its opening should be inserted with remedies from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and it shall be pierced all around through small openings - <|user|`
And between each passage there must be space, then insert into these passages a strong thread of twisted thread for 10 or more turns around, and form the belly as if it were a goat. And when the medication is concentrated, place it with a strong thread on the instrument in front of it for 10 or more turns, then filter; and this is the circular shape.
And let the medication be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply it to the head of the suppository with oil or butter from eggs, or similar substances, then apply gently.
Then the physician uses his two hands together until it is fully stretched out; then extract the clyster, and raise the patient's legs towards the abdomen.
And if the medicine needs to be expelled, as much as it can; and if he sleeps through the entire night, then there is greater help.
And if you apply the clyster in cases of bowel disorder, and the patient quickly needs to expel it, then repeat as much as necessary until they are well again.
When the hemorrhoid is at its foundation or abscess, use a clyster as subtle as for one child;
And it is the subtle form of the clyster wherein the heat may be restrained:
Of wounds
In the section on wound treatment that we have mentioned before; now we will say about hand and medicinal treatments, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on what they are made of, and where or how the lacerations or injuries are made, and why they are made.
the docter les que: ould that are not the of the they or.
Or, they are done according to the parts of the body: as if a wound bleeds from the neck, or from the head, or from the thighs, or from the belly, or from the liver, and similar limbs.
And I shall tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for memory will return to his treatise.
I say that when a simple wound to the head occurs and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's from stone-throwing or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large. And you gently probe for an abscess: if the swelling arises quickly from the scalp, and there is blood from the wound, let it be directed away from the affected area.
And instruct the patient to consume wine and large meats for nourishment.
And if he does not wish to eat meat, let him have less food, and drink no wine, nor consume any flesh.
que p’t re (and:
If there is no abscess, apply to the wound if it is fresh with all its blood and has not moved from air or dust, which I will say a bit later.
If the arrow has moved, apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword's edge and gaping, and the lips cannot be brought together with bandages, bind them by suturing, as I will say for stomach wounds, of sutures.
If the wound is revealed of bone, and sharp, and holds only slightly with the graft; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard durable leather over the skin. And instruct the patient to eat large meats, as you have tested wheat cooked, and such things like hairs.
And if you find or recognize putrefaction in the skin and it has not reached the bone yet, cover all with grafts, pour on wine, then treat.
If there is an artery in the wound or vein, without a cord, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, you must tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread. If this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: you must apply this powder that sets as soon as the salt has touched it.
Et the manner of making the powder is as follows: take incense one part; blood of dragon two parts; quicksilver three parts, and grind finely. And mix the wound, and form the paste, until it dries well and joins all its blood.
And then spread evenly, allowing it not to peel apart if it does not swell, for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
. The English (and the t'tf; and;
If an arrow has moved the wound, especially if it's still there, do not put any of this powder.
But apply on some digested ointments, or wheat flour mixed with water and honey, until it softens. Then use other remedies as needed until healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract using fine forceps;
s in ca:s that.
From the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck or below and it is a simple one, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins of the neck or the artery are injured.
If it is the veins, there is no other remedy than to let them heal on their own and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the veins and makes them recede. the neck inso eco is there c s exstes l’s.
But let the medicines be used, as whey that has been strained in soft water and mixed with rose oil, and boiled similarly in soft water. And other remedies according to this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, and treat until it heals.
, as the context by ETudies themd : ça bentre and so
If the arrow is removed, and bleeding occurs as a result, then debride it, bind it, and if necessary, cauterize.
If the spine of the throat is removed or the windpipe and nerves are preserved, so that tissue can heal. If a cut occurs on the spine of the throat, do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural shape. t: 20t by est the cor :
If the wound causes pressure on the bone, you must seek it. And if there are pieces of bone, use all your strength to pull them out, and those you cannot have, let the wound heal until it is ready. And clean and straighten the edges;
so I's ie. And if there are bones within the wound and it has a fistula, then treat as I have described in its chapter.
Of the wound of spear or knife
If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then assess if there are signs of infection as indicated by the patient's symptoms; thus, if the wound appears to be fatal:
the oso; do not; they. And it. And returns to the body, causing pain to the patient; but apply an attractive salve, and bind the two times a day;
and if you have no balm, then place in the wound clean linen cloth to absorb the moisture.
Let the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or longer as needed. If there is no muscle spasm or severe shaking of the body and strange sensations in the limbs. that they are noter: they leslz; carce he has a. If so loin: donder (and so that I do you... by hand if the and some saye t. Treat with bandages and other remedies until it is healed.
If the wound cannot heal and work, now search if there is a fistula within it; then perform the treatment as one should.
And if the wound is from a cut by sword or knife, whether it's straightforward or more complex, or on the back, treat as usual for what lies before.
If it is large, use cautery; and if small, use powder, and if embedded in the bone with several pieces, then treat the wound, and remove any splinters if necessary. If it is not released, let the wound fester and lighten the extractions.
And other wounds on other limbs are judged as we have said.
if they are not can be c sting et, and de le ou deset l'est est due to heu in les oment le puest men or, with a la est much: b
The collapses of the belly are large and medium, and small.
From the great wound, neither the intestines nor their veins escape, causing an intrusion of foreign substances.
and the healing is more difficult, and at no time does a small wound fare worse than a large one.
For this is why one must reset it multiple times if the intestines are not put back in place at once. because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, and thus return to their original position more easily.
and therefore the bowel wound is moved so that the intestine returns to its place among the other two organs.
And know that the treatment of a hernia has four methods:
The two common suturing techniques occur in abdominal surgery:
And the suturing techniques for other body wounds and two other specialized closures are common for such injuries:
Et bien que toutes soient plus appropriées pour les sutures de l’abdomen, et je décrirai chaque une et en énoncerai leurs propriétés.
J'affirme que lorsque la plaie est petite et n'implique rien dans les intestins. Quant li eulz est ce. When because of the smallness of the wound as we have said, Or because the intestines are swoln by the cold.
And when it is cold, warm him in this manner: A piece of sponge or a cloth soaked in pure water solely, Or boil it in clear water with salt and pepper. And then inflate the intestine until it is sufficiently swollen.
also:
And when you see the swelling begin to subside, then gently warm the intestines with cold or hot water as needed. for thus it is connected by a small vessel.
and if it cannot enter, so do not attempt to insert anything into the wound using an instrument used for treating boils.
And the first treatment is to move the joint, That none should cut without great necessity or need.
And this is the treatment for fistulas:
If you cut inside near the edge without error, observe the shape.
And when the wound is expanded, and the internal organs are severed, if you return them according to their natural shape in their proper place. theye de le t and here is the w; et lesl.
When the wound is wide and located below the belly. if it is necessary to make the patient lie down on their back, and raise his legs higher than his head; quant ce.
And thus if there is a protrusion of the belly on one of the two sides. Then you should make sure that the affected part is positioned higher than the other;
:lfay:
Small wounds are to be treated with what has been prepared.
Then take between your hands a pitious balm that covers the entire area of the cut. and bring together the edges; as heal est-banatropist, or them essticter so to m sidié: a t comes mettidez:
as heal est-banatropist, or them essticter so to m sidié: a t comes mettidez: And it is that you take a needle or several, depending on the quantity of the width of the wound. Then you leave at the head of the wound two spaces apart and insert a needle where there is strong, thick thread. And pierce the two heads of the shoulder with the two heads of an ivory pipe.
First, strain a double thread around both points of the needle, then gently heat it until red-hot, Then immediately bring together the two ends of the wound.
And then leave it to rest for two days, and then insert another needle; said e te:cuer, and it's d cd yet untous t they s s; the lije suzé m, otherwise, or ougner et les malpte de t. Enlight. Et continue to do so according to what you need with the needles. As long as the entire wound is restrained.
And let the needles be medium in size, both subtle and thick. For fine needles cover all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot enter well. Therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size.
And do not insert the needles too far into the flesh and deep into the skin,
in aillages are there.
Then wrap the shoulders with splints so they do not bend and trouble the patient while sleeping. And place tent or cloth on the shoulders to keep them in position. and let it remain until the wound is healed.
And this manner of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds. Because sometimes an additional needle or two is used.
The second strain is common, and it is that you join the two heads of bone with an arrow, where there is a strong thread in place. and when you have pierced all four together,
and when you have pierced all four together, If you reset the dislocation at the part where you began, following the manner of cutting cloth.
and leave space between each stitch as wide as a small finger.
these stitches are for the man;
they come te to be: izards, and if youre so as it ond's.
Who was tormented by a knife wound, and had a wound greater than one span wide, and also had his intestines torn out by two spans of great length,
the it: I brought back his intestines after he had been for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was tied until day fifteen, and healed, and became healthy.
And the masters deemed he would die, yet it was a miracle.
and did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. and placed without further ointment on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until healed.
the c, as le t; nd est by himt is li quitter.
Take a needle, and push it through to the part behind until it reaches inside.
When it has felt the key straight on both sides, if there is pain in the head where you have stuck the needle or tied the string.
And pierce from another side into the part inside until it reaches further back.
Et the understanding of this suture is to treat it as a barber does with hairs. And let the edge of one side be, and its opposite part, until the suturing is entirely completed.
The second method of suture, that Galien correctly describes as
If it is as with any joint, which naturally brings together the two parts. and apply one cheek to the other side in such a manner:
insert a needle or use a nearby knife, and make an incision only there.  Then turn the needle, and pierce it through to the part behind until reaching inside. For two heads like this:
Then turn the neednose to pierce both parts further back to reach inside them, in two other heads like this: that are opposite each other.
And this is the usual way of stitching, and it's the most common.
If Galen says this word, no one testifies to it.
s: t
And one must push a needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew belts.
And you know that when the rupture is amidst the stomach, If this incision is more difficult than others in that abdomen;
The judgements of wounds are such as the judgements of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound fully bloody, thus move the arrow as if. if return inside the intestine, and the coat; then put on the powder soaking with wine.
if return inside the intestine, and the coat; then put on the powder soaking with wine. if he said by. And they bind the wound with bandages, and are applied to it salves and medicinal ointments. Then treat the wound as usual until it heals.
and if you do not have medicine, place it there immediately as soon as it begins to swell, using wool or old cotton. c the m; prisud byle the same:
For you have no need for other medicines in various conditions when wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound affects the primary limbs, If it is appropriate for you to grind linen with warmed oil or rose oil, And place among the angles, and under the knee pans;
And if it feels pain or swelling in bulk, and often occurs, If the wine-black purgatives are applied to his anus, and particularly if the swelling reaches the intestines.
And it penetrates internally, understanding when it is the large intestine, then it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jun" cannot heal when it is strained. Here ests of the d'evacuitye and intest, for they are is et. And it esproveimes as we doctlyes qui ne may heis to beaux dont lonsu, quites les inthe lait sont liet ewould like, that n’il est.
If the spleen falls from the wound, reset it as before with the intestines while fresh.
And if it is old and has turned or blackened, then lie the area that'n appears black so bleeding does not occur. For there are veins and arteries present.
Then bandage what lies between the joints, And place two keys hanging from the part above the wound towards ease of extraction when thorns pierce, and the wound bowels.
From the treatment of a boil
ict: If it can be restored in some individuals,
because I have seen a man troubled or wounded in the belly by an arrow.
and it was the wound on the right side of the abdomen, And became inflamed and turned into a fistula, causing discharge and winds.
I provided care according to my knowledge and did not stop subtly until it was healed, and the wounds were closed.
by its et so ce. And there is no harm, but remains in better conditions, eating and drinking.
And the experimenters said that when there is a small wound within the intestines, it should be bound in this manner: Take strong bandages and then bring together the lips of the wound. And when the frothing has opened the mouth, it is placed between the two lips.
Then place another remedy afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely healed.
And cut the wound. Such injuries penetrate into the intestines, and bring no harm to the patient.
If one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine.
And treat it thusly with an application of medicine, alongside attending to any related matters. Ou treated in a tandent l'ouvre; and the treatment is not apply. Here: And then tie at the end of this thread a fine flaxen twisted string. Then put the thread through the needle and sew with intestines, then reset it in place.
and this manner of suture with foreign materials is not otherwise than according to the method of trust and hope.
the same; and the people they arele man're ctain.
of a fistula or when it occurs Say that any wound or abscess, as it becomes old, is universally called "fistula". and especially when it starts to swell up again.
they are the translation bytir, that is a s, and so m text: And just as with the feathers of a bird;
and at times thinly spread by clear bowstaves, and other times thickly. at some times little, and at others enough;
heal: It is not caused but by one of these seven reasons:
This means "It is known to be due to the smallness of blood or body." Or due to its harmfulness. by with is not so:  the text. The s and f, that ne (orge, which aretide: When there are too many bowels; Or when the urine is cloudy, and the matter is of poor quality; Or if the medicines are not good in the treatment; by: thee too much. Or by its property in the area there is a slow digestion, and delayed health, and spreads naturally. When there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medical remedies in the section.
Now it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of a fistula that is done by handiwork.
et lons, and so long as est e: For there are fistulas coming from great veins, and arteries, and nerves. or to the sack, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spinal column of the back, or to any joints of hands or feet;
And all the fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, with only labor and ignorance involved.
But if there is any fistula that does not reach the level I have mentioned, and you are confident in its healing. And if you see it to be known, then take a tent of flax or iron, and if the fistula is straight, take it.
sit mona; For the flesh around may bend due to its twisted nature;
and if the abscesses on the hands are hidden and you cannot properly search for them with probing. if the enema is administered through one of these openings,
and to it: ict movements of all that li.
Then firmly grasp it within your power to know if there is bone or nerve involved, and it arises from the front.
and ask the patient well about the pain felt when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it.
and when you know truly the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein, et li. If they;
et li. If they; And bone is the other arm and the joints corrupted within. And then the treatment until it is cleaned.
The work of ou les pointe. Then apply tight bandages using medicinal gauze, and wrap up to the top of the abscess.
Then apply tight bandages using medicinal gauze, and wrap up to the top of the abscess. as long as the medicine erodes the excess that is lingering at the bottom.
and then apply healing balms with holy chrism, until it becomes clean.
a're that m; cannot some the the moles.
If the bone is affected by a fistula, treat it with plastering. If you have veins or main limbs afflicted, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed with corruption and blackening, let it be ruled until the corruption has completely eaten away the bone. is the ine he.
And if it is not secured firmly, then bend back as before. Say that you have not gone as far as said until. (This appears to be a fragment of text or an incomplete thought rather than a full sentence to translate.)
And if it is translated as n’it into place, and do not haste vous m cannot moient reset you es. And remove all decayed bone, then reset to its place;
And if it is thus healthy, that's good. But if not, know that the decay is too much at hand, you must not approach it; If there is no other remedy than by pulling with natural force;
and if there is a small deformed bone, and you can extract it using pincers; if the extraction of this requires an instrument suitable for this purpose,
And if there are any bones involved, do not leave behind even one.
And if moisture acts otherwise, there is no mistake or fear. If heat and moisture and movement are involved, then release the bones.
If you cannot remove them within an hour, place upon the wound something unpleasant to encourage putrefaction. and leave it until it is surrounded by bone.
and therefore they will have the bones more easily.
If it is a large bone, like of leg or thigh, If the decay is such that all the bone turns black, then heal the wound;
And if there is significant part of it decayed, coming close to the surface of the bone. If it is necessary to sew and cover up to the corruption, and then treat until it is healed.
And I shall tell you of a case concerning an abscess in his leg. If you seek examples and help in your work.
A youthful lad about thirty years old had a pain in his leg from an internal bodily issue.
until materials came to the leg and there was formed a large abscess, but no relief from opening it.
but the physicians by their folly worked so much on it that they opened the abscesses. the ocult a durit contign est: nd bon la ou n's:
Many physicians have tried various remedies for two years, without any success or knowledge in the art of healing.
Until I went to see him and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him. And all that he needed by the pores of great body; the c: ils it s; que se t the ons; ci est, and its they n've prust (h Vichewdunce;
I pitched a tent at one of these locations, then searched all around.
And I found that one came upon the other from all parts of the leg.
So I pressed on then and made a cut in it until I uncovered part of the bone. And I found it to be decayed and foul-smelling, and the decay reached down to the inner side of the bone;
.
And began to heal the wound with soda remedies for long periods of time, but could not unite.
And then I resumed, and discovered the bone as before,
And I found continuous decay within the bone, and the sinew, and then the tendon, and I tried to unite it all.
But I could not grasp around an inch of the bone, and the fracture came apart completely. Then I restored it with remedies; and it healed quickly and soundly.
and no longer resumed the operation except due to the patient's frailty, who could not endure, do so t; For often blood is vomited during evacuation, but it was completely healed.
For often blood is vomited during evacuation, but it was completely healed. And in the place of the bone grew a hard scar, which was well-formed and had no harm or disadvantage at all throughout, neither during healing nor upon waking.
And extend the neck so that you can draw out the decayed cartilage from below. And expose the cartilage at the level where you see it to be softened, ensuring that it does not touch the bone; the croste de est so that heu: And it is customary to examine as much as possible both visually and by touching for signs of decay, and also more than once.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the decay is in a hole or part of it, If it reveals the entire joint; then place a sharpened instrument underneath,
And then there is of one part to the other the rotting, and it may be longer at the end of the rot: i.p., as we have said.
And if the rot is in the joint, then the joint itself becomes rotten, and it may be longer on the bone that contains it.
And if the rot continues through both joints, there is no other remedy but to cope.
s a: However, it is necessary to inquire about that corrosion, how it opens. and cleanse it in every way you can, but ensure the vein or nerve does not oppose you;
and know that the chisels and files for covering these bones are many, according to the placement of the bones and their appearance. And thiles: And therefore, it is necessary to equip each type of work with its instrument.
and tools that the work will show you which instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art. and witness the signs of diseases. If you think about the instrument you need according to what is fitting.
If by fire. The head may rot or from within causes, or from lack of moisture.
When you have applied the remedy for this erosion with curative medicines, and they prove to be of no benefit. if it is necessary to cover that limb up to its origin where the erosion occurs. if the patient succumbs due to death's approach or illness, which is greater in consequence of the limb's failure.
if the patient succumbs due to death's approach or illness, which is greater in consequence of the limb's failure. s ct; de la Ous: by to se  M. Is so fats iron far l's the scussie tme; they should he commbo chise par: After the darkness, then go to the corroding of limbs from limb. and it takes hold on all parts of the body; if you hurry too much with the fire.
and if it is by the strike of any venomous creatures, such as a sea scorpion, serpent, and similar ones,
as the; s and so I they meritties ofle t ond that:lds pothres que heu cese lesse c0.
And if it comes up to the hand, wrap around the joint so that decay does not reach the arm.
and if it reaches the arm, wrap with a bandage; and if it goes beyond the bandage, that's death. but there is no cure unless by its quantity of virtue;
le ce that; t0t. If yousso pleust.
And if it occurs on a joint or bone, cover the entire bone. And if it rises up to the leg, cover the hip joint.
And if it comes upon the hip joint, there is no other remedy than to hasten the patient's death.
And the manner of using a bandage or a sling on the limb is such that you bind it above and below. And extend some ministers away from the lower line, and others minister to the upper line. if it in the bloodst ic:
Then wrap with a bandage or cloth, and place a piece of linen on each side, so that the skin does not touch directly. This may cause further injury and abscesses to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs while you work, then promptly cauterize the wound. and ilement.
Then bind the limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you that this happened to one of my patients in summer time:
It happened to him on a night which seemed like fire-embers glowing.
by the n’m patient after that he to make:
And when a person sees corruption, they touch it with a copper piece, and are healed.
And after a long time the corruption returned, along with one of his hands, and came to me.
and I placed him under things that are repelling after body purification, and the corruptions could not cease;
le t. And I doubted as if I were to cut off my hand, that he would not die. for the virtue of the man was weak; and he lost all hope, returning to his homeland. and received a blow to his hand, but it healed quickly.
me;
Never comes an abscess in its proper place, and it stays so long that it forms a large collection of pus. And then they swell and burst, with the pus flowing out, and the affected veins remain dilated, as if from a snakebite. and the skin that is above it is as thin as torn cloth. byckizcfs.
But if it is so swollen that it reaches up to the bone on one side, then it is called "fistula";
And if the skin is so thick that you must cut around it entirely, especially when it is thin like a fabric; And does not heal due to its corruption.
And if you find that the skin is hardening, and there is no infection at the core, and if the skin is rough as wax, then use this purging treatment thusly:
wounds: Then comes the first medical enema as made from Egyptian medicine: Take ease, oil, and litharge in equal parts, and put to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
the s like. And in cleansing the intestines, and straining is constricted. and leave the medication to work for two hours, then extract it by squeezing.
do this as often as needed, until the intestines are purged and they are relieved.
 When this remedy is not present, then grasp ashes from wood of grapevine, and pour water over it.
Then pile it up, and turn into a clyster, until you know that the interior is thoroughly cleansed;
and if the sick person cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes. they be it: patient. When youn'chf ; if you do n: s to the t, in the translation kelots not too much as is an seque and not; con the same ve: When you cleanse with honey and mead sweet, so that honey has the property to purify and cleanse. and wine assists in healing the wound;
and when you have done this, and you ensure that the wound is properly cleansed, a.
And it is so you grasp with an awl to finish drawing blood, and they do this with oil-rosemary infusion and wine. or you administer some medicines and ointments to them, of which I have described the properties or treatment for ointments.
and if the patient has small breasts, and the nozzle of the enema cannot enter. If you enlarge a wound slightly with iron, and apply an Egyptian ointment. or basilisk ointment, so that it may be enlarged;
and if the wound is too wide, leaving only enough that a catheter may enter there or be used for enemas, then...
When there is a flowing pus from above, then cover it with a cup or place it lower than where it is located. For when the pus is fresh, do not let it drain into the wound. and if you cannot cover the head from above as you see fit, If dislocated such that the joint moves to its lowest point where it is.
and if you cannot pull off the skin from below as you see, If properly aligned thusly: let the bow glide easily downward, without anything on the string. and take strengthening medicines to place upon the chest.
and spread a lin cloth over it; that covers the entire chest. is not ce t (the et pictas: Take a sufficient amount of oil on one cloth according to the quantity for the bruise. And apply it to the bruised area of the chest in order to reduce swelling, and do not remove the large cloth forcefully until after many days once.
and those who are near the bruised area on the chest often take it off too soon to alleviate swelling, ;s of so thatle lossties: ça f.
And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess.
And when your medicine has spread in a certain manner and you see that it has risen above the chest wall, If you know that the breast is hardening, and approaches healthiness.
Then release it in the morning or after three days, and when you open the wound, if changes a different bandage, and renews the ointment.
they le de: If subtle corruption comes after long periods of time, do not despair about health.
For the patient's proximity is important. Because there are those who give timely attention to their wounds and those that do the opposite;
And if bowel waste flows from the breast for many days, it is said that the breasts are not swoln.
he qui; If like an ointment it ends, for there is great part of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine.
Take the ending ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the mixture of aged wine in equal quantity.
Then you concoct it and apply; and this same makes more cooked honey thickened, ; ce. This villet by him et c (a:29 de the JO lacer; that he ct; Tumbole les MRIze quemjugge at; tose t; and li est s ;Sis, so that youde; en...
When you take myrrh and frankincense and incense, grind it, and powder over honey when placed on the fire. Then take a small cloth, stretch it over the breast, and never administer an emetic long term. and roots of holy basil, which are like flour from times past and present.
and roots of holy basil, which are like flour from times past and present. And it uses simple or composite remedies: grind them into powder, and mix with honey as I have said, and apply. If the wound is swollen and not healed by this treatment,
If the wound is swollen and not healed by this treatment, Then you must say that the suppuration is from within, and it pressures against the bone, or the hardened members, or the ligaments. : they ou les; a. If yout; heal;
Of an abscess of a nail
Apoptosis is an abscess that arises from under the fingernail of the hand. or on the foot, or sometimes occurs in other fingers;
brule, in m echol; And they will turn and pour boiling water until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it may immerse the entire thing.
and comes with rot reaching up to the bone, causing intense pain, making the shoulders wide apart, and turning pale in color.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not seem to be effective, en c cont un t. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The caustic is of great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound.
and if the nail quickly returns to its place, and begins to point, and thickens, . And push it upward, and wrap that area subtly and gently. and apply on the remaining part of the wound with hot and corrosive medicines to remove all [impurities];
or they that the t a f and c so:
And if you see the knee being destroyed, wrap it with a bandage as one of our methods described earlier. and then treat it until it is healthy again.
and if it is swoln up, pus-filled, and in great pain, then first you must relieve it; Then cut off the nail of the great toe by snipping diagonally across.
and be careful that the trimming does not reach to the bone which is below the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain.
and if this happens, apply something soothing on it.
The dislocation which can occur in some people's hands is completely composed of flesh. and sometimes it has bone or joints, but never nails.
and none of these grow at the root of the joint where the dislocation is in some cases found among us with the bones. as it s line so et les nais or. And those who move at the joint of both hands by chance;
The size of one who is fleshly if light in the following manner: Measure him at his root with a wide span;
Those who are born at the root of the joint are more difficult to treat; hold them firmly with your hand.
In those who are formed or will be in their next incarnation, it is necessary to first hold the rounding up to the bone. then cut the bone with an appropriate layer and heal until it's sound.
so that the main; y-line contertret ond le JJSH: he c m, forta.
If it is necessary to cover that swelling, so that it may heal according to its natural forms. Then place between two sheets or cloths moistened with oil of roses, so they do not stick together. Or you put between two pieces of fine linen until the wound is healed, as it ought to be.
should be and they are not the s.
Of evil spirits
These are large humours wrapped with excessive melancholic qualities that come to many members of the body.
and this often occurs in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry loads, more so than others.
by him t saye est plus other thatt.
The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is to remove the clot and strain the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and drain it completely.
The cutting method is as follows: raise the leg with hot water quite strongly so that the veins are made prominent. they. Then tie the vein at a point where it is either one, two or three fingers wide.
Then extract and pull the black blood to your hand from one end to the other until as much as the virtue of the evil can bear.
And then the ligament, instructing it to be dyed with meats for blackening.
and restart the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, causing trouble to the patient.
The disposition of his limbs is as follows: raise the leg affected by pain, if there are many hairs on it. de la w s: and the c il est in t
And if you have no bandage, heat it on the fire, and then cover the wound with a cloth long at the top of the knee or in the part below the ankle.
Then apply grease to the gash and scrape the wound from each side until it appears as one feels it.
And when it looks red and black, and once healed or scraped, it seems like a white cord;
Then pour on the ray of the head, until it is raised to the skin, and then gently place on the support.
Then wrap in a bandage at one other location above three fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. Then lift to the root as you have done before and place on another support similar to the first one.
by the they. This is; heu e le ail y mesle er:
Then stretch it out to the second joint; then extract from joint to joint as much as possible, and then wrap.
And if you cannot pull it apart and lift it, insert a needle into the entire double-threaded cord. And twist and pull it apart, then insert a thread through the needle, and turn your hand both sides as much as possible; And so it. They le:t the bis ictare the same and de and n'ond (do you:
And when you have fully treated it, place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on the wound site; treat until it is healed.
And if the vein is twisted and tangled together, not straight as we have said, And if it is necessary to split it crosswise, but do not cover it completely; treat as we have said before.
And if it is necessary to split it crosswise, but do not cover it completely; treat as we have said before. The form of iron used to strike a vein is curved, and does not cut, but strikes the vein.
It is of thick curvature, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is its form.
From the civilian vein.
that le tst: ous
And sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in legs, as with swelling that arises from beneath the skin.
If indeed it comes within the body as a snake and worm, creeping between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this beginning swelling are such that a very large inflammation comes to the leg, f.
When the head is opened, one must wrap it with a band of linen about three and a half ells up to two ells.
And leave the band on the leg, and each time it is not needed for healing, one wraps around the band again and the linen. And if it is too long, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, but do not cover it at its root until it has fully healed. thetaf; sire
It is necessary for this matter to be treated gradually and gently until completion, without leaving anything or causing harm.
And it should never be the vein that is treated with five or six long hand spans at a time. And an honorable man came to me, who was x hand spans in length, and when you cut it, he poured iii drops or pus, and pierced all the way down to the bottom.
If it all swells up; and let the matter inside be emptied, and restore to its place by mixing with spoiled food as medicine for a day, then treat it as an abscess would be treated.
And never let your hand touch the vein directly; especially when it opens at the joint of the great toe or other toes. and this often leads to irritation, and from which it jumps; treat it then as we have said before.
s the mar:s.
This illness is called on our land "ox disease" because it often occurs in the groins.
and it is a small worm that arises between skin and cartilage, and moves throughout the body going up and down. and he causes great discomfort from limb to limb as it goes through the skin where it lies, and jumps forcefully.
t la pe pe t; Do not s in e t the line. Tad it par le c
And doubt arises about its illness, for when it travels through the body, and rises to the head, and reaches the eye. Sometimes it re-enters, and destroys the eye; this often happens.
When you see that it is draining and bleeding, one cannot force it when it flows like so:
Then it is necessary to firmly fix above and below a strong joint.
Then cut along and the fissure, and if the vessel is fully open within the bone, and you cannot close it, If the fire cautery is applied above, until it heals;
and its greatest harm lies in that it causes swelling of the veins, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or near to the oil, firmly pull out its eyebrow, then cut above it, and tie tightly.
at la, for l's s, ond a ne monmh;
And if wounded by flesh causing inflammation or rot.
From pain arising from swelling or windiness. This disease is known in our land as "waker," and it causes pain in certain limbs, by the ben'estra. They line t they have s ia. The following, but a Jauze crop on any gis t
I was called to a sick woman, and discovered swelling in her arm near the elbow.
and shortly thereafter, I saw it rise like a worm towards the shoulder. more quickly than any other thing, as if alive silver when it falls from one place to another.
The pain departs from there and splits towards the shoulder.
Then afterward it runs throughout the body until it reaches the other arm.
Then he told me that it turned back within the body, as I have seen.
sofle a lisso: Indeed, I have always believed it to move pain from one place to another. However, I did not see this in women.
and I thought this was because women have dry skin, and their veins exposed, And thus appears the constrained swelling of winds;
And they do not appear according to this reason in those who are ill-nourished, and have moist bodies and veins restored.
And when you see to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain if it appears as we have said, If carefully pushed above and below, and then compressed until the swelling subsides and returns to its place. And cauterize the wound; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
If the remedy that dispels swelling, like foul pills and sparrow's eggs, and other similar things.
Of arrowheads
Arrowheads are diverse, depending on their appearance and the way they pierce the body.
The variety of them is that there are some with large points, small ones, barbed, and soldered together. they not that the c echir and all but I know of liuest iste ondes quis it as the, and i dont’nul, or: And that which flows from any limb in two ways: either it seeps from a principal member or
If as the brain, body, liver, heart, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it flows from any part of these members, and the sign of death appears, which I will tell you now: . When these mal signs are not apparent to you, and the arrow is not halfway embedded, then extract it, and treat the wound.
And if signs of brain injury occur when the arrow penetrates and breaks the bone, causing a fist-sized hole above the brain. is when there are blindness and numbness and twitching and reddening of the eyes, inflammaturation and a reddish tongue, spasm and confusion of mind, and bile-like vomiting. * ça benbt:t's t, so: s (and cures.* When the wound of wet white skin appears like hairs, and similar to burned flesh.
And if these signs appear to you, hold the remedy, and extract the arrowhead if it is not out.
If the sign of heat it is like a sting, and are hardened, so that it should be handled. And occasionally the patient moves likewise as hairs do, with black blood in their stool, and comes cold sweat and pale urine, and syncope. Then there is doubt that death will occur.
And the sign of arrow wound is that without clear foam from the wound's exit, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks cold air.
that f but mor:
When an arrow falls or lodges in the stomach, if it comes from the wound, then no part of the digested flesh is spared.
And if an arrow falls or lodges in the stomach and does not pierce any part of the intestines on its exit, there is no hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow falls into the bladder and the urine flows out upon its exit, and the patient feels intense pain: understand that the wound is fatal.
The other limb, as made by the fingers and knuckles and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and neck and thighs, and similar members are safe according to various conditions. When the shaft is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisonous as I will tell you of how it happened to me, so that you may do similarly.
It happened to a man that the shaft pierced his knee or upper leg near its root. I tried it, and from under the fat of the ear, I pierced it on the other side, and it was free without any difficulty.
And pierce into one piece an arrow that fell in the fat of the ear behind the paper below. and the arrow was propped up again, and couldn't be reached except for its tip towards their foot. And the arrowheads were large from a Turkish bow, of all one light metal except for the ears; the yew was sound and no harmful incidents occurred to it.
And pierced an arrow in the throat of a Christian, which was an Arabic arrow with ears.
I pursued the Saracen, and acted cunningly as much as I could during the deception, and was the Christian remained unharmed.
And: ET la main ce Far ben t: 1;
After xx jornes have passed, if there is no change in his condition; I cut into the arrowhead, manipulated it, weakened it, and had no unfortunate incident.
And if you of artais to make a tes nuisement.
And he stays within the shaft, and does not change his natural position. He finds no hindrance in any of his natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow fell on his face and made a wound therein;
the text of la motte them les e lest possible in:
Et you have shot an arrow at one of the king's men, which was lodged deep within his nostril. and it was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrowhead was fully protruding.
I went to treat it after it had been there for three days, and found the wound very narrow.
yourt isnt: And he felt pain and pressure from behind his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead
I put on him a poultice with soothing and digestive properties because his eyes are swollen; est-ciert:
est-ciert: I placed the embolectomy tool today, and reopened the wound completely, and thus the patient suffered long hours.
until he felt the arrowhead; and it came out of his nose; and I removed it. I applied medicinal acid to the wound today, until it was fully open.
the c'che: Then you proceed with treatment of the wound using that particular ointment until the head of the arrow is clearly visible.
And it has thoroughly passed through all its limits within 2 and a half months.
Then I inserted the tongs into the wound on which I had placed them earlier, and neither side could be removed.
the lesse; s crople: According to how its form appears at the end of this chapter, I will treat it and close the wound.
And they judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I will restore it then, and the wound is thoroughly healed, and the patient is completely well.
bye they gose: ougte mon se de le m. If you apply your care to what I do not say, for books cannot fully encompass everything.
but the wise masters compare very little in general things, and with those that are currently present and failing, truly nine works and instruments exist; regarding the descent of strange matters occurring in this art.
I say that arrowheads are driven into limbs either as follows, by two methods: or through the same opening or from another direction;
and that which protrudes by where it enters, is an arrowhead entering the flesh, and never leaves again.
l’s de la motte by, they are:
And similarly if it is fixed in the bone, and cannot be removed, let it remain as such for some time and move each day.
And when it is loose, if it does not come out easily, gently pierce around it with a very fine needle until the area is enlarged, and then extract it.
And if an arrow is reset in place within the body such that one cannot see it, then cover all of it with bandages. and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument.
the: tissued that mguarde le Oulx que c sont; And there are no bones or nerves or veins, so they cut until the wound is large enough. and treat the arrow shaft if you know how to do so; and if it has ears on which it grips,
and treat the arrow shaft if you know how to do so; and if it has ears on which it grips, if a bone that is fixed by two parts as you can move, then... (The text seems incomplete or cut off; without additional context, the full translation cannot be provided.) in l’s.
in l’s. And with subtlety, do not break the arrowhead, but pull it out more firmly.
And if you cannot at once, should the arrowhead be deeply embedded near its entrance, then draw it out, for extraction would be painful. And if bleeding progresses in the opposite direction, follow what we have said about treatment in this chapter;
And take care of cutting through the nerve and vein, and provide a method so that you can draw out the arrow without danger.
Soon or later, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to their shape when the arrow fell upon them. For it is the greatest aid that they can be, and if you cannot, then place them according to what their signs show you.
s.
Therefore, cut down there so that the pincers can take hold, and then extract it; if possible immediately.
And if held within the bone, rotate your round hand so that it enters the bone, then widen the bone before extracting it.
And if it cannot be removed, leave it for now and then resume extraction as soon as possible when you can.
t; et c, so:
If it is a fall, and you see fit to administer cautery, then apply an instrument heated by fire. if the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument, and then pour boiling substance over it.
if the arrow is lodged, apply an instrument with a pointed end for easier extraction.
et there; it; and c. Then treat the wound as needed.
And if the arrow falls or pierces the abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close by, then you shall place your hand over it to hold.
And guard against hitting the vein and nerve, then extract it, then close the wound if necessary. And treat until healed completely.
The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles an eagle's beak, and here is its shape:
There are many ways to handle it: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrowhead.
Of common bodily veins .
It is as follows: two hinges located behind the ears, called 'herbec'. and the two arteries that are in each temple visible. and two veins that are in each temple's fissure, which are called 'aspiracles'. And the veins located within the forehead; and those veins near the nose. and the two jugulars which are in the neck. and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "Augeherich."; the so:
The veins of which one commonly cleanses five in each arm:
the first is the cranial, and is on the left side of the ribcage, and they call it "the vein of the head" in French. and the middle one is called "vita", and is composed of the cranial and the abdominal, if they tost a f. And they call it the "vain wound" near the belly, and is under the bubo. And there are those from which one sweats, clearly visible under the scrotum.
And the surgeon is the vein that lies between the little finger and ring finger, and if it has two branches;
In the leg where there are three veins: one is below the hollow of the left shoulder blade. and the second saphenous vein, which is at the ankle of the right leg; and the vein called "safena," which is in the ankle of the other side.
and on the other leg are three veins below those.
the w. and the quality of the saigner, as I have told you, is to raise the head of the patient.
and the quality of the saigner, as I have told you, is to raise the head of the patient. and rub the area or veins with a coarse cloth; then tighten the neck of the patient with a tourniquet. as long as the two veins appear behind the ears, slightly towards the head: Touch upon your fingers to your knee, and where you feel the hairs from above your knee, do not cut.
Then take the scalpel and cut just below the vein to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein upward. and cleanse and the skin and vein thoroughly with two fingers, and let the blood flow until you see it done.
Then strain and hold, until it is straightened out.
And I have previously mentioned the incision and cautery in the first book.
The purification of the two arteries that are located at the temple, is due to ancient migraine. :
And the quality of the surgeon is as I say: And it is such that the sick must keep themselves apart from their veins until they appear distinctly. Then heal as often times les est beau en saignet que li come on sois pait de la froides pour le cholorent the ise par les doune et les.
Then lift your head above the vein with your index finger, and place the lancet below. And lift the vein upwards, and close it, as you have done with two other veins, and let the blood flow correctly according to your need.
Then lay the patient down, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put it under cotton.
Et ensuite il ferme, et le laisse jusqu'à ce qu'il soit nettoyé; et nous en avons discuté à propos de son compression et de sa retraction, où commence le livre.
The cleaning of the vein on the forehead is just as valuable for treating headaches and ancient skin diseases, and migraines, and yellowish discoloration.
And its quality lies in that the patient extends his neck by twisting until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "curette", which has this shape:
And place the tip on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, allowing the blood to flow out according to the amount you see. Then loosen the cord and tie off the vein so that it is snug but not once around a wide flame.
the s ;
The health of the two veins located in the temples helps with eye issues, and swelling, redness, inflammebg around the ear in oil, and face illnesses.
The quality of their health depends on whether the patient can turn his neck by twisting any ligaments as before;
Then healing and proper blood flow through the spinal cord are achieved with some longness and width of the vein, as there is no obstruction.
And if the veins are fine and delicate, perhaps they break; then make an incision in the blood, as much as you need, and afterwards bind with cotton, and secure it well.
The treatment of the vein is effective against nausea, severe sweating, and facial illnesses. as it causes migraines and a reddish flush that comes upon the face, especially when it is longstanding;
not ce* suest que le crosit. And take the subtle, long thread, and insert it into the space between the two nostrils. because the veins do not open well at first, so now blood flow begins to course.
and do not bleed too much at once, let the blood flow as needed by your judgement, then let it rest overnight, for it will be restored quickly.
The sap of two guindgeons aids in the stretching of the sinew, and at the beginning of healing, and for many illnesses, and impetigo, and erosion, and herpes, and itchiness.
And the quality of the sap is that the patient can remove his head from one side to the other, as we have said. and so be the master stands over the head of the sick person, and the patient sits on a seat,
Then cleanse the vein slightly wider with a long object, then treat the blood promptly as needed.
Then repair it on the other side of the vein, then bind up the ligament, and gently constrict the veins. that the patient does not strain themselves; leave them until morning, so the wound can heal.
byrre commande: The healing of vein lips above contributes to wounds in the mouth, and decay of gums, and tears of lips, and ulcers and abscesses.
And the quality of healing is to have the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck as I have said. then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left. in the; The c the Oudert la crova ba une l'sg fe maine le ou sours au loa: Therefore bind both sides, and if you do not recognize them, and you are uncertain.
Therefore bind both sides, and if you do not recognize them, and you are uncertain. Then grasp the larger of each side, and make two incisions as before, both above and below, for it is the same manner.
From the vein below the tongue. the les t. Do not so I say:
And the quality of the saigner is that the patient must be bled between the hands in front of the sun, and the vein is taken out, and it examines down each side for a black vein.
Then bleed both sides, but not too much at once, because from there are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which we commonly bled are bled in two ways:
When grasping at any point of a large wormwood or delicate olive wood, as sharp and cutting as you wish, and it is called "anisyl." And they are broad and subtle according to the width and extension of the veins. The form of the wormwood is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
And it is needed to open veins with clear blood containing much visible blood and turbid substances. And it is the shape of an olive-like swelling:
and are more subtly pointed, and suitable for tying up fine veins where there is subtle lemon-colored blood.
that is: the n'iza tardus. The  (and so-t. If you t and the ga; thera tre le marde by ta bon butta:
And it is proper for the surgeon to suture securely, and that he cleanses from the artery which is below. And if it is cut on the artery, and bleeding begins, then it must be staunched as I have said. and it should not be pinched with the thumb but trimmed as shown here.
And if the sling does not open clearly, it must be extracted and replaced with another. Or, to pull any hairs of his or to feel into him the veins within the arm: they open clearly; And the plaster on the limb that is painful, as we have said.
And if you see the location of the sinew, it is necessary to also stretch out the arm and touch the place until you recognize the hairs. Then mark the location of inflammation, and then lift the arm, and compress the vein with a bandage.
And be careful not to injure the artery when you see the swelling of the place, because it is an artery: avoid hitting that one.
And if you see it rise up like the urine of a child, and the veins are red and fine, know that it is from an artery. Hasten thee now, and place your hand underneath for a while, then lift the limb once the veins are untwisted, as often happens.
If it lies on the arm, leave it so, and do not move the patient; be in fear, and do not move until it is healthy again.
s the her.
Take a slice of pitch, and heat it, then take one half and lay upon the other until tomorrow.
If the wound is closed, it's fine; if not, then treat as we have said with powders that stop bleeding.
and the closings are not always in various positions due to the small size of the wound and its location on the arm.
e tre: the f 1; if one by them so that you le S. Because it is composed of the thoracic and cranial regions, as we have said.
And it is appropriate for the surgeon to wash with alcohol near the nerve that is exposed, and if they cut too deeply, and damage the nerve. which becomes swoln and its sensation severely diminished, and possibly cannot heal.
by them the most t.
And if there is blood between the two veins, it flows for a long time.
The cerebellum helps by attracting blood and supporting the eyes.
the; t s, that they: it le d, such as a.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek a more gentle position, and do not burden with anything at first attempt, and then start again. And sometimes the joints swell in certain people, but nothing should be done initially, yet one must try again later. The quality of this disease is according to what you think.
; the Jonsul'heu le t, and so et le Tad that d (tienne at the les bce is a.
To avoid future diseases; And the sanitation must be done in one of these three veins known as orifices - that is, cranial, facial, and lower (basilic); And one must begin healing by drinking warm water and prayers at the beginning of spring, summer, and after eating in autumn when signs of fullness appear.
And one must heal for the first day or two, starting three to four hours later.
The healing for illnesses does not have a set time, but is done during the day or night, at all hours and times as needed.
la culm's; 1: Do not let them exercise too much if they are old men who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wishes to exercise in any way, it is necessary that he cleanses his intestines with a light enema. if there is too much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out the excess from the intestines harmful to the main members.
Those who are overly fond of meats or drunkards, as long as they remain so.
and if one is weakened after suffering from colic, vomiting, abdominavent, frequent intercourse with women or animals, wakefulness and masturbation, and by all virtues, or by something related to the weapon or body.
Then subtly changes of the humors, if one is heavy because of foods and drinks or medicines, if you have them.
Then apply a bath if there is no obstacle to drawing out the blood.
and cleanse the vein near the injured part as we have said.
and guard against labor, pain, dislocation, and similar things for that day;
the le to av. The in sonder la b and the d;
Then strain the ligament moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot be corrected without;
And then rub the place with your hands until the veins become inflamed and swoln.
Then grease the bones of a little piece of oil from an old vessel and then place your thumb of your left hand above the veins below the location slightly or as needed to balance. ond; For there are veins that flee like strings on a lute, and some are so filled with windiness. when you place it over the wound, if it retracts away from the flesh, and cannot open the veins, thus becoming one of those.
and if it works on the vein, then the wound is too narrow, so one must be cautious with such things.
: If you say is not the 30 s.
When the vein is swollen, and the patient becomes hopeful, leave it for one or two days without tying the arm. Perhaps new abscesses may arise; do not bathe or wash, then resume dressing if it pleases him.
and if the perforation is small or superficially placed, and you doubt that it does not bleed as much as seen, then close it entirely on that spot.
Line. The following, so marnte ma: 1 (pite ne bon's: Don'tigne et non Z ou n the t et c.
If you see the joint swollen, do not start bleeding again, and apply a little oil poultice, for it eases the pain of the body with blood, and turns into this place the lye that is like oil.
And thus administer the oil poultice in each vein you treat to stop the course of blood.
And similarly make small and wide cuts when it is placed on the joint; subtle they are and spread if too large.
If there comes an abscess large in size, which occurs often, especially when the opening of the vein is small at that time. If you are in a hurry, and place a damp sponge with warm water and salt on it at the site for an hour.
and it is necessary to do this after the blood has drained from the vein, and if there remains any blackness or greenish color at the site for several days, it does not harm. ; And so fat isnt cj’t they are byczse t (X:*s the trute.
And often occurs abscess and appearance on the base of the bladder; therefore put your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft under pressure from your hand, then that is a bad sign. Then be careful not to put on anything of what we have said, for sometimes a stone may block the artery; but first make an uncured plaster to harden the place, then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
And apply each medicine according to the quantity and color of its virtue in the blood.
If the blood is black, let it flow out until it turns red; and if you see a large vein, allow it to continue until it becomes thinner; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are pale and weak, and require blood extraction, one should make a larger incision, resulting in wide wounds.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite and encourage them to rest often, and he should be treated by cutting across rather than incising.
This manner of healing prevents blood deterioration and nerve compression, and it is better for joints that are long or wide.
And for those whose body needs joint care, one should give them flour-meal soaked in juice from red apples; if it is overheated, apply the blood three or four times.
And if they are of a cold disposition, one should give them flour-meal soaked in syrup before the joint care, or syrup with honey and aromatic spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, cloves, and fragrant syrup.
If it is swollen from the wound after much blood loss, then one must give an infusion of strong ale and fragrant subtle syrup.
And employ the other remedies as mentioned in the chapter on fainting, for blood-letting.
And if one wishes to drain the arm veins or treat elsewhere when it is greatly swollen from blood loss, they should bleed slowly and continuously according to the amount of its potency.
et s, by the so pleis an t and; and:
And if you wish to heal another area, it must be healed on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that has become overheated, and it causes fever; therefore, one must extract a large quantity of it, and widen the vein until it flows freely. once you have addressed all healing needs and placed your hand under the hairs as it grows, make sure death does not come to that part. Then: their on the same de ld so su� markett; by linek Middle Sahce but no t sue le comblient and of prujors ;
And it is not necessary when you see dislocating the arm, causing blood to issue a second time, and the veins are closed, so press firmly above. If it is numb, extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad.
But let it heal the second time; or if there is no pain at the spot of the flame, until the blood which has coagulated in the veins flows out. by summar:d and so the mostnfors; by; Can-Ujh# (et ca <b�oblines les. Don're ton tde touble;
If the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
And if bleeding is needed a second time, let the blood flow to the same place or another vein, or in the other arm.
which painful and.
The manner of washing is such that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the fingertips are red.
Then bind it moderately so that the vein appears well, and then wash downwards across, neither too wide nor too long.
And let the wound be wide open, and cleaned well near the joint of the hand, so that nothing can leak out. If there is any bleeding, put the hand in hot water again, and allow blood to flow into the water until you have enough.
s�. Then, and so ouT e tguc: CZ in f il Fust au the bon table by S
The blood of this vein is more preserved than any other veins, with no arteries or nerves present.
The blood from the palm of the right hand is valuable for all diseases related to the liver, and this is how it's done.
squeeze the hand, and pour on hot water until the veins are emptied, if you can see them. y-f; that les quiz;
And do not pull too hard, for the nerves are easily torn from their place.
Then put the hand in warm water; if the blood vessels are frozen within the wound and cannot escape.
And when you have treated the bleeding as much as is necessary, apply oil and wool to the vein so that it can be quickly healed, doing this for each cut.
; you maye:Tud:t; the same and then that is c. The 1: don master they can le Otre toha vie (O contcur� su cesse est paire;
The bath of soap is suitable for all diseases located outside the body. such as arthritis, and swelling of the joints, and illness of the bones, and similar diseases of the hips and legs.
And the quality of its bathing is such that the sick take hot water in their hands and rub it on the veins until they are smooth. lines is not ce combta m il: fe sis les que ou n’s. That’s le pas the ne and are t.
Wash with wine or more potent tincture, or on the ankle, to move it must be done.
And if you wash on the foot, guard against the veins that are near it, and wash through them as when licking with a sponge; and let the fumes be diffused evenly.
And if the blood cannot flow out, reset the foot in water, and let the vein empty completely.
Ou ben but n're they do:n: f." Do not doubt of nerves, as we have said, and do likewise with the quinine for the other limb equally.
The source of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle bone, and its irritation causes pain in the thigh when it's due to heat.
And the quality of its irritation is such that the patient lies between boiling water and strains four fingers above the ankle by twisting.
c. And you must move so as to grasp it, for the head is loose, and it has risen greatly from its place.
And you must move so as to grasp it, for the head is loose, and it has risen greatly from its place. And if you cannot reach it, strike any part of it with the flat or hollow side of your fist, and move towards the small joints, being careful to avoid the bones.
and make as much of the bleeding that you see, then tie off the artery, and wrap it with cotton bandage; it is now healed.
theyt ais. I
Ventoses are made of horns, or glass, or ivory; and suction is done in two ways: either by pricking to draw blood, or without pricking.
And this suction that is done without pricking has two methods: it can be at full fire (intense) or with less heat.
And two others on either side of the neck; and the swelling below the chin; and the swelling in both shoulders; and the swelling above the knees. and the swellings amidst both arms; and the swellings of both legs; do they vont: with de d (t may be they ond.
And so one must not fear it as with suturing of veins; And one must ensure it is not inflamed or on fire in any illness that arises from excessive retention, until the entire body has been emptied of blood.
And if necessary for illnesses or habits, let us apply each treatment at the beginning of every month, or its end, and do so every hour.
he: b (c;
And for those who experience swelling and redness on their face, head, neck, and in the eyes.
And those who experience a drop of blood in their mouths, with swoluted tongues, bleeding. And for those who think and see with numbness, pain, death, and similar things.
the or ent chir plowed with bleus is not to them and, then s't and it if you so, but the paints in them et de that are, ici les peche l'on est.
The treatment of the muscle is to support the neck ... which results in these things, and it must not be done after the evacuation of all blood.
And this inflammation is located near the muscle of the head.
And it is not for those with cold constitution or scurvy, as they would suffer greatly from its effects.
c:
And those who suffer from it often become lazy, and for this reason, it is necessary to apply the poultice slightly lower down due to fear of inefficacy.
Ventilation within the neck is located below the painful area and headache, and for this reason it extends to the widening of the chest. and to the incision in the windpipe, and everywhere else, and inflammastery;
ct set contd's: so:
Ventosities of two ribs on the neck cause pain in the head, otalmies and migraines, along with strangulation, and pain in the nerve roots.
And it is in the sanity of the basilica; and you must instruct the nurse to express his hand placement so that he does not cut the artery nor allow blood flow from it.
Ventosities below the chin are associated with oral disease, and decay of gums, and various illnesses found in the mouth; it is related to the sanity of the two lips.
The inflammation of the shoulders is a disease arising from heat and fullness.
The swelling of the elbows is as much as of three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;
f cq seme p' tigu;
The cushion on the croup is like hemorrhoids at the base and diseases below, it must be large and made of wool, requiring thorough shearing; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break; and it causes large wounds.
If the leg cushions bleed openly because they attract blood from all over the body and are like old pains of the wounds, bladder, and kidneys, and heal the flowers; and there are in place at the two shins and ankles, as well as they weaken the entire body after long use, causing lameness and bringing about various conditions.
The method of applying the cushion is to place it first when empty and then quickly apply pressure firmly and evenly, without stopping until you see a reddened and swolabler blood vessel appears, and pale streaks of blood: then remove the cushions and pay attention to the condition of the body because there are some that have sensitive skin and open pores; thus it is necessary to puncture only once but make large and deep wounds and suck gently.
If the wound is thick, it requires striking twice: the first time to make a passage for the thick blood.
And if the wound is very dense, it must be struck a third time; and when we wish to draw out little blood bit by bit, we do so only once.
And if we wish to draw out a lot of blood, we must repeat often; and if the wound is dense, it must be struck fully, so that the channels are pierced promptly.
t s; and bonte kee c's vce f, so va by the e corre : 1. If it is like this, with ointment of violet oil, or almond softening oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
If it is as of hair, with watercress oil, or flaxseed oil, or chamomile, or similar substances.
And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of wormwood, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
And if one whose heart is tender and broad cannot endure it, there need not be any oil applied.
However, it must be washed after ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or blackthorn berry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or similar substances.
And those with much moisture should rise easily, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar substances.
And those who have excessive swelling rise from old wine or water of peony, or a brew of anise or chamomile, or similar substances.
and they must not sweat with fomentations before or after the bath, but an hour or two after the bath; and should not sleep following the sweating.
and it is necessary that they take a sweat when needed for fomentations and when they are properly fomented. And those who are pale due to being cold, and whose blood is too thick and inflamed. If it is necessary to apply cold things, such as ripe pomegnolata and endive and lettuce with ease, and similar things.
and cooked mushrooms, and lamb's sweetbread, and moist meats.
And those with a cold constitution should prepare syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, mixed with a little mead, young mead, small birds, and wild geese.
And on the day he attempts to take flight, he must drink more than eat.
and it is proper for some men to give them triticale or mucus before or after purging to strengthen the main limbs. And make them subtlety strong, but it is not appropriate for those who are weak to drink them.
The poultices that are placed without causing pain are those put on the liver and spleen, and gout, and abdomen, and bowel issues and leg swelling, because those limbs do not suffer from being pierced anywhere.
and it is done to attract blood away from a member to another member without causing pain. As we do with the eyelids when they are swollen; to remove the hardness that is in the limb, as we apply pumps on the belly and armpits to reduce the limb.
and ease the pain when there is swelling or stones, if you draw out the attraction by chance the swelling, or remove the stone from its place.
and thus does she when placed over the liver and spleen where there is retained windiness,
And these blisters are made hollow to express so much only; and sometimes filled with fire, and at other times plain water.
If it is as with diseases of the lungs, and in such a way that you fill the blister with hot water boiled together or with water to which healing herbs have been added.
The form for administering a cauterizing agent is as follows:
the: s’sgu;
And it may be from strain, so gently as not to shock the patient while placing on the limb;
and let there be in place a stake of twisted iron or steel, to set up an anchor.
and they should vary greatly both small and large according to the diseases and temperaments of those who receive them;
d gue t. Do not c s isnt;
And one must thus apply this poultice to the limb:
Take a tallow candle or ointment, and place it within the poultice across the shaft which is in the center of the poultice. if so that the light (of the candle or ointment) be at the bottom of the poultice and does not burn the patient;
bief le bon de thair by s’e is the inet f.
And use a splint as before, and start over often, if necessary.
In the vesicatory treatment for pleurisy, there is no penis or scrotum involved, and it is only used when filled with fluid, and placed on the limb entirely.
And this is its form:
tiles. And in its removal of warts like goiters or moles, as well as similar conditions.
and the quality for its use is that when you find soft spongy areas with clear fluid, then take them.
and place it into a gentle liquid until they are familiarly swollen without any protrusion. is nottarr t and inso:
And when they are full-grown and ripe, if it is in place where you can put a poultice, then do so, for this works very well.
If not, elevate the dislocated area and apply warm water, very thoroughly, then compress it.
And if the dislocated area becomes too swoln on the body without treatment, apply a cloth of flax in cold water, and place it there until the swelling subsides.
they should lign:
When you place a moist cloth of hairs on it, let them dry in place, then bind now.
and if more is needed, take other remedies.
And if the remedies do not work, rub the fresh blood spot with a stick and insert an arrow until it draws out. line de so that heuze de le. Do they s ça
And when you see that they bleed, then powder with a little oil and salt crushed, or ash, so they will clot now.
Here begins the book of fractures
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine and involve the restoration of breaks and dislocations.
the e-that:thems that (sot'possonsle Tullie.
And for this reason, it is a strange art in our land because I have never found any good ones.
and I know nothing better, for the knowledge from ancient books which I have studied so much that I am familiar with it, and through experimentation, and by the habit of my life.
t. The s.
It is necessary therefore that we say here the preface of this book containing the essence and chapters in which the sage applies his understanding, dwelling on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that whenever there is a fracture or dislocation or twisting or swelling in any, it must happen that you support the patient on one side and another if nothing totally supports them, like as weakness of limbs, infants, or elderly.
or if the tension is not very tight, or too cold; and eat food that is cooling, such as cold broths, poultry, and lamb, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or discharge of material in the limb; then the patient should be governed first as they are accustomed.
When the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that promote nourishment, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, barley, sheep's stomach, eggs, fresh fish, rich wine, and similar things. For proper nourishment allows for faster healing of the fracture.
And know that old and brittle bones cannot heal or unite according to their nature for the recovery of limbs, nor those who are too tender, like children's bones.
But treat it with care, reset the broken bone using a large tenon that is sharp and joins the member together until it's strong as before; do not interrupt its function at all, and for this reason one should nourish with hearty meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For a head fracture is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter about all kinds of fractures. There are fractures that occur from dislocation, and others by being bent, as with the breaking of a quill for writing.
There are fractures that occur from dislocation, and others by being bent, as with the breaking of a quill for writing. And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a crack throughout a small split.
And in each way has its device and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what comes to mind at that place.

And when there is no twisted joint or touching of it, and the patient does not feel much pain if there is no breakage.
But there may be twisted joints, cracks, or small breaks. the in sone de pru;
And know that the fracture which is in motion, and are the two separated parts, they must now be set evenly, as soon as abscesses arise.
and if ulcers come about, leave it for no day until the ulcers are soothed. then you shall set it as evenly and easily as possible, and know that the restoration of him is easier than that of those with pieces left in them; then strain, if it should be done thereafter.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, extend them apart by two parts, whether hands or feet, or to your hand if it is small members, or between two cords, or one cord and your hand.
And place the member according to its natural form so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset them in their places using all methods, and ensure through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
And join well the two pieces of bone according to the best forms.
And he feels it well in the hand if you think it does not seem to be properly aligned: dress it neatly and do not extract too much, nor press as those who bring forth pus and contraction of the limb through their technique have often seen us witness.
And when the limb is at its limit, gently restrain the patient so it does not move, neither in wakefulness nor sleeping, turning or any other manner. and ensure that the limb is secured well enough so it feels no pain. When it feels no pain at all or almost none, one must put it in partial alignment so that it feels no pain.
When it feels no pain at all or almost none, one must put it in partial alignment so that it feels no pain. and keep watch to ensure it is set straight, lest contortions arise when it is restored.
and the quality of the injured member depends as I have told you.
Seek knowledge that broken limbs vary in minor and major ways, and shape.
For there are small members such as arms and legs among others: they should be wrapped in soft fine linen.
and those who are large like thighs and legs: they should be bound with a wide strong bandage because wide bands can encircle the entire large member evenly, ensuring no part is left loose.
the fact if they are not f ; it'homme:
And soften the ligament a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the joint that is whole, then take another ligament, and turn it around correctly on the broken joint.
Then return to the part from beyond the break, and constrain it moderately, not too strong or weakly, as we have said in the first letter above.
Then place between the ligaments cotton or linen cloths, so they are all evenly matched, then bind them together above a bandage, and then put well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or inflammebagainst it with another layer of bandages.
If there is swelling or an abscess, apply soothing plaster to the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for several days.
Then straighten the splints, and let them be of moderate thickness from a wide stick, or wood used for making slats, or coconut fronds, following this shape:
However, it is necessary that the splint placed on the fracture be slightly thicker and wider than the others.
by me:dulme* (e setresd; and there * 1 2, so <brta; but they are not ;t; an Mg s t
Then it is secured over the extremities in the same way as with the first reset, then laid on a bandage swiftly, as with the initial setting above the break.
Furthermore, it is tighter here, less there; and it should be that the bandage is medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
because if the bandage is too thick, as with works of folk who make their ropes from twisted flax strings, and it causes great error, for the spacing cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two inches between each extremity.
And if the patient is in pain from the head of an extremity after it has been tightened into its proper place, then apply linen or cotton padding under them so they do not slip.
When the wound is accompanied by broken bones, I will describe the treatment for this afterwards.
And remember that it is not necessary to extract all fractured bones on the first day. by targard* This.
And here is the way of ancient emplacements to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that remains by the mill walls, mix it with abundant egg, and make this concoction not too clear nor too thick, and use it; it's the common method for the restoring plaster of various positions in many cases, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and torsions: take abareis (sandalwood) and ladani (lemon balm), ana .x. Z.; mirre (myrrh) and aloes, ana .v. Z.; alechil (aloe vera gel), viij. З.; and grind it into powder, mixing with abundant egg; if the patient's condition is warm, use this plaster as it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones for many people.
Another type of plaster for torsion: take mugat (mastic resin) and vismalve (vitalba), ana .x. Z.; mirre (myrrh) and aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice (acacia gum), vi. З.; bolic armenic (bolus Armenian herb), x. Z., and grind finely, then mix with water or abundant egg, and administer.
Another method of resetting dislocated joints and bones back to their original positions alleviates the pain upon occurrence; they mold new splints using cloth soaked in warm oil, and place them at the site. These bandages do not hold firmly, but are effective for calming severe abscesses and properly relieving pain.
Another method for bandaging broken bones: take dried mulberry leaves and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a splint with them.
Another method for bandaging and healing the remaining abscess: take vipersall root, camomile, violet flowers, spelt flour from each portion; grind it, and mix with wine, then if the limb is swollen, apply this mixture mixed with wet coriander or water.
Another method of treatment more effective than the first when a long-lasting abscess occurs in the limb's healing process. Take root powders of marjoram, and seed of flax, balm, mallowsweet, comfrey without succor; and flowers from violets and chamomile, all equal parts together; and grind, and make into a paste with water salted or freshwater, or wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras says in his book that one should not place anything above the broken limb to promote healing except a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, and it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen suggests placing dry and slightly warm substances on the broken limb to promote healing, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned before.
Another way to make plaster for pain and swelling: take horsehair, goat wool, olive pith, and sea sponge in equal amounts, and grind them all together, then mix with the paste.
And afterwards remove it slightly, and be careful that the patient feels no pain or dislocation of any bone in its place; do not reset it until completely healed.
And if pain or itching comes to the area, or rashes, feeling of restlessness or swelling occur, hurry up and reset it, and remove the plaster immediately; take a light cloth and sea sponge dampened with water, immerse the affected area, and lift it until the itch subsides and pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then wrap it in dry linen, wet with rosewater or oil, and bind it above a pillow until you are sure of a hot abscess.
and allow the inflammatur of the limb to heal, and ease the pain in his bones, then continue the gentle resetting, with a little opium, and do not bind it as tightly as before; carefully until it is stable.
And if you see that the abscess is red and painful and swollen throughout the limb, and you need opium and ligature, then proceed as before.
If it does not come to the limb anything as we have said, do not reset until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it for 20 days, according to what is seen, as long as the breaker feels pain and approaches the joint above.
Then the first reset is best, and he swells his flesh as I have said before; and if you see the wound drying more than necessary, know that sores cannot come. Rise the water with hot water each time you reset, and do so every day, and cleanse a little.
Therefore, in this work, cut the tendons of the limb and hasten to what a madman does, returning it wrongly: it is bad, and such works are fearsome, and I see no other way than exhaustion and working directly.
In various ways of fractures Many types of fractures there are, and different shapes, and the causes are distinct.
Due to the cracks made by spear blows, and the bone breaks all the way up to the shaft which is below the bone, just as made with haft or wood; and for this reason it's called this kind of break "hafting".
Or the sword splits the bone from above and it is called this kind of break "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two large or small breaks.
And if there is an embedded blow, or split or crack of stone-like bone, or falling on stone, or other such things.
And if there is persistent bleeding, which reaches up to the tela under the bone, or above it, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that has reached the bone as subtly as mouse teeth, and it is a small tear, and therefore this bleeding is called "capillary".
and if the wound is made by being struck with iron, falling, or similar things, and it allows entry of a piece of bone into it, and the eye sockets are affected as when a blacksmith strikes upon an anvil; then within the pierced bone.
And this happens more often to those who have young or soft bones, as is with children.
And this occurs in all these ways of fractures where small pieces are dislodged, as is with the body; and I shall speak about them now.
And let us know all ways of fractures by distraction upon them, and examination with probes, and through the corrupted cartilage that is beneath.
The resemblance of hair is known by what happens when the bone is uncovered and rubbed well over it; thus there appears black breakage.
In the treatment of a breakage, beware if any unfortunate incident occurs with the patient; and if you see no evil event like vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, palpitations, fever ague, eyes exiting forcefully and reddening, and other such manifestations in various dispositions, do not heal without doubt.
And if you see no hopeless incident, and expect a remedy, then begin the treatment.
When the pain first comes to you, and it is in winter, one must remove the bone by the fourteenth day when the moon can be seen.
And if it is in summer, you must hasten to remove the bone by the seventh day before the fleshing around the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
And if the bone fracture reaches to the flesh covering the brain, it is necessary that you cut the broken part thus: and ensure you grasp the injured head of the patient with a forceful strike, and reveal beneath the bone in all ways possible, and on top of the wound area as gently as you can.
And if the bleeding continues and reveals bone or an abscess, you must use what is appropriate, and ensure that you fill its cavity with molded cloth soaked in oil. And allow the wound to rest until the abscess is soothed, and you are sure of stopping the bleeding; then begin removing around the bone, as there are two methods of treatment: one method involves cutting in a narrow opening at the front, resulting in its shape.
And then make another cut larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have various splints of different lengths and widths, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed or made of iron wire; in a light piece of workmanship, do not cut the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, it must be that you pierce around it, so that you provide splints with tongs, not too long for them to penetrate beyond the bone of the forehead; there should have above the tip a margin or circle, that does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you shall need several, so that each one reaches the surface area of the beam, providing tongs for all types of tests; this is the form of the three kinds of tongs:
The quality for piercing around the fractured bone is that you put one tongs on the bone, and turn your two fingers such that you know the bone has been penetruted; then move the tongs a little bit afterwards to do so throughout, then cut out with incisions the space of the bone which is between the percutures, doing so as subtly as you can, gently, as we have said, until you take off the bone by your hand or any of the tools that you use as pincers; and make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have the bone pierced and cut, it is necessary to reset the protrusion that has been held by the bone against any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be more secure and finer than the other chisels.
And if it holds nothing of small bones or scales, then gently with any instruments; afterwards treat the wound and bandage as we have said.
And another method of operation is what the Greeks call it, which is more effective; and this requires a strong will, as they say. Firstly, you must expose a part of the bone where the break is most open. Once you have exposed that part, place the pointed end of this lenticular chisel on it as follows.
And do not chisel too deeply, and the area is divided into two sides. The cutting tool should be directed towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet upon it so that you gently chip away at the entire bone, being careful of the thin layer beneath.
If it is loose against the bone, gently tap with the chisel as too much force can cause harm and fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the skin and the bone is cut slightly above it so that there are small pieces, then you should treat the severity accordingly, and remove scales with a fine razor of which you must have various quantities in order to administer at each place what is most beneficial according to the work done and the shape of the fracture.
If you have many coarse razors and finer ones after that, continue doing so until it is well done.
In each of the other hair cuts and fine fractures, it is necessary to administer according to its directionality; and this is something that cannot be easily corrected by those who have put their study into this art.
When the wound is uncovered, it is necessary to take a piece of flax cloth according to the amount of the wound, and moisten with oil, then place upon the wound. Then take another piece of cloth folded in two or three layers, and moisten with wine and oil-rosemary, and place it over the first cloth; do this as gently as possible so you don't burden the wound. Then dress it again slightly above the other layer, without stretching more than necessary to cover the wound only.
And leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is soothed. Then remove it and apply medicines such as lily root powder, barley flour, incense dust, and aristolochia, along with similar things. Make a mixture of these substances into powder form, place upon the wound, and apply non-stinging medications afterward;
Ensure the wound is thoroughly cleaned so you do not leave any pus or gather it together, as when sores come together over the brain's cloth, they burn and sting, causing great harm to the patient; for when something biting is applied above a festering matter, it irritates below.
Therefore be cautious; if by chance something happens to the patient as we have said, it is uncertain and without doubt.
And if there is no improvement after the medicine applied, then it should have its effect, and you must take a part of honey, mix it with three parts rose oil, and apply it to the affected area with a cloth. Then proceed with the treatment methods suitable for healing until it is healthy again.
He says that the two upper parts are not broken because they are bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, so it does not break but only swell or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it should be that you bandage your little toe or ankle near those parts, and set the break so it aligns with your index toe, and the arch on its side, until the nail grows back naturally. s; that you give the l'estle benze t: la c.djof:f; nembe;  (and there.
And if the fracture is in the part above the knee and cannot bring the foot to its place, it should be set level with a thin stick slightly thicker than usual.
And if the fracture is in two parts, repair it similarly, and hurry to restore the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscess has subsided, then wrap the area above the knee with linen cloths, if the fracture is in one part.
When you bind another from a different side, if there is a breakage; and the sinews are so thick that they fill the joints to no avail.
And the restorer said that one must soften the sinews with fat and move each day; although it seems strange to me, yet it is necessary for them to be soaked in the concoction of oil and flour powder, then leave the tendon until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
And never apply goose feather quills in place of tendons, and if at all on a thin layer of oil, it will cause the breakage, and suffocate the patient; do what you see fit.
When an abscess occurs near the eye as you work on it, place beeswax or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a drop of diaperin.
And if the abscess does not appear there, apply plaster using wheat flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then place over gauze pieces, ensuring it does not touch the eye.
and if the breakage of the eye is small and it's broken into tiny pieces, extract any suitable fragments, then close the tear, and treat various difficult wounds with pitch charcoal and sulfur; just as plasters and ointments are appropriate for this.
If it does not have any wound in the eyes, he treats with pledgets and inserts cotton until they are well-healed.
For dislocation of the jawbone.
When the jawbone is dislocated and there are no wounds nearby, and the fractures are minimal, so that it's not broken in two, but rather splintered within, if one can notice this lightly.
by so ous f that the mertir claudi.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced on two sides, it is necessary to arrange for an equal extension on both parts.
And if there is movement of the teeth or rotation, use a thread of gold or silver or silk to bind them; then place cerotage on the fractured jawbone and cover it with two layers of cloth; over the cloth, place a large well-made iron bar or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the size of the mandible, and secure it where you can move it. Instruct the patient to rest and consume light meats.
And if you see that the shape changes, reposition it daily and then return to its original state; place a poultice on top, with powdered herbs or meal flour after removing the cerotamoil cover; apply a light linen over the poultice, and as long as the poultice is effective and the patient's condition remains unchanged, leave it until healed; many times it has been cured in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, arrange as we have said many times before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure that no bone fragment has been broken off; delicately remove any splinters of the fragments with what we have said many times before.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it as necessary according to your discretion.
When you have set all the bones in place and they do not move out of position, if the wound is wide, cover with one or two bandages to support healing until it has fully mended.
To strengthen and fortify. The fracture often occurs before the shoulder and breaks in three ways: where it is broken and separated into two parts, with fragments, and is easier to restore; or there is a break with an accompanying wound.
And the operations are when there is a fracture without an open wound, so that you have two assistants, one who paints the broken joint with strengthening ointment; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then aligns the fracture to your hands so that the form is as it should be, with no appearance or lopsidedness.
And if you need to extend more, then place under the patient's shoulder a round rod of cloth or woolling, and it should be thick according to your necessity; and extend and lift the fractured limb, holding the rod in your hand, aligning the break as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the fractured limb towards the back because it comes out frontwards, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their stomach, and place half an earthenware pot under the shoulder, with the assistants lifting the shoulder while keeping pressure until the bone in the fractured limb rises.
And then address the fracture of your legs, and if you find debris therein, it is necessary that you cut above; remove the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any splinting, use one of the knives you have chosen for this purpose: to protect against infection.
And it should resemble a spoon, not too sharp, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the wound; and have two tips, as you see, with one being wider and the other narrower, just like the contour of the wound when cutting through the bones.
And when you are sure of a deep abscess, clean the wound well; if the contour is small or you doubt it's a deep abscess, line the wound with cloth and bandages according to its quantity.
When abscesses occur there, apply a cloth soaked in oil with roselle and spices, and place it on top.
The pulling of the bone when it is sensing wounds and feeling loose is to apply plaster with powdered molten lead and fresh butter on top, and lightly pack up, and put a stick beneath the joint if needed. Then take a very wide band of about the width of a palm, then place a cloth twice on top of the packing and plaster, and then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band, so that the head of the band hangs. Place the splint over the dislocation, turn the bandage around the neck, and under both good and bad seats, adjusting each part. When you see that the dislocation is holding well again, and it's clear that the splint does not move above the broken bone, reinforce every day; when the ligaments have healed, leave it alone.
Lay the bad seat on its back, and place it when sleeping with a small pillow underneath for elevation to raise the shoulder upwards; this will lighten the burden of pain through the alignment of the shoulder where you attach the arm at the collarbone, ensnaring the arm so that no unfortunate accident causes dislocation until xx days.
Then resume the splinting if needed and constrain it until restored; it is usually fully recovered within xxviii days or sooner for some people.
Of a shoulder fracture
Sometimes the shoulder is fractured but not displaced and it can be felt only by touch; then set the joint according to the figure of the break, and reset the limb in its natural shape in any manner you can; then place a powder made from finely ground molten wax over the area with plenty of egg whites, along with light gauze; then wrap it with a double layer bandage; then wrap a wide yet fine bandage around the shoulder that is slightly wider than the fracture site, and securely fasten at any point on the shoulder using linen thread so that the bandages cut evenly; then bind tightly with a large dressing firmly to ensure that the bandage does not move from its place, checking each day for any changes; and whenever it swells, reapply the binding, adjusting the bandage if necessary, and have the patient lie on their back; and after 20 or 25 days, remove the dressings. And when this time period is completed, you can release them because it is not bone that moves easily.
And if a piece of bone protrudes but not from the skin, and it becomes swolebed, and there is inflammation, then follow what we have said in the treatment for an abscess to relieve discomfort quickly.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone
The flesh is not broken often in the middle but sometimes it happens; however, it breaks frequently at the end. And when it is broken within, it moves away from underneath, and causes great pain for the patient, weakness of limbs, fatigue, and occasionally vomiting blood, and opens up the joints on the fractured bone, which feels very bad to them.
The process of healing involves the patient lying down on their back, placing a cushion between the shoulder blades, pressing the shoulders, and bringing together the two ribs with your hands, carefully aligning all possible ways until the bone's appearance is correct; then place splints and padding over the fractured area delicately with salt or other light substance, wrap it in a sheet, secure it so it does not move, and return the ligament to its round shape on the back gently, allowing time for recovery each hour, and if it softens, continue to strain; and if it must be dislocated due to corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain, or abscess, do so quickly, remove it, scrape off the padding, and apply remedies of cure as needed; then reassemble the splint and maintain pressure until healed.
For a broken rib fracture
For the broken ribs are fractures infection and can be infected with d’as heal les chiers that have been bones, so doivent les fracture lesse que li la tes osteoies which become; et ils ou lee a bone les fractures de liaux.
And the reductions are such that you set the fracture evenly as needed. Then place the splint, and bind with a strap if necessary.
And if the rib fracture is moving inward, and it causes the patient great pain and pressure like pleurisy, because the bone pierces; and also lameness, and he vomits a large amount of blood, and this is grievous health, and the ancients have given great remedies.
And some say it is proper to administer meats that inflate the belly, in order to push out the breach.
We do not make it so that abscesses are formed within if they have not come already. If it has occurred there, if the joint is healed.
And they say of these that one applies cups to the place, to draw out humors abundantly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt as to whether the cups do not attract excess fluids to the area due to weakness.
And they say of these that one should cover the area with moist linen soaked in hot oil and place tents between the ribs to achieve equal pressure all around; then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, flesh, and medicines.
the poird;
From the break of the neck
At no time does fracture occur in the bones of the neck, and it is rare for them to bow; similarly with the spine of the back. And when this occurs in any case, and you want to know if it will be safe or not, watch carefully if you see his hands becoming softened and swollen and lifeless, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel. Know that in some cases it is fatal, and if he moves and feels well when they are moved and restrained, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if proper treatment is applied.
m unge t; and (the s.
If this accident does not occur, it is a lighter matter.
And the treatment is to apply ointment if there is an abscess, using rose oil or almond oil until it's soothed; then place it under a comforting and drying plaster and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; they should not sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are healed. If any bone is dislocated, you must apply heat to the area; then separate the two edges of the wound if it's large and stitch them together; then dress the wound with a healing ointment until it's healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, known as 'the hip joint,' place your poultice from your left hand to the right one in balance, then apply a plaster and bandage if needed; then bind it, and if there are dislocated bones, put them back, stitch the wound, and treat it until healed.
Of broken bone of the hip joint
Often the bone of the hip joint is broken, and if it happens, there should be a slight thinning at the head; they become elongated, incline towards the pelvis, come to the patient with pain at that spot, swelling, and fracturing.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it until you are above the fracture; and identify what the break and its shape are; and if the fracture is solely in the head, then align this fracture to its natural shape.
;ta are and and: If you c. When you have placed it evenly, then place under a board, and then under a post of wood or metal, and stabilize the breakage so that it does not move, and align the upper part from below the ribs until they are level.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if an abscess comes forth, do not touch it until the abscess is soothed, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to restoration, and bind as needed, unless there has been any additional injury; this is the manner.
Of a fracture of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which lies between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it should be repaired in one of two ways: one is to take a plain iron rod as large as needed.
And attach two heads to it with two cords and hang the patient under one of them; then pour some boiled beef broth over the broken limb on the rod until it comes up to his elbow, and let there be a curve in the rod, then suspend it from any heavy object or extenders; then place the mire at the fracture equal with both hands together, until the fracture is set as it should.
; that theird; set sal the by; or d thembobint ou tue en lesse sulittelle est this is they.
And if you see that the extraction is more severe, hold a ligament below the break, and above it, extending each member to its part. And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder blade, it must be set by placing one ligature under the collarbone, and another towards the arm, beneath the fracture; similarly, if the fracture faces towards the arm, a light ligature should be applied carefully, without strain, until the break is equal on both sides and at the collarbone; then set the break evenly as needed, and hold it, unless an abscess forms.
And if an abscess forms, do not hold it until six days have passed; instead, apply linen soaked in ease and oil of roses to the area as long as the abscess is calmed; then reset it, setting a splint over the fracture, reassembling the arm on the shoulder blade, placing your hand on the shoulder or breast. Wrap the bandage tightly around the joint and arm, ensuring that the arm remains still if nothing prevents it or if no bones are displaced.
And if you suspect that the bone is not moving, use splints and place a larger and stronger than the others, and between each of them have two thirds parts; then re-splint, so at the fracture. Place on top, more strongly as I said in the beginning below it breaks, above less strong and thupeau au chapiste si estrain sus les briseur, la peirrebrisqulz et siznauet de l’apres mires le chouse aloignet paralent oultre que les brisure enlange.
And if you see the seat of fractures and strains, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then check each of three days to ensure no swelling or wounds come near the spot where nerves might be too strained. If so, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not release the strains until after three or more days, let the patient rest on their back with hands placed over their stomach; and place a plain linen cushion under the shoulder evenly, and observe each hour of day and night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the ligaments are softened; if it responds due to the power of medicine, give them the flesh as we have previously mentioned, in such a manner that the flesh be first subtle; and when they begin to regain strength, let it be substantial. And it is customary for both the shoulder and leg to be reset in forty days altogether; then they must release and administer baths and ointments at the site to direct healing. If the strain is ugly and swollen, delay releasing until after one day or two months.
For a broken arm fracture
The arm is composed of two bones called "foscile," one small, which supports the elbow, and one large, located below the little finger; sometimes the large one is broken solecuously or the small one, or both together.
When the small "foscile" is broken, restoration is easy and healing; but when the large one is broken, it results in a poorer cure, and more difficult than if they were both broken together. If only the small "fosciles" are broken, slight extension is necessary for better alignment.
If it is the large "foscile," stronger stretching is needed; extend over a pillow and raise the elbow higher than the rest of the hand, while lowering the small fingers compared to others, keeping them crossed at the same level, with another cushion placed higher before the patient so they don't feel any strain. Then, extend the smaller arm towards the part below their hand or a ligament and place other ministers on either side above it; finally, align correctly according to its best form.
And if in the break into pieces, place each one back to its position, and if any are dislocated that grip the bone, and you cannot restore it to its position, then strike above and cut the bone as we have said before.
And if with the wound of injury, I have spoken to the individual practitioner; he shall take care.
And if in the beginning of healing arises swelling from wounds, apply a cloth made of rosemary oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and place the cloth gently on all sides until the inflammamoins are calmed. Then remove the wax, and use the poultice powder with plenty of egg yolk, then apply it over the sutures, making them more prominent than the others, and know that there should be seven or eight sutures in various arrangements: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and strain it most on the fractured area compared to other parts, and every day slightly less tension, as we have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages that are over the wound be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread used for sutures be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have mentioned. And attend to the limb and ligament after several days. And if by chance any affliction comes to the limb, as itching that comes to a limb, you shall wash the limb with warm water until the itching is relieved; and let the limb not rest too tightly. Then resume the binding, and when the ligatures are softened and the bone untwisted, along with similar things, so treat them accordingly.
And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a bit and let it rest for some time until the swelling subsides, then resume binding.
And if none of these things that we have mentioned come to the patient, you should not loosen until 12 or 15 days have passed, then tie his hands to his neck and make sure both sides are equal; and beware of movement and displacement, and let him sleep on his back. Also know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 35 days, or possibly even 12 days, according to the compositions and the complexions of the ingredients.
Of a hand fracture
He says that on the back of the hand and in our fingers, there are few fractures, but they bend many times.
And when the plant of the hand is fractured or bent, and if it should come to bandage, then heal properly, and extend his hand outstretched, and the bones broken, and the splints are equal, as long as they grow until joined; and applies plasters, and apostemas, thusly. And thereupon comes in le by the measure is put a lump of; and do so much, it shall come not be measured out for all; and the heals onward.
When the fracture is around the forepart of the stomach by the foot plant, make a sleeve from cloth and instruct the patient to wrap it tightly at the broken area; then strengthen with a long strip of cloth, and let the knot be as large as the hand's palm, and tighten as needed.
And if the fracture is in the hind part, it's necessary to place a splint underneath and another above on the plantar side, so that the hand remains exposed and straight; then bind it entirely around the hand, ensuring the ligaments between the two are sealed.
And if the fracture comes from either of the bones between them (if it's a spike), place an equal splint as needed; and bind with the plantar side, and whether you see to put a small straight splint to elevate the fracture without moving it. If the fracture is on any other of these bones (like in the index or one of the others), place equal splints and use the healthy adjacent bone for binding; or bind them all together with a single strap, as much movement it allows, or placing a splint if needed. And take care in restoration and abscess treatment, and heal whatever comes out, just as I have said before.
of a broken hip joint
The bone of the hip joint is often broken in many ways, and when it turns forward and backward, its restoration involves applying a ligature above or below the fracture. And the patient lies face down, then each attendant extends their hands equally on all sides of his body; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
the emissions theyt; he; J J.
And if there is an abscess hot, let it be pacified then return to your work and care; the lanced opening is done in part by method. It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture; i.e., a doubled bandage of two or three bands, and manage any excess length, then rotate the leg until the heel reaches near to the root of the calf, and insert a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee joint, with its end at the top; then rotate above the leg and over the hips the bandage, then place an iron stake at the fracture site, then put another stake on the bone of the leg; then make a loop from the rope between the leg and hip using soft cloth to apply equal pressure, then begin tying three or four turns around the fracture; as you move more above the fracture, reduce the tightness; then to the two ends of the thread that was inserted between the leg and hip, add another iron stake on top of them, and continue upwards until near the foot; if it is restrained without moving from its place, leave it like this, and do not let any swelling or pus form.
And if it happens that it dislocates again, and address what is happening as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, then they must be pushed back in if possible, but if not, one can split the flesh, and extract the fragments; and the treatment should be done as we have described until it heals.
At no time is the thigh broken as when one inserts pegs, such as in the shoulder and arm; however, with healing done this way, it does not alleviate the patient's suffering.
And know that the thigh is restored in one or two days, or a little more or less, depending on the variations of constitutions.
from the hollow of the knee joint
Know that in the groin area there are often slight breaks, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is not just a crack or hole, and leads to all wounds, feels pained, and this hurts greatly.
And the healing process involves setting it as equally balanced as possible with its parts moved so they can be assembled; then apply the splint, and if needed, put on a round board, and secure firmly as necessary, then address all the arrangements we have mentioned for other breaks, such as swelling and similar issues; apply to each accident what is suitable for it until healed.
Concerning the breaking of the leg
It is known that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" by right and the other is called "foscile"; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is done just as it is with the arm similarly, and the procedures are all the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
And if the delicate bone is shattered, then turn to face forward.
If the large bone is broken, it feels great pain and one can see it well; then remove it from there. Then perform an adjustment, make it even, and fasten the ligaments equally; however, it must be ensured that the breakage is not ugly, and if there are more fragments, let the adjustment be smaller and lighter; and balance according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of hemped wood that wrap around the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from knee to ankle; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and tie them securely together so the leg cannot turn left or right, and thus it is well done; and no one should administer a band of wood along the length of the leg if it is made of wood, and properly keep the leg from moving; regularly check for any swelling or other issues in the area of breakage or wound; and cure until healed.
Regarding the fracture of the bone of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot a break occurs sometimes and in the shinbone, and nothing happens to cause weakness or other conditions.
If there is a break in the bone of the foot and you see these bones protruding from one another, place it gently on the ground as if it were going to walk, then immediately put your own foot under its, where the bones are raised; then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and compresses above, and place a small bandage with two plain pins below, over the belly of the affected foot, secure it temporarily, then wrap around with cloths as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, you will loosen the ligament, for you will find that the bones are equal again, whether they are broken or dislocated.
If there are any broken bones, then repair them as we have said for the hand; then insert a splint along the length of the limb, and make it slightly wider; then place underneath the foot the table I mentioned, and stretch it immediately; and if there are two or three or more, break each one individually, placing a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the table beneath the leg so that its top aligns with the stomach.
And it is necessary not to forget the other things I have said regarding other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each incident accordingly.
Regarding the fracture of the hand bone
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, she should sit in an elevated position, then tilt towards her back and be supported from behind; then fill her womb with cotton as thick as one thumb; then have her stand up, and slightly lift her hips over time, so that the cotton falls into the entrance of her nature and brings the bone along with it; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and if she has urinaturi, reset her position, and thus she does this for seven days or so: her break will be healed, and if you see any remaining issues, take a pouch of sheep's bladder, tie off one end with a cord, and fill it completely with the pouch; then blow air into the tied-off end until the bladder is empty inside. Her nature will return to its proper position; then fill it with cotton again, leaving it like that for several days until fully healed.
And when the bone of a man's finger or woman is broken, restore it as we have described for the hip joint; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and practice, and read my book. For fractures signify multiple approaches to the right path of restoration: so let us then do.
And of the bones quant les lignons li les bone.
Of fracture with a wound
It is necessary for those who have a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, as long as the sinews we mentioned confirm this.
And if the wound is healed, and there remains lead poisoning, unless you have other things, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, as long as abscesses do not appear.
; they can. the same:
And if the broken bone is visible above the joint, it must be gently set into place with your hands, in slight extension.
And if you cannot set the extension with your hands to be level, then use this instrument made of iron, which has seven or six branches and is long in length; and its width depends on the quantity of the wound; thus it is necessary for a surgeon that he grips three or four, as needed for each fracture treatment; and let them have hooks and be somewhat thicker so they do not bend under compression to the limb at your workplace, and place them firmly in front, and thick enough forward, thus:
And it is called "palindrome," so the head of the bone must be placed on the apparent part of the bone; and they should be even one with another when reset. And if the fracture is subtle, and the extensions cannot well grip the beak, then you shall cut off the head of the bone until the extensions have a chance to hold it.
If you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, with the aid of an appropriate instrument, whether cutting or sawing, to your ability; then extract that which is lodged in the hardened bone and small splinters.
And when the bone has been brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Arrange until it is properly positioned, then moisten a cloth with vinegar-like black sticky substance, and cleanse if necessary; do not put oil or any other thing on the wound which may cause decay and corruption; once you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and remove all surrounding tissues according to the size of the wound, while ensuring it is properly protected from strain due to movement; many times this has been done by wise men, who prevent further harm or death in some cases; thus ensure that the adjustments are less rigid and more flexible than other fractures.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you suspect that there may be an accidental infection occurramoosly as we have said, and if you see pain at the site, do not apply any dressing; but wrap a sturdy fabric around it where the padding should be. And when after one or two days, or longer depending on the wound's healing, remove whatever you applied initially and use a medicinal ointment for wounds as like an herbal mixture by Tetrafarmacist;
And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes relaxed and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be fitted with a splint so that the bow supports it lightly.
And if several days pass and it cannot be straightened but continues bent like this, for there are small bone fragments, you must clean the wound with gauze and remove all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
by the bent and or ;  (d vist en sull'sgr rigiern leur.
From bruises which arise upon the saddle.
We often come upon the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and an ugly thing to see is the state of the limb; and sometimes it cannot perform its natural functions.
Be careful then if it is fresh: if you administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, pitch, acacia, and other similar things; take any of these items or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or plenty of vineger or honey water; put it in leather pouches, strain it well, and do not untie the knot for days; then reset, and continue to another until the swelling is ossified like bone; or you may be bound with a piece of wood properly shaped; because the property of this piece of wood is that it removes all inflammation from above the limbs; if the swelling has already turned hard as stone, and needs to be removed, then cut away any excess protrusion; or take it to some barber who will pare until healed.
When the fracture of the bone is healed, and remains weak after the limb has become frail and delicate for various reasons: one is because it was tied too tightly, and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, preventing blood circulation to the limb; or due to a multitude of wounds; or from excessive movements at inappropriate times; or because there is little blood within its body, thus making it weak.
And the treatment is to have the patient eat well and keep their body warm until there are many blood vessels in them again; and administer baths for joy and comfort; then apply plasters on the limb, so that they draw a lot of nourishment into it, and frequently re-wet with water while the circulation restores to the member; and bring back its natural shape.
After injury has healed, the limb becomes twisted
When the limb is twisted after healing, and bones are broken openly, and the shape of the limb appears ugly, yet it still retains its natural formation: do not believe the fools who say that you must break the limb anew entirely, as many foolish people have done in our land; these practices are condemned, and they bring great harm and sometimes death. However, if dislocations and tortures are fresh, it is fitting that they be eased with hot water or soft herbs cooked, such as coltsfoot leaves, roots, meadowsweet, and similar things; and prepare a mollifying poultice, like well-made diaquilon, and take the muscatel of coltsfoot, and mix it with pig fat or oil of sesame, and apply the poult지; or take oily figs, and grind them with fennel seeds, and other medicines that soothe swelling.
At no time is the dislocation cured by continuously and lengthy rubbing with moist hands. And be sure to move the limb once every hour.
And if the curvature is old and hardened, like stones, it needs to be removed with iron, so that it extends up to the bone using a subtle delicate saw-like instrument; then apply pressure and careful attention in its treatment.
This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs, if necessary now reset without delay.
For if delayed, and the leg swells, and perhaps when resetting it is painful at the location; therefore, it does not matter that you move it during the time of swelling: often causes spasms and other pains.
Moreover, when it happens, if you dress the patient's wound, then leave them, until the swelling is soothed; then bathe the limb with hot water and oil, then gently exercise each limb as necessary for healing to occur in its place.
.
Of the jawbones
Occasionally the jawbones become dislocated and remain so; there are two ways this occurs: either they are slightly out of place but softened a bit, or completely displaced, hanging towards one side, causing saliva from the mouth to not be contained, unable to close their mouth, and wrapping around their tongue when speaking.
When dislocation is slight, it can return on its own in various positions.
If it is complete and accomplished, one must reset it promptly without hesitation.
In such a way that the minister washes the patient's head and inserts a mirror with one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, where the dislocation is in two parts; while the other hand is used to create balance. Then instruct the patient to soften their jawbones and move them from all sides.
And then put it inside of its place until they are balanced equally; and take your right beforehands:
If it is difficult to reset, especially if they are the two mandibles together, use hot water and oil, until gently realigning; do not strain in attempting to reset, as we have said.
And when they are realigned equally, and the patient's mouth feels quite relieved and softer, place a cloth soaked in a mixture of oil, rosewater, and wax, then lightly bind it with soft cords.
and let the patient sleep on their back, with their head placed between two cushions, ensuring they do not move to either side or strain themselves. Instead, feed them light meat until the pains subside, and the mandibles are healed.
And then gently move what it wants lightly, and do not work to open the mouth for eating or drinking until the jawbones are well aligned and healthy.
And if the two jawbones cannot be reset to their place within an hour and are not returned to their original positions, fever and usual complaints may come, and perhaps abdominal issues, or possibly complete vomiting of bile alone.
And when you see this, then say that it is a loss; and often those who experience it die within seven days.
Of the hernia
The hernia cannot dislodge from within the ribcage and below, and it is never displaced once formed, and one feels it well.
: the mainte:
and the cheek which is towards it cannot dislocate; if not so, and if it dislocates at any time, reset it in its place as we have said; then put on a splint and bandage it, and restrain it, and instruct the patient to remain calm until they are well.
In the same way, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is displaced from its place.
Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
That one must know that the shoulder is dislocated for three reasons: one reason is when it dislocates at the upper arm part; and the second is at the lower end; and sometimes above, but this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate behind nor within the nerves; and often dislocates downward towards the arm, especially in those with little strength, for them it happens quickly; but in those with adequate strength, it occurs easily and returns just as easily.
And sometimes there are individuals with blows or fractures, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess; they think it is dislocated due to this.
Then it is necessary for you to examine it thoroughly until certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that when the dislocation moves towards the socket, and there is a distinction between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, you will find noticeable differences. and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and just under the socket where the head of the shoulder meets, as if they were eyes; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose nor move in any way.
:
And this manner of dislocation is not merely to return it when new, or where the child is ill.
And the method is for the minister to lift the hand of the sick person upward, then place poultices under the joint and raise it forcefully to its place; the minister lifts the hand and extends it upward, placing it down again quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in days afterward, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and the minister prepares soothing and softening baths, such as infusions of valerian and fenugreek and flaxseed in hot water, and is prepared.
Then support the patient on their back and place a strap of linen evenly, not too loose or too tight, then position the mirror under the heel against the strap, gently lift the head from the shoulder, and guide the hand towards the patient.
and other ministers soak the patient's head, ensuring it does not move downward; that shoulder returns immediately, as you see when performed in this manner.
And that you make present a person who is taller than the patient; and they stand towards their side, and place the shoulder underneath the strap of the injured party, and lift the shoulder upwards so that the patient's head hangs backward. And other ministers rub the hand below to the patient's belly. And if the patient is too light, place with them any heavy object, and the dislocation returns now.
And the reset is sometimes done in another way: it involves inserting a long stick into the ground so that the shoulder joins as securely as a plaster cast, and not too thick or thin. Then it is placed under the patient, but with soft cloths above, and the limb should be long as possible; then extend his hand to the other side properly, and the joint will return quickly.
If it does not wish to return for all these reasons that we have said, then perform this remedy: take a tinder of two arm lengths and four fingers wide, with the head receding at an angle from the saddle according to this manner:
Then wrap the head with a cloth so it does not touch the patient, then place under the saddle where the shoulder is, and extend your arms over the length of the staff, tie the arm to the staff at the top of the hand, then put one arm through the chest strap of a wide saddle pad, with hands facing downward, leaving the body hanging on the other side: the joint will remain in place.
And when it is set in place, however you do so, it must be that you put under the saddle a staff of woolen yarn, then apply a poultice of powdered medicine, with incense and ointment of frankincense on all around the shoulder, then tighten it away from the saddle quickly, and wrap the hand at its neck, leaving hands hanging thus.
It is proper that he rests little while the member becomes comfortable, for it will recover sooner; and then rest more after 5 or 6 days, and move it; and if it is firm but not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is strongly out of place due to moisture or another reason, it is proper that you administer three fire cautions as previously explained by the treatment of cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 6 days, and the joint cannot stay in place or lift the arm upward, then understand that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are compressed or stretched out or weakened; and understand that the joint will never be properly placed there.
The dislocation that occurs in the leg and thigh or behind is caused by impact, extended hands, and another lever; treat until it is set right.
And if after healing come tremors in the limb and later movements, the patient uses them many times until those tremors cease, returning to its original state.
Of the dislocation of the knee
the S; and a se; This ou tizz que c�C: est they arent; en leur ce ; by. When you join the dislocated limb with its proper place, if you can see clearly. For the joint is raised, and it cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary to reset it as quickly as possible when abscesses occur there, for if they were occurring, the repositioning would be difficult; and sometimes not at all, especially if it's towards the back; this type of dislocation is worse than others, causes greater pain, and possibly death.
The restoration is when it can be repositioned, extend its hand to your two hands; and the arms spread out, and the hands according to the proper position around it, above and below, place the joint back on its peach together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
When dislocation is before, it returns when the hand doubles to itself and the root of the palm's edge that has been dislocated.
If it does not return to its place on its own, apply strong extension; and two assistants extend the arm, holding it in position during extension; then turn the arm from each side, after wrapping a long and wide double cloth around.
And when the flesh is at the joint, if you apply oil to soften the joint, then bind it tightly until it heals.
And when it has healed at the place, if you apply dry paste with egg yolk, then bind firmly and leave the arm at the neck of the sick person for some days, then release it.
If the joint is firmly in its place, then dislocate it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, repeat the splinting and binding, leaving it like this for several days until it is securely set; then dislocate it again.
If it feels instability after the resetting of the joint and it moves again, then bathe and rub well, pressing until it is eased; place a fat sheep grease on the joint, then leave for one day and night before oiling, and soaking. and if it sweats, rub the joint with warm grease again, then place the fat on top, and let soak for two or three times until it is well-healed; and if you see that, put some moist wheat bran heated with butter on it, and strain it.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand joint occurs, and its return is light compared to other joints generally; it must be quickly returned to its place at the same time as it becomes dislocated again, so that swelling or pus does not occur therein.
And the resets are that you place the patient's hand on a table and extend their fingers; the examiner makes them equal, so they place their palm over the appearance of the joint, and hold it until retraction occurs.
s (to write:  your answer. If O fact by and and bon: Ct line. If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, instruct the patient to place their hand's back on the table, and the healer places his hand over the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is good.
If not, use soothing plasters for abscesses, and let them remain as such to begin healing again.
And if it cannot bear the pressure, and you cannot place it back after any days, when the dislocated joint remains twisted.
And it does not allow the patient to grip anything while their hands are so weakened, and cannot grasp any object at all: then understand that the nerves or arteries are cut; there is no other remedy but to grasp with a fire cautery near the wound, and perhaps nothing else helps.
And when the hands are at rest, place them on the platform as we have said, then grasp and leave for 5 days, then release and let it be so.
And if they cannot move well, and there is no trembling, then apply warm water with millet, and rub until it feels fine.
Of dislocation of the hand's fingers
Dislocations are never reset to either side of the hand, neither the back of the palm nor the belly.
Then they are fixed in place and the dislocation is contained within pockets until it heals, then support the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it was dislocated.
thet; the, and, s.
Do the same if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you did before until it is centered again; similarly, do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
For the dislocation of the spinal column in the back
When the spinal column or the neck is dislocated, if there are multiple occurrences and no remedy, it quickly kills the patient.
s so
And many times it moves the spine by four parts, the one that moves to the back is called "gilbosed":
The treatment is such that if you find the 'gilbosing' has occurred from childhood, there may be no cure or healing for it at all.
And the one that comes from falls or blows or similar things, say the ancient methods of healing by many words, there is no benefit in all.
t JB croevende:
I say that in the gangrenes which come to the foot before them, there is neither remedy nor health.
And this is the right way in two positions, and cannot be treated except by that which comes to the back, as I say;
And it is that the patient be stretched on their back in one place evenly, and have support under them so they do not bend.
Then make a fire cushion on the ground firmly, and one at the head, and tie a band around the joints of the patient's limbs, and one around the hips, knees, and ankles.
And two ministers know the bands, one to the head and the other to the feet, between the two fires;
And they should be firmly closed, the bandage as we have said, and the healer places his palms on the spine squarely, until it returns.
And if it does not return from this treatment, then take a stick three arm's lengths long, and cut off the bark, and let the patient lie on their side, and put the head of the stick under the ribcage, then place the middle part of the stick on the spine; and the healer places his fingers on the other end of the stick, and presses firmly until it returns to its place; and if you observe as it turns towards you.
And it is that you shall insert two ties at the head of the arm on either side, with between each tie, above and below, a width of space long.
And each tie shall have a loop through which the knot can turn securely, and be firmly in place so it does not move; and between each pair of ties there should be another turning tie at the point where the loops are attached, with two small ties of a hand's width long to adjust the knot.
And then tie the loop among the pins at the knot's top to one end and the other loop to the other ends of the ties; each minister turns their knot around all the loops, and the master aligns the spine as we have said.
When it is evenly aligned, place an infusion of drying powder with plenty of egg, then the plugs, and then a splint from a tablet of three ounces in length, which secures the proper position of the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine; afterwards bind it with a ligature as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient until they are well.
And if at the end of health none of these things come about, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint as we have said above; and each time do not apply a poultice.
And never does the appearance of dislocation occur in the back spine of the neck, and one should think that it is dislocations; and these are bones that have opened up, so there must be no assumption: perhaps this would bring death.
Dislocation of the hip joint
It is said that hip and shoulder joints only come with dislocations, not as other joints do; the hip joint can be dislocated in four parts: anteriorly, posteriorly, internally, and externally; more often it comes out internally, less so frontwards and backwards.
And the recognition of an internally dislocated hip is that when you join the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the pained joints are more open than the healthy ones, and the pained leg cannot be doubled at the knee by fire. f:
And the sign of those for whom it occurs is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of those who suffer before it, are such that they extend their leg according to completion; however, do not double the knee in pain, and if one wishes them to walk, they cannot bend forward, retains urine, swells with anger, and as they walk, passes over the heel.
And the signs for those who suffer behind it are such that they cannot expand their knee or double it, and the leg is more twisted than the other, anger is alleviated, and the head of the hip to its place below the ribs.
The signs of this type of dislocation are such that you must know if the dislocation has occurred before, and it remains according to its condition, there is no treatment; and in no way should it have arrogance.
When the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocating, quickly return the joint to its place, push it in and out, and move it right and left; perhaps it will return on its own without needing further care.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must summon strong helpers and support the leg firmly with two hands or one strap above the knee. and other assistants extend their hands over the thigh so that they place their fingers below the kneecap, then grip it with a thin strap above the buttocks; another pulls on the head of the bone.
And they are extended upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is lifted off the ground in one go, and hangs suspended.
This method of extension is common for 4 types, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is fine.
If not, you must provide care for the specific case. When dislocation is in the pelvis, it should be that you place the patient on their healthy side, then tie a ligature at the base of the hip and where there are no arteries, pull the ligature up towards the groin, and towards the thigh;
Then seek other ministers with his arms, and embrace the large protrusion of the malady's thigh, and extend it forward properly; now it will return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, it is necessary to bind the two feet of the malady together with a strong but soft ligature on both heels and ankles, and that the afflicted leg be extended twice as much as the other.
Then let them hang by a log on the head and have two long arms hanging from it; then instruct one minister to embrace the head of the thighs, with another set of ministers hanging alongside the afflicted, who firmly grasp the thighs, as the joint will now return rapidly.
When dislocation is delayed, place the patient on their back, as we have said in those with gilbo's disease, and properly stretch out a band around the affected leg and above the knee.
Then take two splints, one at the top and one below, then insert a splint between the buttocks near the affected area on the patient's body. And place wet cloths around it so that the patient does not move, then stretch out each minister toward him, and you shall equalize your hand with the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, place on the table and press as we have said in treating contusions, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it should be stretched out hastily with the injured leg, and according to what I have said; place your hands on their painful side, then press with the other hand, and extend downward toward the groin.
And if the dislocation is behind, it should not be stretched out or raised off the ground but rather as though the hip were dislocated to the rear, as we have said in lying on one's side with two hips; And let it lie on its face, and the ligament is extended as we have said before, and one must apply pressure to the joint along the table.
And it will be ready when the patient spreads its legs and they are even; then bring together the buttocks, place the embalmment, and tighten with a bandage so that the joint does not move.
And let it rest for 3 or 4 days then release the bandage and place the embalmment; if you see that they are even, tighten with a bandage as before, and leave it. For 3 days; then release the bandage and allow the patient to walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
Of shoulder dislocation
The joints are dislocated in three ways: through pressure from within and behind; it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if it does not reach his hip, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright and extend his leg if possible, and place your back against his face, and place your foot under theirs.
Then take his kneecap in your hands and retract it between your thumbs, then bend the two shins of the heel completely; and other assistants extend his foot until the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign is that it slightly touches its hip.
Place the bandage on it, and elevate the leg to the thigh, and tie them together firmly for three or four days, then release; and do not allow the patient to move at all until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not well, treat it with great care as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it becomes healthy.
Regarding ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes numb, never fully dislocated, within and without.
And the signs are such that the ankle is swollen, and try before reaching the part where it has dislocated.
The removals should be gentle, and the bandages should be loosened gently with your hands when it is barely touching.
And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright and hold with a piece of cloth outside through the leg above the ankle.
Then grasp the foot towards your right hand and then with your left hand twice, extend it upwards and carefully place the foot back down gently.
And do this as we have said, extending and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, start the procedure again, because it will return.
If it cannot return in this way, then make the patient lie on their back with a firm stake driven into the ground between their thighs, and wrap bandages around so they do not move.
Then dye the buttock of the patient, and other assistants extend their legs with ropes at their hands or thighs, so they are tied by the neck of the leg. Then extend each assistant equally, and the stakes remain between the buttocks of the patient to keep them still when they are extended.
Then set the wires evenly for the dislocation at its place, and other remedies apply grease to the healthy leg above it, and the dislocation will quickly return.
And when it reaches this point, apply the dressing and plug into it, firmly tie the bandage to the leg, and wrap up the skin that is behind the ankle, so that the ligature is not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature loosens, retie the bandage; then remove on the third day or the fourth day, and advise the patient to walk with crutches for four days. If it goes beyond this term, it is not secure that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes there, one must soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
From the shoulder dislocation and its treatment, let's discuss a few related matters:
by;t what d. If:
And if the dislocation is in any part of the patient's back or foot, you must have them sit on a plain seat or table straight up, place your foot under what has been affected by these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it moves.
And when it is even, and there is nothing wrong with it, then remove the sole of your foot from a table with two fingers, then strain firmly, and leave it for three days, then release it; let them rest until they are well again.
For both wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and you see it needs to be restored, often it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not humble in the treatment, if you are not wise and experienced in the art, and if you are neither merciful nor compassionate and slow to action, do not be bold.
And in the beginning of calming abscesses with heat, leave the patient at God's hand if you do not see hope for health. t s: bon and t:
When the limb is in its place, apply soothing remedies to the abscess and treat the wound as needed with dried ointments.
And if there is dislocation accompanied by breakage, remove small bones as necessary and do what we have said in simple illnesses.
And be wary of falling into despair, as I have said, for this shall depend on your Maker, and for the health of your arms and body. Amen.
