O you, dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science volume, and have made it whole through its explanations and declarations. And to me has come in vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands - namely, "Surgery."
And because the work of hands is taught in our region and practiced entirely, it has been overshadowed by science and knowledge, with only minor details remaining from ancient texts that describe actions performed on limbs. And thus comes about the error and folly, closing off understanding and separating knowledge.
Or it seems to me that I shall revive this treatise by following the order of exposure and explanation, as well as abbreviation; and I will also discuss the forms of cauldrons used for cautery, along with other instruments and materials in their preparation, where necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned. to tc;s s ...
And thus Ipocras says that without bone is much, and with the sinew little; especially in the art of hands.
In the introduction of this book, we say that those not understanding what has been said before may err and harm others; thus, I have often witnessed many who engage in this knowledge yet abandon experience and sense.
For I saw a foolish man who opened an abscess or gland of a woman's neck and cut the arteries thereof; hence so much blood issued that the woman died in her hands.
And see a certain physician who treated an ill man's wound, and the wound was large; he took with it a portion of the bladder, and within three days, the man died inside.
And I have already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the severity of the wound, and if it were not for treating it, he would surely die.
And I saw another physician who took care of a duke from our land, whose leg was broken and with the fracture there was a wound; and the ignorant physician strained the fracture over the wound using strong bandages, not allowing any blood to flow through them, leaving it like this for so long that the leg became fully healed and the foot came to ruin. And the physician commanded him never to loosen it; thus it remained until his leg was completely healed but his foot suffered greatly.
I am called to come to him, and hurriedly unbind the leg; and when it was seen dislocated, there was peace and felt no pain.
But in any case the rot had already settled into the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until the entire limb was completely lost.
And there was another physician who collapsed an abscess and it became infected, then inflamed due to the spite of its lordship.
and: the first.
In this work, you must know that the art of hands is divided into two divisions: one involving danger in various forms; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and risk.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in contemplation, and begin treating the sickly gently yet firmly, using the best course through God's grace so that you may be saved and honored; and let go of diseases causing serious health concerns with hope, and remove any doubts to fully believe in this such that you can come from this world into another of glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take ill health for a bad cause, lest you be called mad master."
I have devised this treaty according to these three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal fever cauterizations, and it's structured from the head down to the feet; and on the forms of plasters, and tools for cautery, and all that is necessary in practice.
byt a she. And:
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it orders the head up to the fingers, and the forms of strains.
So we remember this work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of aid and harm from each temperament.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is spoken in longer words and subtle science and hidden responses; and on this, many wise men speak, they agree with it; but their words are few to me because I recall the essence.
I say that fire cautery assists universally in any constitution where there is matter; for two kinds of constitutions: namely hot sensitive to material and dry sensitive to material.
In a constitution that is both hot and dry, some suggest there are no matters and say fire cautery greatly helps; while others claim the opposite: that fire cautery only benefits diseases originating from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated with heat for disease by heat or dryness; and those who say otherwise claim that fire cautery greatly helps diseases that are hot and dry, which occur in human bodies. When you examine the body of the person and their moisture to its constitution with heat, you find the body cold.
And I agree upon this statement. ouest douce la cuire the luist les plaies. Et quant tu ne soigné, et les tires in its froid gues-le chaude of heat it est curet is à chaud déguises de a le croix coupeur temps let: Car tu; and l’ai ou la partis d’est douce or li cuise au teste.
And in every case, only let those involved be those who have experience and know the cautery treatise well, understanding long-standing usage of diverse patient constitutions, their dispositions and causes of diseases, occurrences, and duration over time; we do not fear other constitutions especially when it comes to cold and moist illnesses. And all the physicians gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
And know this, my children, that fire-cautery is a secret of healing and more generous than caustic medicinal cautery.
The fire is simple, and does not come from force except to the limb that is cooked, and harms no other limb unless it has a name.
Hot medicines come from one limb to another by alignment, and bring severe healing diseases to the limb; and sometimes it kills the patient.
Fire due to its intensity and the goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no excess.
; bud t
And know, son, that they are agreed upon when to be made the fire cauteries, and choosing prayers.
And I say that fire cautery is appropriate in all times, because the damage occurring can be alleviated by its aid; and especially when the fire cautery is for urgent and severe pains that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
And you should never think about it, dear son, as the foolish knights do; for the disease that has been healed by cautery does not have a return; and they say so in this way; but it is not quite as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that alters the constitution, nor dry up the humors causing pain, rather they work faster than other medicines due to the potency of their effect.
And the thing that can cause disease in any case according to the constitution of the patient and the nature of the ailment and its power is an accumulation assembled within them from the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered at the right time where there's little excess moisture, as with dense caustics for pain, and those like it; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicines; and it is true; but they wrongly believe that caustics have no value after medicine, when in fact, caustics are the last of medicines because we administer them as remedies for any illness which alone have worth. Then indeed, fire cautery is the last of medicines, not according to the misguided beliefs of fools.
The ancients said that a surgical instrument of gold is more effective than iron, and they claimed this was due to the quality of gold and the value of its substance; however, they argued that the heat from cautery does not cause putrefaction, but it indeed causes damage, as I have tested it and found that it does cause harm in some men. Therefore, gold surgical tools are less effective than iron ones, just as they said.
Nevertheless, whenever you heat an instrument made of gold, it does not retain its heat due to the color of gold and cools down quickly; and if overheated, they lose their effectiveness, as demonstrated by fire. Thus, there is quite enough hindrance.
And so we employ fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
And I have ordered this chapter from the main points up until now so that the journey may be easier to find.
Olive oil is often used in medieval medical treatments for its supposed healing properties, though it should be noted that many of these beliefs were not based on our modern understanding of medicine and science. It was sometimes applied externally as a salve or ointment to wounds or afflictions such as skin conditions, believed to have soothing effects due to the oil's moisturizing properties.
These fire cauteries are effective for moisture and cold on the brain, and among them there is a sweet way to treat an illness called 'soda,' as well as due to various humors descending into the ears, and causing numerous dreams and toothache pain, throat pain, and primarily for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar afflictions.
The form of this fire cautery is that the patient be purged by a solvent medicine which changes their state .iii or .iiij., according to what their virtue, temperament, and habitation can withstand; then raise up the head of the patient.
And then you make the patient sit between your hands, and place your hands over their knees; afterwards put the root of your palm onto the root of his neck between his two eyes; and there will come both ways of your fingers, so that it bleeds firstly and then cool down with a cautery called 'olivare', which is its form:
The physician applies ink to the joint, and draws and strains your hand little by little while turning it; then gently lift your hand, and adjust the joint as you see a small bone; if you do not see it, continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. After taking a bit of wax, place soft cotton within, put on the joint, and leave for three days; then apply fine cloth soaked in butter; let heal until the inflammation is gone; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacist", until it is healthy.
And if said by the elders that when an open wound persists longer, more cleansing occurs; therefore apply remedies.
And some say that one should not overuse the cautery if part of the bone is burnt; and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
And they say that one must cauterize for as long as necessary, and press so hard that the bone is widened just like the straps women wear in their shoes to allow fluids to flow out; and the wound should be left open for a prolonged period before closing it; afterwards, it must be cleaned and dressed.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me good in all cases except for some men who have a cause for fear; I think it seems better to leave them alone, as the head weakens from continuous natural solutions, just as we testify with other limbs; similarly when the head is naturally feeble and the first sign of cauterization appears more healing and beneficial to me, so my work on this matter results in a combined benefit.
Regarding the pain from an open wound
When chronic pain arises throughout the head and lasts long, one must employ herbs and pills called "cochie," as well as enemas of chief and oils and plasters; and if the cautery that we have previously mentioned is performed on them, it helps.
Be aware that the patient's head is in a severe condition and not too cold; then one should perform the cautery underneath from the cautery as we have mentioned above.
After performing cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and do a "vasselz" cautery in place; and these are spots where one applies cups. Lift your hand so that you cannot see all the way to the bone: the patient feels much more pain from this cautery than others, and I will speak about it elsewhere; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those used in the middle of the head, which is as follows:
For both fire cauterization of the head When sudden pain occurs in any part of the head, and the disease extends up to the ear, and the head is purged by medicinal substances, along with all other treatments previously mentioned for diseases, none of which help: then you shall perform fire cauterization as per two methods - one with ague medicine and the other with pitch.
The cauterization with ague medicine involves grabbing a piece of alum the size of two nails, removing its peel and covering it with two small chips of ivory; then place it on the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can reinsert the piece of alum under the skin; when it is properly inserted, ensure that it remains tightly secured for 12 hours; after this period, remove it and apply fat to the wound, leaving the site like this for two or three days; then cover with a linen soaked in butter until pus forms.
After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see any of the written incendiary medicines, treat them as I have described or divided among incendiary medicines.
The iron caustery according to this manner is made thus: heat the iron piece which has the shape of a goose's neck.
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell with .i. spot of corrobin, and about one small appearance; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently rotate the iron slightly, until half of the sponge-like substance inside has turned black; then release your hand as blood flows abundantly out from behind.
After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then apply freshly boiled cotton soaked in butter, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine using the cautery called "cultellus" at its tip, but be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine that isn't ancient.
Migraine
When you are treating a migraine as we have previously mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not respond to either medication or iron, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellus" until it is white; and so place your hand on the painful wound for half an hour long, and after removing your hand once, pull out enough that you do not cut the artery and reach only to the bone. Watch out for the jaw that moves when biting, and ensure that the nerves have no reaction and that spasms do not occur in the patient, and watch out for bleeding from the artery after it is cauterized, or if caustication causes great fear and anxiety to those who are unaware and unaccustomed. Leave the vein halfway; but I will tell you how blood can be stopped once the artery is cauterized, and I will show you where this occurs in this book.
If you see that this caustic does not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering, apply it within the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healthy; if you see, provide the caustic which our chapter of artery extraction has described, with the caustic that has two blades; this caustic is better than that one and more helpful.
Of ear pain due to coldness
When ear pain comes from coldness, and one has used soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pain does not subside, then warm this caustic called "point," of which here is the form:
After pointing all around the ear of the patient, where both sides feel pain, move away slightly from the root of the ear once you have located it; and use six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healthy again.
For the treatment of mouth wounds.
Torture that must be treated with fire is only those caused by moisture, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform a fire treatment for similar cases resulting from pus and black matter of veins.
When treating this type of torment that causes swelling from insect bites and chief purifications and gargling, then there is no value in it. Therefore, you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little behind the temple, and the third where the two lips meet; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, making an incision near the top of the outer ear, and another along the length similar to a thumb's breadth. Leave the cautery until half the skin is charred; this is the method for the cautery:
And there is this type of incision we have mentioned before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires the knife to be somewhat larger; after performing as I have explained previously, until it heals soundly.
When treating an apoplexy that is long-standing and you treat it as we have said before, and if there is no improvement, and the patient does not have a fever, then make three cauteries: two on each of the two points of the top of the head, and one in the middle, and one where they are called "vessels" as we have said before, and the following one above the mouth of the stomabg. Treat it as we have said before.
Of lethargy
This disease requires giving the patient large years and purging pills that clear the brain; afterwards, cut off their head entirely, and place on the occiput the flaxseed oil prescribed for plasters; this is how cauterization is done: do as I have instructed.
If it is thus done well, it is good; and if not, then do as follows: make three cauterizations below the head by descending to the collarbone, each with two fingers' width of space between them; treat them as the others are treated, and if you see any congestion, also perform one in the center; and if necessary, do two more above the two points I mentioned before, and cure until they are clear; and use the type of cauterization called "olivary," as I have previously described.
From coldness of the head It is necessary to warm the head with wool as we have previously mentioned; after placing the head of the patient on their hands, then make a fire cupping over each horn and .i. behind and .iij. above the spine of the neck; and if you deem it necessary, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease has advanced far, make .iiij. cauteries on the spine of the back; leave them until the most inflamed part heals, remove your hand; after curing as long as it becomes healthy, and let be the cautery that we have previously called "olivare".
On epilepsy
Epileptics should not use a strong fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to cool the brain with ice and other treatments we have mentioned in the division when the patient is greatly suffering and enduring hardships of medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, they do gargarism and chewing to cool the brain often with bone meats; afterwards, the head is milled in oil, as we have said before, and one fire cautery on the throat, and on each horn; and if the patient is greatly suffering and afflicted, they undergo fire cauterization as I have mentioned to those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, in the manner that I have described.
If it is a child with these symptoms, they undergo a subtle fire cauterization as follows:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moistures and heavy phlegm, then one should perform the kind of caustic cautery as we have told for those with paralysis.
And if due to melancholy there are declining excesses towards melancholy, and the body is ill-humored and moist, then give it something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what it is before in the classification.
After the head of the ill person is done; after making .i. tortex made of flax well-formed, like .i. circle, place it inside the head; and the patient's legs are crossed, and held well from all sides; then apply the liniment, and move with ancient buffalo butter; and warm with fire quickly, so that they can endure to pour in hot oil; after emptying the circle into within the head, let it cool down; and do this to the sick person once a week with another good government until he is sane.
When you observe the caustic during its making, apply it to all parts of the caustic. This method cools the brain evenly; then place cotton wool soaked in butter and lamb fat on it.
From underneath the eyes. When the pain first comes as described in the divisions, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and protects from all dampness, making them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomamen't venu plusors par l’ivreement des eulz
After the command to raise his head, and make a fire cautery in the head, and two cauterizations above the temples where the root of pain is at both eyes together, or in one if it's only in that eye; wrap all the blood vessels and arteries under the forehead, making the cauterization long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding too much, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop using hot irons as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and making an incision how to cauterize them; never make a fire or hot iron under either of the two bones behind.
In the body's tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and upon the veins, or near the arteries that appear in front of the forehead; and one sees that it is from cold, watery excesses, then perform the cauterization as I have said at the beginning of this chapter: i. cauterization on the head, ii. cauterizations above the two temples, and ii. cauterizations or thread-like below the two bones; and if more is needed, cauterize skillfully with a small cauterization at each eyebrow.
To cause tears to flow within the eyes themselves.
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three pints of a certain wine cocktail; afterward on his head, and perform either cauterization or miliau with olive oil caustic; and two "clavilist" cauterizations above the eyebrows, slightly below the hairline; and beware not to harm the artery. And this is the shape of the fire cautery, which is called "clavalis":
When the parchment of oil is softened by illness and moisture, then use the cautioning from this fire cautery called "olivare." This is its shape:
And if you see two cauteries over the eyes of the sorcerer as long as their eyelids are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the parchment is burnt, according to the manner I have said.
; that t n's armoust et s. If youd: line Tarn: At no time do the eyelash hairs turn into scales, and they irritate the eye, so it is treated with caustery according to two methods: that of fire or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in health; after marking on the eyelids a figure that is similar to the feather of myrtle, and begin with the sign near the hairs; then place cotton cloth soaked in egg white and musk oil over the eye, then apply this form of cautery:
After cauterizing the wound you have made with a hot iron repeatedly and many times, let the skin be red at that spot; and the signs of healing are when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the size of an egg; then gently wash your hands and leave it so for three days, then apply moistened cotton in oil until the scald is gone; afterward treat with ointment until it is healthy.
And if after this the hairs come in, and the paper is softened as before; then continue the cautery at that same place; and if the hair does not grow, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place and is even, without touching the skin with the iron.
The hot iron cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow tall and even, then make a leaf of paper from parchment; then take French soap and lively salt, each one ounce of both, and grind them together well; and quickly do it without letting it cool, then press on the form as if making leaves of myrtle, and put over the paper with the iron; and if the disease is only in a bone, work it in one piece, and so too; and apply woolen cotton dipped in oil; and let the patient's head be in your hands and press gently on the medicine, and squeeze him slightly every time that the patient feels the pricking of the medicine as if from fire. When you have done so for some time, apply the appropriate medication to your wound. When the swelling is gone and you have elevated the affected area, if you see the vein raised just as it would be from heat or incision, then it is well. If not, reapply medication to the wound until your efforts are balanced, and the eyes are aligned; then apply a cotton pad soaked in oil until the scab forms, followed by dressing the wound with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And take great care in your treatment so that the medicine does not wash away from the eyes. If the vein becomes thin again and the hairs poke at the ointment, resume medicating the affected area as you did before; after which heal until it is healthy again; this is the form of a sparrow's nest:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, so should be your constraints; and do not return the straight path to those whose study is in this art.
On the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and if your treatments do not yield results, then it is necessary for you to perform cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand; and guide the assistant's head between your hands so that it does not move or turn its head; afterwards place cotton wool moistened with vinegar or juice of pennyroyal on it: then heat the cautery which is tied; position it as close to the skull as a quill to a bowl, ensuring the needle is also attached to the cautery; if you see, ensure it is pointed from one side to the other like a tent, but regardless, this that is against the head serves for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treating any pus, and drying it out; and if it is closed, proceed with your work, and press firmly around the edge; afterwards place the heated cautery correctly on it, and hold your hand on the cautery at a part of soft tissue over the bone, so that your hands do not cause injury; then insert the curtaret into the oil's grease, and corrupt it.
If you come to the cauterization up to the bone, it would be good. If not, if necessary, then resume the cautery once more, and as needed, and leave it .iii. jars; afterwards apply cotton wool in fat, and healing ointment until dry until sane, and xl. days pass that it is dry, so put medicine corrosive until bone until clear; and the cure according to come up on as per the chapter of its chapter comes in this.
And there is a method of fire cautery for anorectal abscesses that none of the ancients mentioned. Understand about the abscess, and take from it the pus; afterwards insert into the wound a subtle implement whose form is as follows: And make the quantity of about half a ounce; and hold your hand or implement firmly without moving so that the liquid does not flow out too quickly; it is necessary to place above the wound cotton swab in an ointment tube, either one ounce or two: this will treat the abscess properly and heal remarkably.
And if the abscess is healed by the fire cautery we have described, it's good. If not, one should administer a pessary to the woman, and bring the fistula back into its proper place in accordance with where it originally was.
From cracks in the lips Often there occur lip cracks called "hairs," particularly in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small pointed cautery according to this method:
which is not the f they are noce
From the incision of a boil on the throat
When a boil appears at the root of the throat or in the ear, palate, or tooth roots, after having decayed and rotten and become old and turns into a fistula; you treat it as we have described in divisions, and it does not heal: then it is necessary for you to apply a cautery according to the quantity of the funtule; after the boring or piercing of the fistule, hold your hand until the hot iron comes into contact with its source, and thereafter at rest; perform thus once or twice, after the treatment as we have described in treatments, until it is healthy; if treated this way, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the cause and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in your chapter.
The two movements of the teeth (or "dou mouvement des dens") likely refers to dental issues such as shifting or misalignment within Old French medical texts. It could also pertain to treatments involving teeth, like adjusting their position for proper occlusion or addressing dental abscesses that might require procedures akin to modern endodontics or extractions.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines that do not work, then place the head of the patient in his health; after cooling the cautery, its shape will come to be as follows where you place a coin on the tooth; insert into the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand so the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, resume the cautery at your discretion; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it sit for an hour and a half.
And in such a manner that the tooth which was moving is firmly put back; and the softened gums are kept from further movement, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
Of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold or heat, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to perform cauterization by two methods: cauterization with butter and cautereby fire.
Cauterization with butter is as follows: take butter from the cow, and a tip of an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap around the tip of the spoon so that a ball of melted butter forms, and quickly apply it to the painful tooth until it has cooled; do this often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth. If you see wool and cotton in butter when heated, then quickly apply it to the painful tooth again and heat with an iron until the heat reaches the joint of the tooth.
The cauterization with fire is as follows: take an iron or copper tube that is thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient'anno mouth; after heating the caustic, its form will come afterwards and apply it to the painful tooth, holding your hand until it has cooled; do this often, as the pain will be relieved on that day or the following. It is necessary for the sickly person to fill his mouth with good butter during the cauterization process and then spit it out; and that's what happens because of the caustic:
When the scrofulous swellings are caused by cold humors and moistures, not responding to medicines, then apply the hot caustic herb as follows: make two openings for smoke to escape from the other side; place the caustic upon the abscess once or twice if necessary until it reaches the edge of the abscess. If the abscess is small, apply the caustic according to its size and leave it thus for three days; then cover with cotton soaked in butter as long as the abrasion remains open. Afterward, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until healed.
When moistures prevail in the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then one must first purge the patient with soluble medicines; afterward do a cautery at the root of the throat but not up to the throat itself and only burn slightly. Then do another cautery on the joint at the neck's spine base, where is the clavile called 'clavicle'; and heal it as we have stated before until it is sound again.
To treat inflammation of the throat, also known as tonsillitis or pharyngitis. When all diseases of the throat are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor chills, and it is an early illness, then do two cauteries on both sides below the Adam's apple; and another cautery in between the nipples. And there should be a cautery called 'clavicle', as per the form which was previously mentioned.
And if you see this, perform cautery by continuously pressing all the points called "points" as previously mentioned in ear diseases; and let them be up to xxx points or within that range. After treating the area as described above, have the cauteries at iij (3) rains according to this method:
And thus they are lighter cauteries because you make them of iii parts each.
Regarding shoulder joint dislocation. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first reset the dislocation. After examining the patient on their back and side ribs; then remove the core within the gallbladder from your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, apply the cauterizing tool with two hot needles as follows:
And cauterize the core until it reaches the ribs, and the figure of cauterization is four cauters; and because this cauterizing tool has three hot needles, hence the figures of cauterization are three cauters each; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, which is the form of the cauterizing tool with three hot needangs:
On any occasion it is touched upon this particular nerve, where there are seven cauterizations.
After placing the cautery for the grains to be scraped off with a blade; afterwards allow the patient to rest, and do not move the limb for an extended time until it is well supported.
And if it becomes dislocated again, very little happens as a result; then perform the cautery on the thickness of the clavicle blade or many pinches of cauterization. Because the joint is refractured, and bone moisture remains and the patient recovers healthily.
byrto:
The ancient ones said one should make pleurisy cauteries from the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of aristolochia as long as you can find, dry it completely, and make it just as thick and long as your finger; then grind it with oil, hold it over fire, and perform one large cauterization between the philtrum and collarbone, and two small cauterizations slightly down in the area below the beard; and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and sixth, angling backward slightly; and one cauterization at the hip, another above the stomwart, and one between the shoulders, and two on either side of the lower ribs; and do not press too hard with your hand, but make it open as in smelling.
And some ancient ones said that no man should use a fire-cautery resembling shaving, and heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then there is relief from pain as we have described in the liver abscess. But in this kind of treatment, fear or illness often cause death immediately, or a fistula appears that cannot be healed.
The ancient ones said that no man should use a cautery resembling shaving, heat it and place it between the ribs until an abscess reaches; then there is relief from pain as we have described in liver abscess. But in this kind of treatment often fear or illness cause death immediately, or fistula appears that cannot be healed.
When treating the illness of epilepsy as we have said in the previous sections on treatments, and it proves effective, then there are three methods of cautery that all work well.
One method is to make three or four cauteries in a line according to the length of the seizure, following the shape of the liver cautery we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all at once, let the patient lie on their back.
Another method of cautery is to use the one with two nerves as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and elevate the part where the illness comes from toward the left side, and do lifts according to the size of the body, with the cautery being proportionate to the width of the body.
After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced on the other side, and then apply the fire cautery, and in this way there will be four (of them). And if you see it, cauterize all of the area with the cautery at three more points. After curing when it has taken feculence for a long time, and this is equivalent to moving one of the previously mentioned treatments.
Dropsy
Cauterization is not suitable for dropsy, but rather in the manner called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions and your treatment does not work, then you must make four cauteries around the waist, one over the stomwartz, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one on another place the genitals; and let each cautery be close to the area of the body where the swelling is.
After leaving the cautery open to promote long-lasting healing, and do not release the care for the patient after cauterization; recovery would be quickened, and both intentions are together with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be a spindle as we have shown before; and that for the back should be oval, as it is placed here ahead.
Of inflammation in the joints When the fingers are swollen in one who is jaundiced, and are full of yellow bile, it should be that you cauterize on the back between the little finger and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery turning. And do not go too deep in, thus you would squeeebore the yellow bile, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After performing on two legs two cauldrons in each leg at the point of the shin bone; and let the cauldron be elongated, one below the knee forward and the other backward along the leg; leave the caudrons long enough to allow the bile to flow out. Then cure the other boils as we have mentioned.
of melancholy
When the solution of the stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines flow out, they cannot be treated by common methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vitality, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what was mentioned before about the stomach's cautery, or stomach cauterization; and four subtle cauteries around the belly circulate; and one main cautery is subdivided into eight subtle, pointed cauteries, and two on the hips.
And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the palm, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries near the large stomach, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids
When bunions are at the foundation, or one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help if you make cauteries: III on the spine of the back, those that are just before lumbar vertebrae a little and gradually towards each side, and I cautery under the buttocks; two.
And if you think its stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face do a great cautery as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another under the ribs at all cauteries; let the cautery remain open for long periods. Afterward cleanse the wound until it is healed.
From the flesh which is called "thelel".
When you treat an ulcer, heat the cautery which looks like a small razor, and then set it all ablaze on that ulcer; leave your hand and the cautery where blood vessels are born, from which bleeding occurs; do this once or twice, and if there is much of the ulcer, cauterize each as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they heal; and if you use a large cautery on an abscess, it will provide greater help.
Of poorly treated wound
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, we will tell you in its place about a disease that cannot be healed but by cautery.
When a fistula occurs and is infected, aged, and filled with rotting flesh and corrupted moisture, you must completely cover it with a fine veil, ensuring that you know its entire extent. After heating the cautery, which appears like a small razor, apply it to the fistula according to the amount of material entered therein, then resume the cauterization until once or twice or thrice as needed based on the quantity required; be careful not to burn the nerve that lies within. If the fistula reaches the bladder or intestine, avoid these areas and do not pass it through anything other than a natural opening, thinking it is not an enemy; afterward, treat the cavity until it is healthy, and if the materials are removed over a long period, then you know the cavity is entirely healed; and if the materials have not been removed, understand that the cavity is still inflamed and the bone at its core is corrupted; thus, as one of those we mention in this location.
On kidney disease As the robinde ceste les mille ontes de maladies auge tout l’esle cure les raines talies les ardreles sus tousmement la eau vient li ne parlet les rnages, et nos, desquels nus.
of the bladder When the bladder is heavy and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery on the part behind the bladaderivereceur de l’enfant qui vient au monde en desordre, et tu le remets par grant movement.
of the testicles When the testicles are cold and moist, they do not produce semen, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed maturation; when they come, there is great pain: then one must make three cauterizations around the scrotum, as we have said in urinary bladder cautery, and two on the back; and the third should be a cruciate cautery.
Causes of thigh pain:
When moisture-filled vesicles drain to the bladder of the thigh and as a result it moves out of its place, with signs that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the lymph nodes are found in the groin area, then you must cauterize the patient above the bladder of the thigh at one circular cautery, and position so that it surrounds the bladder as it turns, ensuring the bladder is within the circle; and use cauteries similar to those used for the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, make three large olive-oil cauterizations and let the cauterization be as large as all the keys; treat until it is sound.
From the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers as we have said in the division and treatment does not help, and the disease is old: then you must purge the ill person of large humors with foul pills or other good-looking pills.
After performing the caustic treatment; and the manner of applying this caustic is in two ways: namely, with burning medicines and fire cautery. Fire cautery has many methods, among which one is as follows: you must triangularly make three cauterizations on the bolt of the elbow, each well-made and deep, spacing them apart by the width of a thumb, making them olive shaped; nevertheless, at times in the middle of the elbow's head, there are four according to this method:
And if you see the triangular caustic we have mentioned earlier for elbow dislocations; but apply it so that the circle contains the entire elbow and all its surrounding skin is burned.
And this is the way to treat sciatica when pain is felt in the elbow and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and leg, you shall make two caustics where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one cauterization under the ankle four fingers' width; and let it be olive shaped, and dry out the fleshy part of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to the toe or near it, you shall cauterize where he senses the pain three times or four with a cauterization called "points".
If necessary, if more is to be done; and if it seems that the pain is moving from below the groin towards the thigh, make a cautery with the caustic or circular caustic, and give good care in all your cauteries so you do not cause harm to either the caustic itself or burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not further harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have seen many who did cauterization on the ankle joint of the foot, and they continued until the entire leg was consumed, and so were the bones, which became perforated and corrupted throughout. After a stomach solution, it caused their death.
And if the pain is in two adjacent parts together, make a cautery on both according to this manner. // The wise say in the cauterization of the haunch, here is the method, make one such iron and it should be as large as a small dagger or slightly less, and have gaps between them so that from one gap to another there is space equal to a nut's size; and the gaps are over two parts equally, and they also resemble nails. And it has an iron rod well made: here is its shape:
Ensure it is heated until all are red and blistered, then place it on the malady's haunch bag, and twist onto its side; cauterize with one iron cautery three times and leave it for three days; afterwards apply honey ointment and let the open wound remain exposed for a long time; afterward, treat with salve until healed.
Albuquerque says we use little of this cautery due to fear of its appearance, and few people do so; yet it is a good cautery that can be endured, wherever it may touch.
Of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive blood loss, or from similar matters of cold substance spreading, none of these cases call for fire cauterization; rather it is for those who have an influx of cold matter.
After the patient has expelled fetid pills or other substances, apply three lines of fire cauterization at the spot where pain is felt; in each line make five caustic burns or more depending on the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure. The caustic burns should be made according to the "point" method; if you see it necessary, apply three or four caustic burns at the midline using this technique:
This disease often comes to small children, and the signs at the onset are that they have a narrow back when sitting up, and fear. You will find it in the lowest spine of the back and above the appearance that comes among other vertebrae.
When you see this wound and observe it healing, then cauterize with a caustic cautery according to the following method.
If the caustic cautery is needed on any part of the spine, evenly distribute it across. And if you see, then apply a pricking cautery two or three lines close to each other around the area as we have said before, and heal the wound until it is clean, being careful not to place the caustic cautery on any area where nerves may be in danger.
For pain of the joints
When joint pain is from moistures that spread to every part of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which those called "gout" properly, and when it is due to cold causes and cannot be healed by medicines, then they are treated with cauldrons thus: make a circle of cauldrons around the joint of the foot, and let the cauldrons be olive oil according to this form.
And if there is a need to grasp the face of the foot, make cauldrons all around each named "point". And when pains come near to joints and other joints, which often happens, then you make cauldrums on each joint 3 or 4 for every part; with olive oil over each. And if more is needed, do so, but not keep your hand close unless the color of heat arises.
And if the pain descends to joints and the back, treat with cauldrons as we have mentioned in this chapter. And if the pain is of hands, make points around the palm 2 lines; and if there remains no pain on the thumbs, then treat each joint and hair of hand; and if pains come to ears or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the sickly and administer medicine. For if you do good governance and you purge phlegm, you will be helped by God.
of the routine for this fracture
When the fracture is near, and the bones descend towards the knees, forming anew, when you see it to be healed, let not more than one day pass; and use remedies that relieve the stomach so the spleen descends from the belly. After this, make him sit on his back between your hands, commanding him to stretch his arm until the bones are mended, and move it with your fingers at both elbows, and bind above the fracture to the bone of the wrist; and as a sign, let it resemble three-quarters of a circle above the body. Then heat the cautery in this form:
Until it is white and drips clear. Then move the bones to their place; and instruct the patient not to let his hands turn backward; and work well on the legs of the sick man, placing a cushion and a sling around the thighs, and another under the feet that he grips with his hands; then place the caustic at the sign using your whole hand, straight and until you reach the bone, and if not reached in the first attempt, try again as many times as needed to reach up to the b
And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your actions are worthless. It is necessary for children's cauldrons to be subtle according to their size, and large people'angs also large according to their measure; after three days heal it in place with butter until the burn is scabbed over; then treat it with other ointments until it is sound, and rest the patient for 40 days on his back until the wound is well closed; and it must be that his strengthenings are lengthy so that the swelling does not come out when he wants to get up into bed.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, let him be fitted with a well-made bandage, and wear it for 40 more days; have good rest, so that he works little and guards against excessive drinking and eating, and shouting too loudly; and when this teaching is complete, he will be fully sound. And I will now say after the treatment of shearing in his chapter. Regarding the routine care of the abdomen
When growths come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one full cautery with the heated iron according to its quantity; let it be two-thirds at the level of the wound; afterward treat as we have said; and none of the old ones have said that it should be cauldrered by the hot iron at three angles in this manner:
But first mark the level of the wound and make a line for the width above the growth; another behind it, and hold your hand over all of the cauldration carefully. However, the first cauldrations are lighter and more movable.
from old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain lasts a long time, with medicinal treatment proving ineffective, then one must be cauterized with a caustic called "points," and the caustics should be applied according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, virtue, location of torsions, and pain. If it is suitable for the first caustic, that's good; if not, begin another caustic above it, as custom dictates that one must move within the limb nearest to the pain, so it is necessary to make the caustics until the patient becomes well.
Of healing art
The healing arts have been aided at times by caustic treatment greatly, especially the diseases that arise from putrefaction of vapours and melancholy. If you can see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is in its beginning, and if it has been treated as we have said in the division, and neither rises nor falls back; and if you doubt whether the corruption does not affect all of the sickness, then apply .5 causters on the head: one above the forehead near the nose at the end of the hairs; two on each side of the horns, and one behind the ear; let your hand remain that the cauterizes to the bone, and as long as the scales come out so that the vapors of gross humours can escape.
And if the pus is everywhere visible and manifest; then it must be treated with the cauteries we have mentioned earlier, such as one on each side of the collarbone, two along the spine at the neck, five along the spine at the back, a large one near the groin and another nearby, two on either shoulder blade, two above the hips, two over the tendons of the thighs, one over each joint in the hands and feet, and one for the palm pits; beware not to burn any veins that are close behind it. Never do cauterization on the bone of the wrist, nor once on the bone of the stomach, nor anywhere near the liver.
Know that the more you do with cauterization, the more it helps and benefits him; know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would because their body is already thoroughly corrupted. It must be ensured that the size of the cautery varcuets according to the limbs and joints, depending on how you find them in handling iron tools. After healing with lime flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is safe.
It should be ensured that the application of cautery varies in size according to the limbs and joints, depending on how you find them in handling iron tools; after healing with lime flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is safe.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not healthy, then make cautery on the limb according to its size and extent; the cautery should be slightly penetrating into the skin color of the area. Then treat with ointments until it is healthy. At times a cautery is made on the hand or foot or back, where the nerve causes movement in the limb, thus an inflammation occurs there; however, do not meddle if you are not familiar with the limbs and the pathways of the moving nerves.
The practice known as 'albaras' involves applying a heated iron or substance to the skin, creating cauterization that closes wounds, removes growths, or stops bleeding by sealing blood vessels through heat coagulation.
When the disease known as "albaramo" is old and medical remedies prove ineffective, then cauterize with a small iron, according to the quantity of the substance required, until the blanching disappears and it changes color; then treat with flour of lentils and oil of roses and plantain leaves, as well as blood from a rabbit and blood of almonds, in equal parts each. Combine everything together, wrap it in cloth, and air it out until healthy.
The treatment of ulcers through cauterization
When ulcers begin to appear and you see them starting to form, cauterize the area with a circular cautery around the entire circumference of the ulcer. However, some physicians claim that caulterization should also be done within the depths of the ulcer; however, I do not believe this is good, as it may cause further ulceration and corruption, which has never happened to me before in any case; moreover, a more suitable approach would be cauterization around it using the 'circular' cautery as we have discussed among many types of caulteries.
For non-healing swellings that cannot be healed
When someone has an illness called "adubelati", which is prone to death or due to the excess it causes, or from the poor condition of the patient when they are very old and have little blood, or in time; and you see them close to dying: then cauterize around with many small caustics by pinching; afterwards leave as is. For it will be inclined to die.
And if you see the entire area with caustics, heat the area where the shape is:
And place your hand within the disease called "adubelati" until the caustics have penetrated to the core, and be such that the patient feels the heat behind them somewhat so that the course of putrefaction is alleviated. Afterwards, cure it until it is perfectly sound.
The care of fire with iron
Another way of illness called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a swelling in the limb, for it consumes the limbs just as fire dries out tinder. If you see this disease present that could suffer from cauterization with iron, then according to where the location or the illness lies; firstly perform cauterizations both small and large over all parts until you have removed the entire corruption, leaving nothing of it behind so that everything that is corrupted has been excised. And let it be for three days, after which apply ointments with oil to the burned areas from iron as long as the burns heal and the corruption disappears. Afterward, proceed with the treatment of salves producing charm. And if you see that after three days there is no improvement, then this is good; but if not, continue cauterization where the corrupted tissue remains. This swelling has never been treated in situ with iron as a cure immediately followed by medical leeches, however, cauterization with iron is of greater help and I have already mentioned the treatment of medical leeches in another section: take whatever quantity you need.
Cords or strings that come to the fingers
Often it happens that in the fingers a disease arises which we call "closed", and is a large swelling causing pain to the foot. The treatment for this illness comes in two forms: fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating a tool like a blacksmith's tongs made of good iron that can encompvee all parts around the nail, with delicate margins; then place it very hot on the nail and turn your hand all around it until it reaches the source of heat; leave it so for three days until pus begins to form. Then make a poultice of freshly chopped radishes mixed with salt, and let the poultice remain overnight, after which the swelling will shrink and be drawn out from its roots. Afterward, treat the wound with anointing ointment until it is healed.
If they are converted forward in the body, and often occurs in hands and fingers, then you must perform hot water cautery; it is done thus: take a needle made of iron or steel, or a blacksmith's tongs, place it on the nail and its shaft (that is to say, for warts); put the needle so that it pierces all around, then add some hot water, hold your hand tightly, and press while turning until the edge of the neednose reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply to its roots; let the patient endure a bit of burning from the hot water for an hour. Then leave it as such, and all will be drawn out along with their roots. Do this again at another time, until you have removed all that is in the body; then treat them with healing ointments.
of the pen, which to make s le tissaz:
When anyone trembles from coldness of the limbs or fever quartan or other, it is necessary to make .iiij. (four) cauteries or .iv. (four) on the spine along the back; one cautery between each vertebrae; and one at the waist with an olive oil cauterization; this will cease the trembling, and restore their health from the cold disease.
Of pus-filled pustules
Never apparent on the body bathing or pus-filled pustules that come from large corrupted materials. If they first appear, one should perform a delicate cauterization on each head of the pustule: an incision made with wood stained to a point with fire, or long root of aristolochia, or lenticular incision. And whenever these are cauterized at their beginning when they first appear in this manner, they do not grow into more prominent lesions but are broken down; the excess matter from which they come is relieved and cleansed; however, it must be done after blood evacuation.
When the artery is harmed Many times there occur great consequences of arterial blood that is drawn to the wound from afar, or from an abscess incision, or on a limb cauterization, and similar things; it is very serious to stop the bleeding.
And yet when it happens to anyone, hurry to put your index finger on the vein wound, and strain as much until the blood is calmed below your finger; then apply with fire small or large olive oil caustics until they are all reddened; then take .i., either great or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, and put a cautery over that vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood is stanched.
And if it leaps away when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the caustic is extinguished, then quickly take another from those heated near the fire.
And continue doing them one after another until the blood has stopped; and guard that you do not burn the nerve near it, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when the artery is cut off from the blood flow, it cannot be properly tied up if the artery is large, unless by one of these four ways we have mentioned: by cauterization or extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong wrapping with thread, or by medicines applied that can stop bleeding; and it should be tied and strained at once.
Who will provide the tight binding with cloths or burning substances on it, or other similar things, if there is no good result.
If this happens to anyone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then you must put your index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it well until it is tightly pressed against the wound and vein; do not move it, but moisten with cold water often so that it becomes very cold enough to freeze and thicken and adhere; then make incisions there where you need cauterization and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicine, and pains, causes, remedies, and forms of cauterization; I placed that chapter up to fingers, and I will go on this chapter by the same way so that it is easier to find what one wants.
And so as I begin this section, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cauterization, and therefore greater care is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often blood evacuation when opening a vein, and incision over an abscess, and wound treatment, and arrow extraction, and stone cutting, among other things; where doubt and fear arise, leading to the deaths of many.
And I warn you not to engage in folly. For many people come seeking cures. Some arrive from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they die easily due to the abandonment of their disease, and the severity of their suffering; about these one should have fear. And of these are those who give you their attention, and say: "Wait, I am in charge"; and the patient is desperate. You should not only consent to those who come to you with this approach, but also show greater compassion for your honor than for your self-interest, and do not hastily act on what you are certain of and can take and lose; use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick so that health is converted, and this will help you achieve good reputation, glory, and memory of kingdom.
Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as I discussed in the previous chapter about cautery, from head to feet, so that you may find more easily what you need.
Full of water, headache
It is said that this disease often comes from children during childbirth, and when the birth canal is too tightly constricted around the baby's head; there has never been a case where it was resolved without knowing why.
And I have never seen this disease occur in adults, and it seems that everyone who has had it died quickly; for these reasons, I believe it is worth dedicating more effort to studying its treatments.
s the bonji sont by their lele'sgrde and let they en toce ouraccue eaulet on t’s ; the louloient; man les a bont; Or (cont ses que contura. ça l’sudre t persef; it couch, so s... in ancisd;e ben;
If there is excessive moisture, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross, following this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone and you see signs such as redness at the top of each part, and it bleeds profusely when pressed with your hand inside, and has not been reset properly: then make three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture with a cloth and powders; then apply wine and oil, leaving it as such until the fifth day; afterwards, uncover it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to heal evenly, and give the patient dry meat with little moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
In another manner of incision, observe if the head of the abscess is visible and the color of the water (pus); for it is never before, never behind, never to the right, nor ever to the left.
Thus, cut where the head of the abscess is visible and the filling of pus, according to your ability; and be careful not to puncture an artery; ensure a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the normal flow of blood and evacuation of pus.
Of restoration
When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and has been present for some time, and medical treatment proves ineffective, then the subsequent remedy is the fire cautery with which one ties off the two arteries.
Therefore, when you tie off the eyes, instruct the patient to lie back his head; afterwards, rub their face with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then extract the collar bone with one entire cloth; then examine where the vein is, and both eyes are behind the ears, but only slightly protrude; then close the eyelids with thread loops, then tie off each with a strip of gut about two parts long until it reaches the bone, and ties wide at the top.
And if you see this, take the gut strip off from above the artery and tie it upwards as two fingers across.
And when the vein is opened, let it bleed continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open upon touching, then measure three inches of space and bind it tight until reaching the bone; the amount of blood to let flow is five ounces (5oz), with a possibility of more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery. Then examine the wound: if there remains no sign of syphilis near it upon opening, and an abscess does not appear, then straighten the wound and stitches, and treat with ointment until it heals completely.
And when infection until is gone: let it up to cease; sirop dressez it syphon, and sew on after aseepistressure; as it untie the wound to treat with the syring.
When migraine occurs early and with acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old headache, and medicine by methods of medical treatment does not help at all, we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have demonstrated.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient rubs back the hair on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, as it beats well by its pulsation, and it's not refilled much like some men who are too cold; if it does refill, then the patient pulls out a piece of cloth from the area, then rubs the place with an abrasive cloth, and applies warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which this form is:
Then gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then bind it tightly with strips of cloth that are around each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn it with the tip of a pin, then cover that area according to the quantity of the two shots. For if it's not covered, it won't heal properly at all.
And treat the bleeding of the veins until it stops within three hours; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two loops from a strong double silk thread, so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and blood flows through it; then remove any excess between the two ligatures at the same moment, and then, if necessary, cauterize with the caustic spatula until reaching bone as long as the head remains closed; this is the completed work, provided the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
For caustics are used to finish abscesses: that's why they are of greater help with abscesses. In the extraction of arrows, you should fill the cavity with thick cotton and well-made bandages; and when you remove them, then treat with dry medicines that generate heat, as well as compresses, until it is healed; and if the arrowhead remains deep within so much as you work upon it, be quick to sear by cauterization, or fill the cavity with vitriol and the pound on your hand to make the wound tighten; and if not present, then place ice on the wound until it is frozen, and irrigate the wound with cold water until the wound heals as it should. The completion of arrow extraction is that you cauterize the vein of .ij. parts, but the cutting be well sharpened so long longer maintains them; When inflammations are too prolonged, they retain less heat. And it should have between the two knives a certain width, and then when you have reached both sides, heat an iron until it is glowing red to the bone, cut the vein in two parts; they should be separated by the two heads because this caustery can harm everywhere. This is the form of the caustery:
Of tears
by ça; the oignen.
And they called it the ancient "contusion cure", and you should do this for the patient who has this illness with hairs on his forehead, then make three incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions be like two eyes all along the front down to the bridge of the nose, and the other two be at each side by the eyebrows, and avoid incision of arteries that are on each side above the brows; and move your hand away from the extension of the two jawbones, with each wound being the size of three fingers apart.
From the incision that is from the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all skin that is between the two cuts up to the bone beneath it, then apply another part of the ointment from the middle incision to the other end, and then extract this ointment.
If you insert the instrument called "culteral" into the first opening, and it is very sharp on one side but on the other side is smooth, not cutting. And that's its form: Insert the sharp edge of the tailor towards the chest near the root, and the smooth edge toward the bone, inserting it until reaching the middle opening. Close all vessels branching from the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to where it opens at the root, then continue on both sides through the middle opening until you reach the other end; then withdraw blood evenly, and express the wound for collected blood; then place a piece of old cotton in each fissure, and cover with soaked cloths in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring that abscesses do not form; after three days remove the ligature, and apply large amounts of water-soaked plantain, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, along with other treatments for wounds until healed.
As for the eyes, they are blinded or do not see properly due to this condition.
When to any come frequent catarrhs as usual, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with weakened vision, and burning of the papers; and the hair falls out, and at its source there is great pain, and the patient sneezes; then by these occurrences it shows that those matters and such catarrhs do not come from a single cause, but rather multiple veins, and the lesion lies within them.
And it is that you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision in front of him, and another wide one. Then begin from the incision at the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and let the cut reach until the bone; keep your hands away from the nerves around the temps when eating; and once the bone is exposed, drain all the blood onto a sponge, then place cotton wool between the two lips of the incision, then wrap with bandages soaked in wine and oil, and beware of heatstroke; if it becomes infected, it must be cleansed until new growth begins, then treat with things that cause purification.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of wormwood, and make an ointment with it; and apply it to the wounds to cleanse them thoroughly.
From stopping up of the ears
All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains, beast matter, fragments of minerals or similar substances as iron; seed-like materials such as hailstones, peas, and beans; or fluids flowing like water easily and seemingly so.
When it flows from the ear in any form other than something that naturally belongs to the ear and does not grow therein, place the ear in sunlight. If you see a stone or similar object being discharged along with some violet oil or ointment of saffron, then proceed with extraction; and it causes sneezing as a condition, and they stop up their nostrils when sneezes come, and place cloth pieces or wool near the ear; and elevate the ear above. Often this treatment brings relief; but if it does not, then apply fine pincer-like instruments for extraction, of which here is the form:
If it jumps up at the pinceres, that's good; if not, prepare extraction with a subtle double-needled hook; and if it does not come out this way, make an ear wax candle and push its head through the hole or ear canal strongly, stuffing around the candle with soft beeswax so the blood vessels cannot enter when using the candle; then treat properly, as often it comes up just as we have mentioned; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take grease where it goes into the joints, and use some precise instrument for that purpose, placing a bit of cotton around it; then press on the wart or whatever it is, and treat properly. And if it does not come out from all these things we have mentioned, quickly make an incision in the ear so that pus comes out and spasms occur; then the method of the incision is to first bandage the patient's head securely, extract blood according to its severity, then have the patient sit with their hands holding the ear upwards, making a small cut at the root of the ear near the fat or whatever it depends on; and make the fissure as round as a crescent moon until you reach the wart, then treat it as best as you can, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until healed. And if it is a grain as you can extract; and then take the hairs like this method according to form:
And make an incision at the grain of sand. But do not attempt this when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many attempts; then extract with fine forceps and suction as we have said, so that the extractions be aligned.
Therefore when the water comes into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze first and fill the ear with old cotton. Place the same substance as close as possible over that ear where the water is. If it falls out easily, this is good; if not, take multiple pieces according to the size of your fingers held loosely together, heat them slightly, then put a piece in the patient's ear and push through. On the other side of the head, puncture another spot with an arrowhead or needle; continue piercing from one hole to another until all the water has come out, thus making it completely clear; if you see any remaining fluid, take a reed, insert one end into the ear, and heat the other until the thinner part burns off. Then use different pieces as necessary until all the water is gone, as we have described for the piercing technique.
In the removal of the object, if it is small like a flea and similar in nature, treat as we have described for division; but if it is large enough to be felt, prepare extractions with forceps; and it is easier to remove what is lodged within the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have discussed in the division and treatment of distillations, if the remedy is not effective, then you must examine the ear under sunlight; if there are no worms, use fine forceps, and if they do not appear, grasp the hole where the form was.
And it is narrow above and wide below. Then insert the finer end into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then gently pull out all the worm; do this often until all the worms are removed. If they don't come out, wrap cotton around the hole as I have mentioned in stone removal; if they still don't come out, administer distillations that the elders have tested through worm excision, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and if you distill oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, it is as you see.
It is made of silver or copper and has small openings above and holes to pour out the distillation through a well-made copper instrument for this purpose, and if you see a screw and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and as much medicine in the hole as you see, so that it fills the ear. Then place all the cotton on the screw and press with your warm hand until the oil is distilled out of the ear; and let the patient smell the maladies within, and the distillations are a cupful over fire just as he does this in the ear where it distills; but keep that it not too cold because medicine would be not so good.
Of ear blockage
No child is born without any piercing in the ears; and this same thing happens at home with ear blockages from wounds or foreign objects inside the ear, and these blockages never occur entirely within the ear if one cannot see them; and it never happens that a little bit of defecation goes through the piercings, and sight is still good.
If one cannot see the blockage that comes entirely inside if it can't be seen, and is of severe healing but in various positions, and here are the work is this appearance:
And with a hook and cutting in front and back plainly, so that it does not bruise the ear; if the operation is of the cartilage or bone of the ear, grasp it with fine pincers, and hold it gently until all the bones are exposed.
And if the operation is partially in the ear, take a fine rasp and carefully smooth it with heat, then place or bone of the ear. If you feel the operation causing the patient great weakness to hearing, gently pierce, but be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then insert a tent according to the size of the opening in the ear, oiled with Egyptian balm.
Do not do anything for a day until the wound is bound, then take a tent and oil it with rosewater, and powdered antimony on top; if you see the ear swelling, it is fitting to replace the tent and place another oiled tent made of rosemary oil and beeswax, so that when the swelling has been bone, heal until it is well.
When bleeding persists, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other remed cuing to stop the blood flow which are used for treating dropsy.
From removing parchment layers.
This althelul that comes from parchment papers when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tweezers and pincers, then coat them with a solution of its roots; afterward, place on the blue vitriol paste.
If not removed by cutting, if the fine caustic is applied with a lenticular cautery after the incision heals, and many times it repairs; but sometimes nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn up and do not return.
Of chalk
Many times they come in parchment things that seem like chalk in their shape and hardness, and thus this illness is called "grandine", consisting of a large amount of moisture under and over the skin; its treatments are as follows: take care if the grandine moves on one side or another, and it's an easy thing to know how to do. Then make the incision wide, then gently scrape each part, then grasp with tweezamoins, and pluck out. If you don’t pierce through a bit of skin, nothing will hurt the patient; and if there is a large tear, bind it with stitches until healed; and if small, do not apply force, because the ointment will restore it quickly without further harm.
When the gravel is descending into the depth of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and extend it with tweezebts; and if the paper is moved by the incision, nothing matters; and when the gravel has been contained, cleanse the wound with salt water, and care for its healing until the patient is well again.
From the fat of the eyes
The excerpt describes seborrhea, an oiliness that is found in the pores of children's skin, which occurs mainly in infants and causes much irritation to their eyes; they rub it with matinees (cloth), and cannot gaze upon sunlight because tears fill their eyes so quickly due to this. Therefore, they lie down on their faces upwards, sleeping thereon, and have cloths over their moist eyelids which the seborrhea has covered; when you press it with your thumbs and feel its presence within.
The manner of the operation is such that the patient places their head in the saddle; then take a strip of linen and construct a tent shaped like a circle according to the amount contained by each part, then place it over them; press with your hands on both sides so that the abscesses are united within the circle; then make a slit at the spouting end sharply wide, and not wider than the incision made in the vein's skin; and keep making cuts into the fat until you reach the abscess; and in various positions comes the drainage from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Extract the pus from everything with a piece of torn fabric between your fingers and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; and keep that you do not approach the incision, so that you go through all the abscess until the end, without tearing it.
And if the abscess does not open at the beginning of the incision, then gently widen the incision slightly until it appears; then extract as we have said, and moisten with strips and water, and place on top, and bind with bandages.
And in such men who crack their joints and place them to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat until it is sound again. And if an abscess comes at its place, cleanse with emollients until it becomes sound.
Of hair from parchment papers
When hairs grow from parchment papers in a manner different than natural and become aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about habits of diseases as with accustomed tears and softening of the paper and pus, leading to destruction of the eyes; and there are cures according to four ways: either by fire-cauterization together with heat or medicinal ague depending on what is written in this chapter regarding caustery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by cataracts as I will explain.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper of oil with your left hand; if it's twisted, it's good; if not, insert a needle through all one thread over; and let this be near the edge of the paper where hair grows near these hairs, and draw one thread over the entire paper, then turn it under the razor; then place in the area below the paper, close to the hairs, covering the whole swelling from the large corner to the small; then extract a filament, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then press on the paper with an imprint as the reed's bellows, ensuring that the imprint matches the amount you observe raising the paper which is separated at all times.
If you need to remove a large quantity of the paper according to how much it is softened; then make cuts over the entire swelling on the two lines you marked, and begin from the large corner down to small; and let there be a natural split in the growth near the hairs, then insert the needle into one of the corners with your thumb, then scrape off completely; then join the two edges together with stitching by all one thread of fine linen, remove any blood, and trim excess threads over both eyebrows as needed; and if not, don't worry about it, but leave the suture and filaments until 3 or 4 days; then treat the wound without dry and constricting bandages because the paper will rejoin to the healing of the wound and assembly, but the stitches are movable (as the ancients say), and it is a procedure without fear.
the is not the s. The bloods and it bees ansi let; then heal of d’d as tu se pecking de; et li so exemploco to let bile, the f tient et:
Then follow those who ascend with small, evenly matched strengths according to the form here shown.
And if you cannot hold the pincers, and the pieces are not equal in size, take a needle where appropriate. Wrap one thread around your figure, then wrap another thread near its upper rim, third fil at the small rim, and evenly combine both threads; then lift your hand equally and remove all skin over which you have marked, as we have described, then join the two edges of the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is healthy. If an abscess appears at your incision site, soothe it with cerote and other soothing ointments;
And never is it the case that hair from the paper is converted to skin: if it's necessary for you to use what we have described about incision; but the stitching in both places is more artificial.
The treatment of fractures is as follows: and you convert the paper and fold it inside according to what I have said, and then make two splints using art; and two delicate bandages also long like the paper and the width equal to that of a palm; then wrap each side around where you hold the wires; then join one and the other carefully above what rises from the folded paper at its end, and strain the two fractures firmly; leave them thus for several days, and the sutured skin will die, dry up, and scab over, as it heals.
If it is delayed and the wrapping becomes too tight, then treat until it heals properly; and if the wound is swollen and the paper cannot hold any more hairs, then you will make the two splints according to this figure and quantity of length and width.
Fold the paper in this way: then pierce with the hair, and cut off one or two of them all. Pierce until all that is as they are very small, and fold it in such long it's length and wide as a palm; then place where you bind both ends together gently above what rises from at its end paper below, and the same way like this here:
Et if the growth is treated and hair does not come out with it, you will pull the growth from below along the entire thread as ordered, until the growth comes out strongly through the opening above and can be seen by eye; then you will pull the growth and thread, remove the oil and leave them closed for two or three days so that the hair hardens in its place and a head grows over it; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural edge of the eyebrow, raising it until it is extended out and then removed.
Of the inflammation of the eye
When this disease called "aleacrati" or inflammation of the eye occurs in two ways: naturally and unnaturally. And it happens due to sudden injury, surgery, or cauterization, as well as similar causes.
And the method of treatment for it is to split that suture, and separate its lips, and place lin threads inside, and tie them until they are clean; and it does not matter if you use in his healing things that dry up and tighten. For if you do this, his illness worsens more than the original; but work with things softening, such as fenugreek; and dew or elevated water and linseed cooked seed, and ointments infused with any of the oils, and wrap it in a tent, and treat that.
And the essence of your treatment is that you must ensure it does not rejoin in accordance with its previous form; and these treatments we have mentioned are sole cued for this illness to prevent recurrence in its original form.
From the clotting substance found within the oil.
This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and splits and cauterization and similar things; the nature of its work in it that you take an awl, in which there is a double thread, and the needle with the hole at the head, and pierce through to the right side so that the threads come out in two heads of the needle; then extend the needle upwards completely along the entire awl, and the cover to a width of a span.
And if the paper's shape returns as it should, that is good; if not, take some resin and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two cuts inside the paper; and let the tips of the scissors from the two cuts be at the two angles of the incision you made, and form them so that when they are joined together, the shape is like a letter with "J" shaped hook; then remove that needle according to the amount that its sides come out or in, as it affects the paper, then bring together the divided parts, and bind them with wool thread; then care for this as we have said of mollifying medicines and bandages until healed.
And if the disease is different and must be shaped like it should return; according to this and healings and in various forms of naturellement, cares lesions: Et se il est facize que covient. En out de la maladies soiant mieles a li formet qui revenir sont les saiges quidexacriger.
With great care of parchment paper
When this welding occurs on the skin in such a way that the parchment paper above is well sealed with egg white, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it then follows that you should puncture with the tip of a razor underneath the paper, and lift upwards; and apply pressure with tweezeboarers until you scrape off what has adhered to the delicate glue, which is neither too tough nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot endure if the glue becomes overly sticky or weakens the oil; and make your incision where you peel apart the assembled parts gently, so that the parchment resumes its natural shape; and it will heal entirely without any sign of greenish water in the oil, but with clear water and collagen. Then place a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and cover the oil with shredded wool abundantly mixed with egg white; and after three days, use gentle pressure with collodion until it is healed.
Concerning the nail of the oil (referring to a method in medieval medicine that involves using an oily substance for treatment)
Know that the gout is of two kinds: one nervous and resembling hard sores, and another not nervous but resembling frozen wet swelling, which when touched with a piece of iron during cauterization cannot be moved; both types begin towards the great joint, and grow slowly until they cover all sight and light as well as movement in the eye.
The manner of the incision is such that the patient places their head in trust, then works with his eyes; he removes paper to your hand, then bends the nail into small doublets using a piece of iron, and extends it upward; then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or wool, or ox hair, and strong thread; pierce the tip of the neednose slightly and push through the nail, attach the nail with a thread and extend upwards, scrape along all the hair-side near the nail to its root and skin down to the head, then cut off any remaining spatulous flesh at its base; leave the natural cornea or large spot intact so that by incision tears do not flow as usual; never should they be extended only with a needle threaded through it, but rather scraping all the fine tissue of which this form is composed.
And guard that the spatulous tissue does not touch it and the cornea should be punctured, and then anoint with a little oil in the eye for a day or soak with a linen; and let it dry until healing is done with this treatment of ce qui est li l’aygidieret. Then after incision therein take a pus a lait, and if it should be cleaning.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle, and the hooks do not enter it, this resemblance of a nail is often treated with medicines; they grow as I described in the section, and when you see it covered, work on the oil for the patient's comfort, and apply a light plaster according to these instructions:
Gently remove the nail and if you see that it does not diminish and there is a residue afterwards, distill from your mouth into the oil collier made of litargire and red wax, stuffing the oil until the next day; then resume the other treatment as per this method, until it is completely gone.
If nothing is opposed to you in the oil, as for abscesses, then wash it out, and cure first the inflamed abscess until it is cleaned, then resume the treatment as before, until it is cleaned.
And if the appearance of flesh on the elbow is greatly damaged by its use, suspend it with a splint and wrap part but not all, so that no pus comes forth; then a red fluid distills into the neck vein, which is made from litharge.
From underneath the eyebrow where it arises
There are some men who have redness beneath the eyebrow at times, covering the pupil and pressing against the skin and turning away from the forehead; and such cases are like rosebush thorns. Firstly, make the patient rest their head on a pillow, then work the eyelids and remove all unnatural growths as far as possible with force; next, cut off the first redness, shave it completely to the end, and take care that no hair grows back in the operated area; and perform an incision of the spathe as we have said in the cutting of the nail and the small forces by which one removes a stye.
When the incision is completed and bone fully exposed, apply oil from a sealed or distilled churn along with red pigmented cordial and similar corrosive medicines, placing cotton soaked in egg whites to ensure warmth; if there's no discharge, and wound heat subsides, treat the hot abscess with things that calm it, then return to your treatment until healthy, enscuing bone is held in place by this method.
However, it is necessary that you align the treatment of each weak oil with nature's course; and in surgical work, for accidental cases; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb suffers from such a procedure.
The veins of the eyes
Red marks appear over the eye, and they obstruct sight and weaken the eye daily. Therefore, when you first look at the eye in which redness is present, examine it thoroughly; there are no other illnesses besides this redness; then treat it thus: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, and gently stretch out those veins along its entire length according to your wisdom, enscribing them twice subtly as follows:
And let there be two lines drawn by degrees in one curve following this form:
Then carefully draw those veins subtly, and let the blood flow out again after some time, until you see that those veins are removed from the eye; and be careful not to blister the edges of the eyelids, and perform this procedure at midday in front of the sun, and be very attentive during your operation so that only those veins remain; and when you have done this, if there is a yellow-red discoloration on the sclera, it means to cure what remains underneebel.
If you are unable to grasp it all at once in that hour, make a poultice of soothing substances for the pain in the eyes, and leave it on for several days until the pain is eased and assured from inflammation, then resume according to this method as long as they remain sane; and this is the form of strength.
From the abscess in the eye
The so-called "arissati" abscesses: when you treat it with cautery and hot medicinal water as I have previously mentioned, and if it is not healed, then use a tool to pierce the abscess at the spot where it must die, draining all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is uncovered and you see corruption and darkness, return to all parts of the tool from which its form comes; it is called "rough head," and should be made of fine iron for one chief point, and pointed as a file in this present form.
And place it over the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press with your hand slightly until you know that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore its original position with medical cleansing remedies.
If the bone is loose and comes out, and the body of the bowel is loose, and remains like this for 40 days, and does not heal or become an abscess, and no accident occurs, know that it is healthy; if not, there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula at the nostril according to this form: it must be uncovered from the bone for a second time with iron, and with aging medicines, and when it is uncovered, take an instrument as described herein; the head of the iron should have three angles, and the shaft should be thinned until you see thus.
Then place it on the bone near the cheek, and keep your hand away a little, then turn around completely as long as it pierces the bone and causes pain to the patient because of this if they hold their hand close to their nose; and then restore its original position with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when pus forms and hardens on the wound, the matter goes to the nose; thus it is easier for the sick person.
From the exit of the nostril
When the eyebrows are completely open and do not cause blockage or narrowing in the nose, then tie up the patient; then wash it, then apply compresses or a soft cloth to draw out pus without causing harm, then put oil made of acacia resin, aloe, incense, and sarcocolum, and strain the oil, and place bandages and linens on top; and wrap the patient in these linens so that you choose soft enough linens, and double each one four times, and then layer them with one on another according to the amount needed by the eye. Then strain it from above a hard board, and begin applying compresses again for drawing out pus without causing harm; then remove the compresses and let the oil drain day and night, and if the resin softens greatly, so that you need to extract it completely; then remove the resin after one day and night, and if the oil returns, it is good; if not, reapply the bandages and linens and resin and compresses as long as necessary.
The breaking of a veil seen
When such disruptions come to the veil seen, then opening occurs and it comes from particles like a grain of resin, and is hopeful to see; thus you should cut the area below up to that above, then insert one needle into the root of the part down to the edge, then another needle or if there is a double thread in the part at the lower margin; pierce it through, leave the first needle according to its arrangement; then cover it with the place doubling and tie off a portion of the vein around it, and pull tightly, then extract the needle and put over it a cloth soaked in oil in abundance; let it remain until the thread breaks away from the vein, then treat the wound with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never should the wound be restrained by the vein each part of a circle of fabric, until it is healed.
And if the veins give great appearance, pierce at a subtle part near the edge of the wound, and allow the whiteish moisture to rise upwards and descend into the veins, and enter quickly; then extract as much as it is cleaned.
From the bow of the joint
This disease called "alcunnati" is not merely a bow that appears in the joint like water pouring out; its appearance of treatment is such that you make the patient sit on a specially prepared and upright seat, then take their head with both hands until you see the bow coming up to your level. Then it should be fixed firmly, and do not dissect or uncover the lumbar area, observe if the patient feels as usual; but if they don't feel that way, know that it is water, and if the shape of the bowstring is not aligned as we have said, make them sit between your hands again, then take a subtle spatula and apply it on the horny part with one spot continuously connected to the horny area and crown, until the bow rises; and when it does rise, drip hot sweetened water or water boiled with fenugreek into the joint, then cure it further until it is healed.
From the waters of the joints
In the division of joints resembling those in water, what is appropriate for cutting; thus following health guidelines. It should be done that you have the patient sit between your crossed hands under dim light to avoid sunlight and apply a clean ointment firmly, then place the paper with oil on your left hand if it's right-handed or on your right hand if it's left-cupped; then take in your right hand (if right-handed) the instrument called "almagda" or with your left hand (if left-handed); then position the tip of the instrument near the crown by slightly shifting a ray beneath the paper to oil, and feel that almagda arrives at the empty thing; it is necessary for the path of almagda to be as wide as possible from the space between the plumb and its end. This is the crown of oil; if you see bones through the paper due to the whiteness of the horn-like cloth, then place the instrument up until reaching where the fluid exists, then press out a way afterward. If the fluid descends now, you will see in front of you the patient and the instrument in his oil.
After resting for a while and the fluid rises again through another route, apply heat with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise further, gently rotate almagca around your hand little by little; then put back some gemstone wax, and oil within. Then place poultice or soft cloth soaked in oil rosette on top abundantly mixed with uef. We, and those of our time, place comin broiet with an abundance of uef.
et ou.
Therefore pierce the joint only slightly, not too deeply, but with a very fine needle, then apply an emollient as we have said; and at the completion of the work provide the patient with a comfortable resting place in which he may sleep on his back in a darkened room; ensure complete immobility except for light meals, and do not move his head to the right or left, maintain them according to their natural position until three days have passed; then remove him from that same dimly-lit house, test his vision, let him see various things, and then reattach the ligament up to the seventh day; it is not necessary for this to be done during the hour of healing or immediately after an incision, but rather wait until swelling subsides quickly.
If abscesses arise, remove the dressing before the seventh day and apply poultices that soothe the abscess; once it is calmed, reopen the wound and place a bandage over its face for a full day, keeping it in that darkened house. Then gradually leave the house little by little, and allow him to resume his usual activities; know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And there is one, but the time de la pluste les chaument on quittances de nos avecque nous esprend, and then li qui les poins que le texte lor nenet, et almagde tout ne estrange a li veus se c.
And these are the forms of alchemy, for those who do not know them see them as such; and they are truly foolish.
And there are heads of this same subtlety, and they have three corners each.
From the chariot to the neck
Never do chariots of various kinds appear in the neck; some resemble scorpions with many stings; and if there are any such chariots with furious colored wheels or wheels that are white like bone. In those cases where a chariot is white but not attached, one must make the patient sit between their hands towards the sun; work on its nostrils, pour oil into them, cleanse the axle and trace along the lines; then cover what you can support at the subtle spatulous end of a bone, until you know that chariot is completely ossified.
And if there remains anything that cannot be removed, work on all subtle veins lightly until nothing is left; and if the patient becomes swolculed or an abscess appears, treat them accordingly; and if it's malignant, haste to cauterize until they are completely excised and turned into bones, then pour oil or vinegar or wine.
If the treatment fails and moisture reaches up to the palate, believe that it is clean; if moisture does not penetrate as it should, suspect there is infection in the bone above, which prevents proper healing: then you must wrap a linen thread around. Make it somewhat thickened with hands, and leave space between each knot; place the patient's head under the thread so firmly that they can move slightly, pull gently until it slides into their mouth; this method is often used for children in schools, and it is an easy task for those who must perform it. Hold one side of the head with one hand and the other side with the other hand, feeling each knot as you go along. Continue doing so until you are sure that our thread has loosened any impuramoins; then draw out the pus, treat the linen with Egyptian ointment, and place it back in its original position on either side of the nose; do this for three days or more, as long as the ointments dissolve all residual impurities. Then cover one nostril with a cotton plug until healed, and if there is need of dry medicines, use them accordingly; this method cleanses the head using an instrument designed to distil oil and medicine through it.
And it is made of silver or glass, resembling an open lamp similar to a flame, and you guide them the same way; and if you see one needs it, make it closed with no protrusions for purging the head; and have one hand holding the head when heating oil or any liquid.

Many times a disease arises in the head of the neck called "telul", which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; therefore, one must cut it at the beginning, and the bone entirely, then apply the cautery or burning medicine on it; if not done quickly before it becomes too large, be vigilant that it may be hard, of a strange color, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an incurable boil, for whenever one cuts it even once, the patient suffers greatly; and if the boil is from a tender spot, not of a strange color, then you see that you can completely cauterize it, so relieve the patient and do not fear, and treat drying things and tightening.
When the neck is cut and sutured.
If solutions for continuation come one of these cartilages are damaged, there is little benefit in any person; and it does not happen to anyone, so that as far see if the wound fresh blood all his blood, then stitches both sides two lips together, then heals until whole, and poudre with dragon's blood on it, and let them be suture. And if one side is torn apart from either part of either side both together, and cure so you inward a little.
The manner of the suture is that you gather the solutions: by needles, as we have said in the abdominal suturing; or by thread, as I have shown you.
For abscesses on the lips
When the lips have an abscess that is hard like grains of barley and are small to larger in size; then you must turn the lip apart, split them at each spot, grasp with forceps on each side, place the leeches therein for each part; after the incision with vitriol pus flows out until it is cleaned away; then apply a soothing ointment and treat the lips until they are dry.
From the edge of the gums
Often it arises under the gums from being pushed backward, which the ancients called "albulus"; if necessary, support it with forceps, and cut to its root, allowing blood or pus to flow; then apply vitriol salt on the wound or other drying powders; and if that edge returns after cutting, and often this happens, second time cauterizing: it does not return after cautery; these are forms of abscesses to treat.
Of ulcers
in ousle chiktustsd
When treating the tooth of its pain, take time to extract it as much as you can, for one must not leave any part behind; for it is a matter so high that there is no excuse for leaving any remnants. Then when the patient is constrained to extract a tooth, it should be certain that you are sure of a decayed tooth; often pain precedes the patient, and they think it's a healthy tooth, so pull out the bad tooth; however, do not cease the pain by this means until the evil is removed, for we have tried this with such healers before; and when you are well certain of a decayed toebone, ensure that you scrape around it thoroughly to protect all parts of the gum. Then move the jaw using your fingers or fine tweezers in small increments until properly aligned, securely holding the tenailles tightly afterward; and make sure the head of the healer is placed firmly between the genous, ensuring no movement.
After extracting the tooth properly without breakage, if it does not come loose easily, take any of these bindings and stuff them inside from each side gently, and move the jaw as you have previously done. And if the root is pierced or mixed up, ensure that you fill it with gauze; and when using fine tweezers to extract, do so without causing a breakage; work very carefully around the gum to protect the tooth.
Ensure that you do not break it and leave a part of it intact, allowing it to return painfully due to the root's malevolence. Be careful not to act as ignorant surgeons do, who with haste and boldness often break any cartilage without heeding what we have discussed; instead, they bring about great illness from the venom of such a fracture or because they break the cartilage itself, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is extracted, wash it with wine or oil and salt; if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply the lees of vitriol; and if that does not suffice, cauterize.
The shapes of the molars where teeth first move should have sharp points and large cheeks so that they do not double when you pull out a tooth. And these are the forms:
They should have large bodies such that they do not bend when extracted, and be well-made of iron, with teeth to grip it firmly.
From the root of the teeth When the root stays in place after extraction, it is necessary to put cotton moistened with butter at the site for one or two days until the area is numb, then insert pliers called "algefri" so that the head seems like a bird's beak; and inside they are shaped like files:
And if the roots do not come out with all these pliers, it is necessary to expose the entire bone around the root and insert an instrument called "althali," which is a chisel; herein lies its shape:
is they s.
And if one uses this instrument which has two prongs; its form is as follows:
and other instruments used before on teeth and of this instrument which appears to be large pliers, its form is as follows:
and so f. And they should be large and firm enough to hold the bone so that it does not slip out, but can securely grip and remove it; then restore its original position with appropriate medicines for this purpose, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, use all of these instruments.
When the tooth appears not in accordance with the natural course of the body, and its shape is unsightly, especially in young women, it must be determined whether there are nerves behind the tooth and if they are not on the right side, and cannot be felt or filed down: then scrape; and if there is a root with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is shown here, resembling .i. small beak, made of iron that has been sharpened at both ends.
And the tooth becomes harder over time for its hardness and because you dore moving others, and if it is visible that one can file it down, use a part of this file as shown in the shape.
Et ainsi comme le fer de cui on fait les aiguilles; et en filant les dents peu à peu, mains légèrement, si qu’ils ne se déplacent pas tant qu'ils soient affilés ; puis l'aiguise au final avec tout aucun polisseur, et s'il est trop tranchant et il blesse la langue, alors il faut aiguiser l'espèce jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit égalisée, si qu'il ne blesse pas la langue ni ne corrompt le parler.
When the teeth become loose
Wenn die Zähne locken werden oder durch Schlag oder Stumpf bleiben und das Patient schmerzen kann, wenn es etwas kaut, so dass er ausscheidet; dann sollst du ihm mit Medizinen zusammenziehend, aber nicht zu sehr fest anwenden, da diese zu stark verhindern können; stattdebrauchen Sie ein Goldfaden, denn Silberfäden werden grün und schimmen (also verderoeroeffentlich, doch goldneigt sich niemals; so soll der Faden mittelgroß. Doch wenn du siehtst, wie die Zwischenräum zwischen den Zähne: Zieh einen doppelten Schnur ziehen Sie zwei gesichern siebtet an der Zähne dazwischen - dann heilt manche essez.
And when the tooth is set loose, it is put back in its place repeatedly as we have said; only those who are wise and patient should be involved, never attempting the shape of a wolf's bone, placing it where it lacks, tightening it just as we have said, remaining long in this manner.
And cut off the cord of the tongue
And never are these ligatures that come from below the tongue or nature, that one removes in this manner; and by accident of an incision made hot; and the procedures are such as to work on the mouth with the patient's head upright, and lift the tongue; then cut off the nervous cord at its base so that the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there is any hardness or swelling, and it is of a fresh wound, then you must bandage it tightly until it heals well, but not too much to avoid the artery underneath; and after doing this, raise the lymphatic sacs with warm water or cold water, and place linen gauze below the tongue. And if there are any bleeding spots on the neck each night, make sure they do not adhere. If a vein bursts, apply salted earth; and if it does not stop, then cauterize with a slow fire lancet which is good for this; then treat it again until it heals well.
If you see it of a color or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch as it is cancer; and if it appears to be swelling towards the bladder, and there is moisture, apply an ointment subtly, and relieve from both sides. If you are successful with this treatment, then subject it to vitriol broiling until it becomes firm; afterwards return to your procedure until all furuncles are treated; then lift up the lump easily and thoroughly, and treat it with other remedies until it is healthy again.
For boils in the throat
Boils in the throat are known as "godath," and they are properly called 'the two almonds'; when treating them, follow what we have said in the division. If they do not heal, be careful: if it is a boil of small sense and color, do not touch with iron. And if it's red and the root is large, don't touch with iron; similarly for blood flowing from the wound; but let them stay as long as they bleed, then you can cut or break apart when ready to heal on its own, or it will burst by itself; and if it's light in color, and the roots are subtle, prepare the instrument, but first look whether the boils rest quietly and calm. Then make the patient sit in front of the sunlight, and his head is in thy hand, and presses the tongue between its handle with iron or a little:
As you press the tongue to all this instrument, and see the abscess, then take a string and insert it through the hole, and pull from above as much as you can; also remove any remnants with tweezeboots, then cover the instrument with a cup of that form which seems like force; and yet the head is bent, one place to another, very painful, made of iron or silver.
And if you do not have this instrument, use tongs for that form which is shaped like it:
And use a trenching instrument on one side, and the other for naming purposes; and when you have opened one of the holes, open the other in the same manner, then after incision gargle the patient with hot water, as well as warm water to soothe, and if bleeding occurs, gargle again with the patient using boiled quinces or rosemary leaves, and such things, until it is healed; then cure them until they are healthy. If no other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two holes, open them as you did for these two holes.
And I treated a woman with an abscess inside her throat, which is to say, a small abscess; and it had been almost entirely closed off the entire throat, such that the woman could not exhale through the passage blocked by cotton-like tissue, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if this condition persisted for one or two days. The abscess was so swollen that it had been pushed out by two openings from within. Thus, I immediately took action, inserted a needle into one of the cords, then pulled on the thread to draw out a large portion of pus; next, I repeated this with the other opening. I opened her mouth and pressed against her tongue; afterwards, I inserted a neednose into these abscesses, extracted part of it, and there only came forth a little blood from the wound; thus the throat passage was cleared for the woman, who then began to drink water and wine, continuing to treat the abscess over long periods. The abscess would recur again, filling up the space I had emptied, becoming very large until it could not grow any more. Then I deceived it and cauterized inside her throat: so that it no longer grew; then I left those areas to God for further care after me.
The phrase "de l'uvre" translates to "of the work" or "from the work." However, without additional context, it is challenging to provide a more precise translation or interpretation of this term within the text. It could refer to a specific medical procedure or treatment mentioned in the larger document from which this excerpt comes.
as a. Then; if they se ce prt is tud by the el are.
If the head has a hair or hole where you place the medicine, like in a spoon's handle, and put the instrument over all of the medicine; let the patient lie on their side so saliva and muscle flakes come from their mouth into the medicine without going down to the throat or stomach; then hold your hand over the entirety of the medicine, pressing it onto the wound for a quarter hour until you see it becoming clear and the pain from the medicine subsides. If so, take cotton and wrap it around any instruments, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place all the instrument into the cup of the cotonnets; continue this frequently until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry for 4 or 5 days. And if you need to reapply the medicinal cauterization, do so, followed by wiping around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter, and cleanse what surrounds the medicine; be refreshed with cold water, and rinse your mouth with gargles until healthy.
This treatment is more beneficial of the incision rather than the cauterization; if it's treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamint and yellowwort and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, mixing all or some of them into a pot, adding water, and bringing to boil. The pots should be tightly sealed with strong clay, and within the pot there must be an instrument inserted in this manner: :
Many times it happens in the throat at the jaw or spine of a fish, or any other thing; therefore you must examine what you can see, and press the tongue towards the sun along all instruments until you see movement; and if there is nothing to pry open but is returned to the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps it may be prodded out by the vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a navel piece, or a lettuce root, or a crust of dry bread; and with the sponge tie some thread to it, then transfer it through the throat. And when it reaches its place, you will probe, and then examine further; and if it does not come from what we have said, take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And let the probe be inserted at the throat so that it can more easily enter into the gorge, and keep the head lifted high; and be cautious not to touch the epiglote so as not to obstruct or push inside any bone; move until the patient inserts the instrument because something is stuck out. Then pull upward, or examine thoroughly with all instruments equally until it's removed.
And in a similar manner; and then remove without getting deeper; or you do not penetrate further.
On no occasion is medicine without effectiveness, as I have said in the division, through the cure of medicines; and when this does not benefit them at all, then look into the throat of the patient by sunlight, then press their tongue with the instrument that I told you. And if you see the swelling, treat it with a little needle or fine pincers as appropriate. And if these do not suffice, take a hollow quill, place it in the patient's throat and pour hot iron into it repeatedly. And if the patient is discolored from blood all day, then boil a jug of cold water, work their mouth, let them swallow sensibly, and move it with your hands often; and as soon as the swelling feels the water, it will drain.
And if it does not drain as we have said, then smoke the patient with camphor, using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of wine; do this many times, for it will draw without pain. The method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are charcoal embers, and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and place the head of the instrument through that hole; then pour your fumigation, and let the patient put their cheek on the end of the tube, sealing their mouth so that no smoke escapes but travels to the swelling; now the swelling will draw out, and if it does not drain, repeat the fumigative process many times. Allow the patient to have thirst and consume dirty things and salted foods, but do not drink water; and eventually they must pass through this treatment regimen.
the fire the c. Et, and of the f li ft. It is not. And will it for swallow with vin, and let to the in the ointinis unce. The en ligne themes est à l’est s, ousoie et quadratine; and are so they telle. ould de ce n'ast cite the gela pecta butt.
The surgeons of abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, as one's memory recalls from this book and various other sources; they differ in perforation and cutting techniques, with two main methods - one similar to the other but influenced by moisture. The first method is for those that occur on limbs within the body, while the second method applies where abscesses appear as joints. For instance, an abscess atop the head differs from one at the base, and an abscess in a hollow area varies from those in joints; each has its own approach in treatment.
If at an abscess one must not yet perforate it until the swelling is fully developed; and for those that require incision when they are ripe but do not wither according to their development, as with abscesses near joints - such ones behave differently than others. When an abscess occurs near a joint, if left to develop completely, there's a risk of corrupting the ligament and nerve in the joint area; this may lead to contraction in that limb. If an abscess is near the main limb and one delays perforation until it's fully matured, it will harm the main limb; if it is near the base, incise it before full ripeness - do not perform a procedure on those near the base unless they have spread extensively inward and formed an abscess channel. It should heal within a reasonable time frame rather than persisting unresolved for too long.
And it must be known the time of abscess perforation when healing is complete, and this is when pain is alleviated, fever subsides, and reduction in pain and redness occurs, along with debilitation and sharpening of the headache from the abscess, and other signs; and it must be that you place the abscess perforation to depend on its location relative to the abscess, and where movement is possible. The perforation should be long in the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, in all similar cases without swelling.
And in those that bulge, according to the affected limb. And if the abscess is at the neck region, let the perforatur remain until it confirms complete digestion as we have said. For if you cut before it, it will extend poison throughout its body and be full of much filth; and sometimes harden the lips and deep wounds within. And for any abscess that are perceived according to the width of the body, depending on what the limb requires. And it must be that you treat small abscesses with small perforations; and large abscesse
the former thei; and then est a se peissamme telle pue ben tre jour il'heu de la so quet;
And if bleeding occurs in your operation area, treat with cool and soothing water and a cloth, moistening the wound frequently. And if bleeding persists, provide proper care and use the powders mentioned in this book, and if it is winter or the place of suture or abscess is very sensitive, you should place warm, moistened tents and cloths; and if it's summer, and the area or abscess is fleshy, you should apply dampened tents and cloths with cool water or oil and vinegar until after three days as we have said; then remove the sutures and drainage and treat accordingly until healed.
And you must know this universally for treating abscesses: here is what I have told you about how to proceed with the treatment of abscesse, and now comes the chapter.
About pus. (The word "des" in Old French can mean both "of" or "from", so it's often a matter of context)
When small abscesses occur on the head and are treated in ways similar to those of an animal's joint, there are many types; some are moist like hairs while others are hard and painful when touched, with no doubt or fear when using a tool called "entromissoire," from which shapes arise afterwards, depending on what they contain. If it contains moisture, they emit through the length above. And when the moisture is drained, scrape without leaving any hair that contains such moistcuire; for it reappears as soon as you leave anything there; then soak a cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; otherwise use water and salt, and apply to the wound until the next day. And again begin with the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you are sure it does not remain night-long; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until healed. If an abscess is greasy, follow this method: lengthwise; apply a poultice, drain any pus, scrape all parts, and administer care as if milking from where it lies; and if the tool acts contrary to you, do what I have previously instructed. Similarly treat an abscess that is hard like bone or flesh.
And if an abscess on the skin is hard and moist, it contains less blood. And among such abscesses or chiefs without moisture are those I described as being like a head of an old woman; and found an abscess similar to a long bone, rough and swollen, which could not be broken through; and if one had struck any, they would have treated it just as with a stone. In other abscesses that come on the head or at the roots of ears, make sure to open them fully every day for moisture to escape; and treat accordingly.
the f h. Manze de lapeccest c's.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and below the shoulders, and in arms, and they do not appear elsewhere on the body, and are very large, and interconnected with each other. Each boil is properly within its own spot, just as we have described for the abscess of the head; and there are many appearances of these boils. Some contain moisture, and others have malign tendencies that do not wish to obey health. Therefore, in those cases where you see good disposition at touching, and resembles the color of the body, and is painless from all sides and is not inflamed on the neck or artery or vein, and is not deep; it should be cut open from above, and each part scraped off, and extend the two lips of flesh to stitches as needed, just as we have described for abscesses in the head; and treat slowly but surely, and make sure you do not nick the nerve or vein, nor leave any spongy tissue or cutting edge, so that your fingers escape unharmed, and do not go too far forward, beyond what is necessary.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow work, then apply vitriol paste or powders that draw blood to the wound, and press the ward; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and softened, and begins to decay. And when the pus has escaped, return to your treatment, as long as you need to complete it; then look for small boils if any remain, cut them out and cleanse them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the boil, do not cut this boil at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang without harming anything; then dress the wound with gauze soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
the les que il � le t'homme so that isnt ae:ld Jonsme. Ce.
Of quinsance
The ancients spoke and wrote about the throat incision; but I never saw it done in our land, and it is through their writings that we know of this.
For those with quinsy, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat called "epiglottis" be cleared; and you cannot aid by this method because all the veins and the main part of the malaise are at a boil in cases of abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds. When the disease is in the channel of the main part, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottebefore three or four circles, or between them with a small cut across the width of the incision, not in the cartilage.
Et ceux-là se tiennent courbables à la section de l'épiglotte, sans aucun défaut, et les vessies sont longues en quantité.
And if the master is fearful, it must be extended with leather around the entire neck, then cut through the skin until reaching the chin; and avoid blood vessels, unless you see something, and then close the sack as we have said.
and is demonstrated by the section of the throat vein which bursts through where it has been torn, and due to the defect in voice.
Leave the open wound uncovered for a while.
When the time has passed for doubting a strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound so that they are joined; then apply remedies which promote healing and make it whole until it is sound.
Not until the throat is completely blocked will you do this; and if the patient appears to be dying, and lacks breath. Then seal the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe through their mouth, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
And therefore instructed the physicians to leave the open wound until the illness is healed, and it takes three or four days for this to occur. And then they commanded to sew up and clean the wound until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. by: (1 v...
And I went called to cure him, and found him just as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found blood issuing from it, but was well that it had not caused swelling or a tight band to choke the throat; however, there was severe bleeding through the injury.
I tended quickly and stitched the wound, then healed it as much as possible.
par lis they he ne lesse d, at; puis; to se est the next. Theng tir ig so that he c e's such as much que I don' s.
In treating of the epiglottis, there must not be any fear.
From a swollen throat
These boils are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses in the color of jet, and occur often in women;
a so or shee:
The occurrence is in two ways - one appears like fat on us and the other way seems like an abscess coming from our arteries. And there is fear, and it does not bode well to operate on large wounds; instead, test and seek out all the underlying causes. If you find it as in our flesh and not attached to any vein, then cut it off, as one would skin oneself, and treat the wound thoroughly if there are any. byz;
From us
There are many ways that we have, of which I will tell all the kinds.
And now it is necessary for me to explain all the differences that exist between them.
I say that an abscess is heat and fever-bearing, as long as the boiling persists, and decay is complete; then rests the fever and heat.
We do not have heat or fever or pain, and contains a vesicle, which is its own bag and corresponds to the body's color, and begins like wax, and becomes larger.
c; O for le bon se o lire they n's.
When attending to this matter, first examine and inquire about the entire instrument called "entromissor," according to its form or chapter that follows.
And the method of inquiring about abscesses in our bodies is to grasp or find more moisture where you think it lies within the abscess and turn its edges slowly until you know that the essence has perceived the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the entromissor, and be careful not to hurt it further.
If moisture persists within a wound, until it changes color as I have said about other abscesses;
And if after the interpositor does not come moisture, say that it is greasy, then apply crosswise as I have said, and hold in tweezebers, and lightly scrape from each side and keep the coat where it lies to treat with a nut.
that it so:
If left untreated for a while, it returns to us many times.
If it lingers a bit and the wound grieves him, apply some powders of corrosive agues to the wound, bind the wound, and place soothing substances on the abscesses and treat with other remedebut only until he is well.
If it is large, remove the two edges of the wound and treat with a remedy that prevents infection.
If it is contrary or another urgency occurs and you hastily apply the lead of vitriol paste, leave it for two days or three, until the wound heals, then allow the bleeding to subside; afterwards return to its original state as was delayed before.
See here the forms of entangled intestines, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three sections called "albaret," and one called "breb," and there are again three ways: large, medium, and small, to search for abscesses in a fistula.
and are similar to the needles used in witchcraft, which can be of citrine stone, iron, or silver, and yellow-tipped ones are most effective, while those with a black tip are more useful for searching for pus pockets in a fistula.
and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the openings in question.
The shapes of tumors are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and in tumors that have two kinds with three different approaches.
And if there are tumors that have three types of protuberances and come in three different ways; and if there are tumors with two kinds of protuberances, but only one type overall, and they also come in three different ways; all these are necessary at their place.
The principal types of these that cut are sharp, and among those there are some that do not cut anywhere except in one direction, which we scrape the skin off, so as to avoid cutting the vein or nerve.
And among these intrusions are displaced nails reset in small pieces so that the patient does not perceive pain at the onset of abscesses.
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
And it should not be used except in the case of swollen joints such as legs, arms, elbows, and other limbs.
�e with theilloe market line.
And you put it back into place at times with blood flow from veins, and arteries, and sometimes they return according to this major form:
Never do the breasts swell on some men when they begin to be corrupted, appearing like female breasts.
and remain ugly and swolebreathed, and if one wishes to treat them according to this line B. until G:. Then scrape off the fat, and treat the wound with medicinal chalk paste, then bring together the two edges of the wound to sew them up, and close it until it is healed.
and if the tissues become relaxed below, and are softened by their size as it happens in women, then make two slits above them with similar incision cuts. so that one is held to the other at each end, with the larger line containing the smaller in this manner, from this line down to the line g. Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and do as we have said with stitching and powders, and anything necessary for the treatment, until it is clean.
and if it is not clean, or the incision has not been properly made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a soft cotton cloth soaked in a corrosive ointment. and leave it until all the remaining flesh and fat have healed over, then continue to treat it until it is clean.
Of abscesses and elbows
These abscesses that arise from under the elbows are forms of hard goiters or swellings, and if there is any containing pus.
Those which contain pus should be cut according to this pattern, from line b. up to line g.: the bat:
And if the abscesses are of similar nature to hard swellings, make an incision as we have described in cutting open hard swellings, and if the wound is bowed out, treat with fire cautery as we have said before.
Of rupturing of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes hardened, there often come abscesses, and likewise, one experiences bleeding from the veins and an abscess.
tjou. The bencule is not; this. And when you feel it in your elbows, there is extreme tightness; and when it is from the vein, there is a reason for its disappearance.
And it is foolish to attempt this abscess, especially when it is from the joints and tendons and veins and numerous other places, and they are very large. Therefore it is necessary to avoid the treatment with iron, and those who are of age must also refrain from this, and in those who have inflammation of arteries on the long skin.
Therefore it is necessary to avoid the treatment with iron, and those who are of age must also refrain from this, and in those who have inflammation of arteries on the long skin. Then work around the neck with an incision, and gently open up the artery through the veins until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle through the skin and make an incision towards the opposite side until it reaches the muscle, and tie off the artery with a double thread as I have shown you in extracting the two arteries that are behind the ears.
Then puncture the lump that is between the two ligatures with an instrument until the blood flows out, and let the abscess be drained.
Then apply a curative bandage until it no longer bleeds. Then apply an appropriate ointment to it until it is healed.
the bien that ligament, and d for peie; Then insert the needle from under the joint that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, so that there is a double thread on it; then pull it to the other side. Then tie the abscess as I have told you, or join one of the two heads with the double thread.
And if you doubt whether the thread is strong enough, then rethread with another needle through all of the threads from the abscess incision to where the first needebore was placed, and hold the strings in four loops.
Then treat the abscess until excess fluid drains out, then cut away the swelling and leave what remains.
Then apply a dressing of wool soaked in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and ointments until it is healed.
On the cords from abscesses
is so they le grand. Et so that: the ondce; if: 1  J. If you to not; don’t. Tort (30. JA Dex.
This often happens with shoulders and elbangs where there are joints, and it is a troublesome abscess, its color resembles the body's color, and in many cases there is pain.
And when it is strangely tightened, the patient feels great pain, and it is not throughout the body, but from beneath the head.
And it moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, upwards or downwards. The one who is dislocated should not be bound with iron: perhaps there would be spasms.
And those whose head or forehead is affected, they cause it with a sharp instrument. If the abscesses are small, if you use pliers, and cut into its root.
And if they are large, tie them off with thread, then scrape and stitch the wound, and care for it until healed.
to make: lesse a l. At no time does it occur in the abdomen or elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its appearance, with fine roots and large stems; there are both small and very large ones.
And I saw a house where there were two stools that looked more like fungi than anything else, with no visible difference, and they were white, had fine roots, were split in half, and became damp from moisture.
I collected them and found the one to weigh eighteen ounces, and the other five ounces. Upon making an incision in it, you observe that the sickly are moist, and the flesh color of the lining is pale and moist with fine roots;
If the head is too wide at the shoulder, and be present with fire cautery. For in cutting often comes great loss of blood, and if it does not stop, then hasten to use cautery.
And if you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread and tie it as we have said, leaving it for two days.
and then the restraint, and do not stop tightening the thread until it holds the artery, causing some pain; but if the roots are large, beware of placing a cup on the stomach as well, however, you should cover most of the area with cups.
Then cauterize so it does not recur; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cover the torn flesh which is of hot color, poor sense, and lacking sight.
For it is an inflamed ulcer that needs to be treated, and I will come for the treatment of syphilis afterward.
When there is an acute fistula
If the appearance of gangrene comes from a wound or fissure on the abdomen and in some of the intestines, as it happens in other regions, or blood leaks from veins or arteries according to what is before, or inflammation.
And if it is due to the rupture of the sphincter and from the release of the intestine, then the appearance of the abscess resembles that of the body's flesh color, and it is a minor thing without pain, with various openings. And if it is due to the release of the intestine, then there are more diversities, and when one presses on its sides, so it pops back out again, and sometimes it becomes hardened, and greatly expands at the opening of the bath and requires strong work.
If it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and easily pressed with one's hand without force; if it is for blood, then the abscess appears large and hard, and embedded according to a quantity.
If it is for inflammation, it is soft to touch, and the workings so you observe if the appearance suggests arterial blood, veins, or inflammamen If it is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear as I have told you in my chapter on abscesses, for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is for the intestines or belly, it must be commanded that the patient soaks his leg in wine, and lies stretched out straight, then bind all around the belly. Then command him to lie as if sleeping between your hands, Then go around his body that you have laid out completely with all your bandages, Then they extend the dressing of the abscess above all along the great bone.
Then work on extending the abscess over the ligament, and place your finger inside it, reaching for the intestine. If you find that caught in the ligament, if you dislocate it, and push the intestine towards the right side of the belly.
And if you find the swelling, if it grasps at the sinew, and cut off the excess tissue;
t; (1 f:lue; the O’mce est aqui but whate tous.  byn or
Then straighten the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and let it remain open until healed, and expel the dead flesh. Or remove it when it is subtle and ready, then treat as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said.
Or remove it when it is subtle and ready, then treat as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said. And extract any blood or pus you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and bind it up.
Of a canker
In the division of cankers, we have explained how they should be treated with medicines and purging iron cures; let us now discuss the canker in its beginning stages, which requires great caution for treatment, and according to old texts, when a canker is present or can be removed like one that is found on the cheek, groin, or similar areas, it should be entirely eradicated from the start. However, if they are large and ancient, do not approach them as I have never seen any healed; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
And when it is present or can be removed as we have said, purge the patient of black bile once; then nourish them if they show signs of repletion, and prepare the patient by placing a linen cloth to make an incision; then pour on oil over all the wart(ies) or canker, along with hair and bone from every part without leaving anything behind; allow the blood to flow freely, pressing it firmly into your hand or any other material, and if bleeding occurs contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the vessel is sealed off; then apply a different remedy until they are healed.
Of dropsy. We have previously discussed in the section on dropsy its similarities, how assembly of water occurs within the body, signs of each type, treatment with medicines and those treated with iron; it is only so. Do not touch with iron in these two types: that is to say, tympanitis and hepatomegaly, for they are fatal conditions; therefore, when treating this dropsy condition called "eclites" with medicine, and the treatment does not help, check if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsebesides dropsy such as flatulence and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there is doubt. And if you see a patient of strong vitality, who only has dropsy and is neither too young nor too old, then work thus: Lay the patient right up against your hands and have the assistant press the belly from the outside pushing the water to the lowest part near the pelvis. Then take a spatula made of bone according to this form: And let it be a sharp cutting instrument divided into two parts, but not so long that it could reach the intestine when inserted and cause bleeding;
Then look to see if the dropsy is invading towards the intestines: if it must be that you make an incision above the elbow, three fingers' width from below on the hand; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then the cut should be on the left side of the elbow, three fingers' width; and if it is because of spleen, then the incision should be on the right, ensuring that no excess fluids flow there weakening its strength.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument and empty it, then lift your hand to remove all fluid between the skin and fascia just as when squeezing out an almond's worth or more; then pierce the fascia until the space reaches eight fingers wide, which is where the water vessels are, then extract this vessel, and here is the instrument of its shape: It resembles a finely crafted silver chain, made of copper or brass, with one small hole at the top part; on one side it has three holes, and on another two, and yet another one. The head is shaped as if cut like a feather, and this incision shape which scribes form their quill:
At the head above is the vessel, and when there are exudations to water, empty them onto the instrument; then drain out about one-third or half of it, for if you overfill too much in that hour, perhaps causing the patient's spirit to faint from pain.
However, according to the amount of its virtue, and based on what the patient's physical condition signifies, and their hair; then draw the instrument and hold back the water, which is now retained by the key that blocks the passage above the armpit, as I have spoken, pierce it in this manner; then repeat with the instrument the next day if you see the patient still suffering, and draw out a small amount of fluid.
For each day, and avoid leaving it too long but only a little water; if you have doubts about the patient, and you leave out much fluid, then treat with burial dust or hot sand, and by sweating excessively or bathing in sunlight, and drinking wine; and treat with dry medicines until healed, and cauterize above the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting fluid, as I have said before.
For the stopping of the vein At no time is a child born without foreskin on the penis, or if it is small, or not in its proper place. If necessary, it should be pierced as soon as possible using a very fine tube following this method: then insert a very fine thread into the hole, and tie and cut off after three to four days; when urine needs to come out, untie the knot, allowing urination, and then reset it; however, sometimes there is no need for re-knotting because urine flow prevents it from closing. If the foreskin is small, it can be treated as described by us and will enlarge. Those who do not have a foreskin in its proper place are afflicted because no child is born with the foreskin at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until their penis is lifted; and they cannot impregnate due to material that does not reach the testicles, which is an unfortunate condition.
And the manner of its use is that the patient lies supine with their head elevated and the penis lengthened like a feather's stem; and be careful to prevent excessive blood loss which often occurs, and if it does happen, apply the tourniquet for controlling bleeding, and treat the wound until healed.
From boils of the penis Many times come these swellings in the penis, and it appears as an ugly growth; there are malignant and benign ones; thus you must pluck them with a fine needle, then cleanse and wash all thoroughly, then apply cotton soaked in refined Egyptian ointment, curing with this ointment until they heal. And if the swelling is malignant, of pus color and depopulating, then you must apply fire cautery. After cleaning it, if the swelling is inside the foreskin part and partly outside, remove the swelling that is inward first; once it's removed, treat the outer part. Because when you heal them together, do not leave the head of the penis exposed to be pierced, as blackness and decay come upon its shaft causing pain; therefore, cover everything that is blackened and corrupted with honey and flour mixed from pomegranate bark and pear juice, then heal with other salves until it's healed.
If blood flow changes, arrange the lunar cautery in this way: The cauterization is composed of two parts together - that is, for changing blood flow and corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it must be that you insert or guide a wax cone into the penis so the patient urinates among them; and when the hairs are burned at the top of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised, occurring due to injury or abscess, then one should carefully scrape it with an instrument until the ligaments are released and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
And if it is a serious matter to address this, then one should carefully scrape with a spatula just the top of the penis and hair; afterwards, separate completely between them, and place a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water on it without delay.
Regarding circumcision
Circumcision is not the dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our will and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best and easiest work for health.
I say the ancients did not mention child circumcision, as they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have wanted the greater part of masters and authorities who performed circumcision within one day, and at all times, and in every manner; there were keys because there are two locks, and by chance a cap was placed above and below those locks.
Then it is regained by pressure, and the pain doubles, and with the redness which is half due to cold, the tip of the limb is not fully secure; and sometimes during the trimming of the nail, the steel escapes from them, causing wounds, and many times they come about without needing further treatment.
Of the mundification performed using force throughout the entire line of thread, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as the forces cut exactly both above and below.
For when you press your hand while cutting evenly throughout the entire thread of soul-tens; but let the thread be well stretched around the hide; and make it in such a way as if instructing the child, so that he understands you are only tying the thread around the rod just enough. Then release him to move freely in all manners possible; Then the member is straightened in your hands, and it regains strength in your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the strains; then put your hand on the rod and blow or shout, and pull gently until the head of the rod is raised; then cleanse thoroughly of any filth accumulated there; then tie the joint with a double thread, then secure it below .i. point to another notch; and hold as close as possible at .ij. points by the second tied area at the pouchet and indicator, connecting between the .ij. ties, then lift gently above the head and straighten the head of the rod.
Then the member is straightened in your hands, and it regains strength in your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the strains; then put your hand on the rod and blow or shout, and pull gently until the head of the rod is raised; then cleanse thoroughly of any filth accumulated there; then tie the joint with a double thread, then secure it below .i. point to another notch; and hold as close as possible at .ij. points by the second tied area at the pouchet and indicator, connecting between the .ij. ties, then lift gently above the head and straighten the head of the rod. Then allow the blood to clot slowly and sparingcurosis: then put powder on it and over the wound; .i. drapeil glued with a half of an egg cooked without water, mixed with rose oil, good-quality fresh olive oil, and let it remain until the next day, and treat again as necessary until it is healed.
The shape of the chisels for this procedure is as follows: the two heads should be held and sharp, and each head should be as large as a hand evenly.
The error in the procedure is when the core escapes during the incision; therefore, you must extend it with your fingernail so that the edges make an opening, and then cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, use pincers, and then cut.
And if it passes three days and what is beneath the rod is swollen, leave it until the incisions have healed, and gently scrape away; cut as you can move, but protect the part of the penis, for this will not cause any harm.
Treat then the sudden pain of powder wounds that we have discussed in our treatment of powders, and if one copes with it excessively causing it to go too high, do not harm; treat as we have said until it is healed.
Regarding urinary retention
The retention of urine is due to blockages such as stones or frozen blood, bowel obstruction, or similar conditions that we have mentioned in the section.
If the urine is not discharged, and you see that there is retention due to the stone lodged in the urethra near the bladastery neck, it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; then put his feet on the back, extend his belly towards the upper part of the back, and restrain the patient as much as possible. Then, one must strain the bladastery neck to expel the stone from above, so that urine is discharged.
And if it still does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must prepare extraction with an instrument called a "syringe," which is of this form: made of fine, lightweight silver wire, like that of a bird's feather; and the needle should be one palm in length and half as wide, and also very fine at its tip.
The manner of urine evacuation is as follows: take a double thread and tie on its tip a small piece of wool or cotton, then insert the end with the yarn into the syringe. Trim any excess yarn and push it up to the top of the needle, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and opium; have the patient sit on a seat, and apply oil-moistened wool and olive oil and water as needed.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches near the root of the penis, then wrap the penis over to the scrotum; next inject the syringe before reaching the bladard, and let the patient feel as if a venomous creature is coming up towards the empty thing; but this is not done in accordance with this order for it is twisted where it goes; then pull out the thread bit by bit from all the wool, and urine follows along the wool, then extract firmly, and conduct the urine properly.
Then restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and relax the patient.
Concerning diseases of the bladder.
When stitches or blood reaches the bladder, where swelling has accumulated, and you see it to be drained with waters and medicines, do so using all the instrument called "clamps", which is its form.
It is closed, and if at .iii. places: .ii. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the opening wherein to insert medicine so that it thoroughly fills the vessel without addition, and from which we can extract moisture, and replace when necessary.
And when you see to place your medicines in the bladastery, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and extract through the tube that is therein. You will drain the moisture using the bucket, then firmly replace the tube; if moisture enters it, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
And this is the form of subtle enema used to cleanse the bladder: so it goes.
And it is of silver or lead, and the head is higher; from one breast the ligaments are torn. Then take an inflated sheep bladder and insert the moisture you intend to use for enema, then tie between two breasts with a strong double thread, heat some of that moisture over fire; then introduce the top part of the enema into the penis, then squeeze your hand on the bladeroid as soon as the patient feels that moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle in it, piercing it evenly all around; then insert a strong thread through these holes, assemble the circle as one would with a leather bag, and put inside what oil, moisture, and water you wish to use, and tie up this instrument; and press just as if you had used a bladder until the moisture reaches the patient's bladeroid.
Of the stone
We have said in the division of stone removal methods and extraction with medicines; we have described the difference between stones caused by rain, and all signs, and which type of stone requires cutting; and for bladder stones, and for penile stones; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stones which are caused by the bladabladder often occur in children and it is a sign that the water of the bladder seems to flow as clear water; and there's an earthy smell, and the male suffers great pain in his penis, and he urinates many times before becoming enlarged; and with such stones, the foundations are greatly affected. It is much easier for children up until they have 4 years old to be cured, it is most severe in older men, and moderate between youths and elderly; and the treatment of those who have large stones is easier than that of those who have small stones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by an enema, in order to expel all filth from the intestines. For it often causes painful irritation.
Then take the patient by the hips and stand him up and move to one side, so that his bowels descend to the front of the bladeback, often rising above. Then have him sit between your hands properly positioned, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder slopes downward; then grasp it and touch its ends.
If you feel the bowels in that space, then hasten to cut it there. And if they do not come out immediately after touching, anoint your left index finger with oil from your hand and press into the groin of a young patient or your middle finger for an adult patient; and push it downward, grasp the bowel, and when you feel it on your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladaster. Then press near your finger, and release at the point where you see fit to cut.
The patient instructs the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands that he extend upwards with his right hand the joints, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the joints in the area where circumcision is made; then he applies the spatula copingly, which forms:
And they make between those who are between the joints and the foundation, not inwards but along the left armpit; and it is right on the stone, and your arms be close to or near the base, and the cutting shall be long enough so that it's wide below and narrow above, according to the amount of the stone, not too large.
occasionally press the arm that is at or near the base so it doesn't need work; and know there are parts of the stone where there are angles or edges: if they stick out; and those parts which are smooth like a ribbon, and round, from which the issue is easy.
For the hernia where there are angles and edges, make the opening larger; and if it does not pass, you must extract with tongs similar to a file at the head, in order to widen the hole so that it doesn't slip away; or place a subtle instrument curved at the top underneath it; and if you cannot manage thusly, enlarge slightly the opening of a pipe, and if the thing slips out, strain with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, first push the largest at the bladder neck, then cut through it, and the smaller ones afterward if there are any others. And if they are very large, you must suture them, making a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies or urine comes out through where the urethra cannot seal; however, do try hard at milking it out or breaking up with tongs until you can expel by pieces.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon'amoebic dysentery blood, and bandage it up, and place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water to cool the abscess; then dress the patient on his back and do not loosen the bandage until three days have passed.
And when you reset it, the place is greatly filled with oil and water, then treat with diaphoretic ointment and basil ointment until healed.
And if an abscess arises in the wound and festering and congealment of blood in the bladder occur, causing urine retention, which is known to flow without force along with the urine: then apply your finger in the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and cause inflammaturms.
Then clean the wound of water and dirt and debris, and aid in every way you can until healed; and it is necessary that all bandages used to dress him have his two thighs bound together, and apply ointments at the site.
If the stone is small and it is located along the path of the vein, buried deep within, and urine cannot pass; thus treat as I have described beforehand by dilating many times with this method for relief from straining during treatment. This has been proven to me.
Take an iron rod according to this shape and be at three pointed ends sharpened into one tip.
Then take a thread and wrap it around the vein below the stone: so that it cannot reach back to the bladastery; then insert the rod into the vein gently until it reaches the stone. Turn the rod slowly in your hand near the stone, bit by bit, as much as you can pierce through the stone on the other side; soon the urine will come out, and press your hand against what is left of the stone that remains inside the vein. It will be quickly broken, jumping with the urine, and the patient is cured.
If you are unable to do so due to any obstacle, then take a filament from under the pierced area and another above it, make the rod at the place of the piercing between the two ligatures, then extract the impaled object, remove the ligature, cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healthy.
Of women's pierced areas.
Often, piercing occurs in women's bodies, and if it does so infrequently, then the treatment is difficult for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and secondly, there may not be found a well-informed woman who will expose herself at the bathhouse, especially if she is chaste.
And the third way is such that sometimes you cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone from the man, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear associated with it.
And if it is necessary to do so, one must choose a skilled midwife and inform them at once, and if you cannot find such a wise woman, then no less than a highly subtle doctor; this presents an experienced and knowledgeable female in women's health or a woman who knows part of the art, and he commands that she carry out what you command regarding the investigation of the stone.
and carefully observe if the woman is a virgin; then she must place her hand or foot and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should constrain it out from under its place, and recommend that she put her hand or her left hand on the vagina firmly.
If it is dislocated, one must move it gradually from the area near the bladder to above, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then place a wedge at the abscess in the thigh against the inner knee where it becomes misaligned, feeling the abscess in that part; and do not move its joint over or under the abscess, and support it with a splint on the first small movement.
Then apply the blade along the thigh; if you feel the abscess, cut until the abscess can be removed forcefully, and know that there are many kinds of abscesses: they come in various sizes (small and large), shapes (sharp and blunt), lengths (long and round), some with heads. Understand these varieties to determine their nature.
And if the vein does not yield, then apply warm alum paste, and wait for an hour until it is cooled; then return to your work, until the abscess is strong enough, and have dressings that I told you in the removal of abscesses at home to help you with your task.
If the blood does not stop flowing, and it is from an artery that has been punctured, then apply powder at the site and strain with tapes and bandages, and do not start again on this one, and leave the wound alone unless the patient dies; then treat the injury.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the joint rests, return to your work as long as the wound is strong.
Regarding abdominal hernias.
Immediately after washing, it is nothing but a gathering of moisture or pus beneath the skin near the joints, which is contained within the vein; and it is called "pus," and never properly in the tissue of the vein, as one might think it to be another vein; and it is the leather-like substance between the white pus that we have mentioned earlier; and this does not happen at all.
And the production of this gathering is due to weakness in the joints, and that material is spread there.
And it never comes from impact on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a yellowish hue, or colorless without redness, or black, or white like water, and that happens more.
These are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is as we have described, white and faceless, then the boils are like short horns, and they do not open up because there is moisture all around them.
If it has moisture in the proper skin, then there are boils like part of an ox, and for this reason one thinks they are another horn.
If the moisture is between the skin of the horns and the white face, then it feels quite well; thus when you see to know the color of the moisture, try all around the entire region, so that the form can be seen as before. According to what comes after the intervention, judge according to what is within.
According to what comes after the intervention, judge according to what is within. And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be made whole to the extent possible and their body replenished; then let them lie on their back, with something slightly elevated underneath, and place many cloths beneath them.
then let them lie on their left side, and command the assistant to sit to their right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the kidneys;
s.
Then pierce the sac clean of water to one large opening and drain all the water, and then apply bandages, and raise the back upwards; and do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the sac; carefully cut along or in pieces evenly his thin bones, so that if you do not cut them skillfully, the water will return.
And if the skin bursts during your work, when you have completed the task of the sac, then join the two parts of the ribcage with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until they are healed.
And if you find the sac affected by another illness, it is necessary to tie up the veins that are hanging loosely, suspecting blood leakage; then cut through the ribcage completely and remove the sac, and treat it as we have described.
Et lorsque elle est réunie en deux parties ensemble, reconnaissez que ce sont deux branches; coupez l'autre partie de même manière que vous avez coupé la première, puis évacuez le sang et applique un linge trempé dans de l'huile sur la plaie.
and apply another clean linen soaked in wine and oil, then place it on the two parts, cover with doubled cloths, and tie securely according to this method.
Then take two more cloths and stuff them with linen rags in this manner and sew them together along the waistline of the trousers; one head is stitched to the base up to the back, and the other to the inner elbow; then both heads are tied on each side under the armpit.
Once medicine of this kind for a fire cautery in place of iron sawing, and you take a delicate cauterizing knife, cover the leather on the hooves, and heat it as we have said, so that the white sap contained within the water is revealed;
If you take the cautery according to this method and pierce the white sap at the knots, and the scraping with this delicate hot cautery:
And cover it in all ways that you can scrape off, until everything is removed; and ensure the flame does not touch the skin; and know that this work is more healing; and maintaining proper blood flow, and being mindful of saw cuts.
If any other condition arises that causes an abscess or bleeding or something else, treat the condition causing it as previously mentioned.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this treatment due to its severity, make a puncture as I have instructed you, and ensure that once you are well assured by the meanings we have mentioned, you proceed accordingly.
If the patient lies on a raised seat with his legs elevated; then puncture the abscess below all the surrounding tissue and place the incision lengthwise across the entire breadth of the body; and let it be wide enough so that all the liquid flows out.
Then place cotton at the location, bind it, and let the remainder of the water drain off; then treat until the wound is healed.
If the dressing does not allow water to drain out of the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a straw or the tool used for draining in hydrocele cases, as mentioned before; and slightly enlarge the wound so that the fluid returns, and heals after 3-4 months or so. When it has healed as described above, this will pass and the patient's days will be relieved.
Regarding abscesses in joints
In this part of the treatise on fears lie various arrangements, for it seems to me that what should be moved is left.
and I will tell you about the work and appearances of an abscess.
Thus, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the thighs; and this happens quite often.
Juda:e le tile. TTP� on la j'stane; if c the c the body with s ; they to remove by which:
The color of the abscess follows the color of the body; it does not cause pain, and is a serious abscess.
And sometimes it may be a frightening and painful abscess with a fearsome color, without any veins or blood vessels coming from us.
When it is caused by our arteries, it is recognized by the hot appearance of the abscess when you press against your elbebows. they he (1, or: Lord.
He who is affected by blood inflammation is recognized by his tendency to express pain upon touching the joints.
and can properly perform incision on this swelling, and on other chilblains; and that you cut the core of the cords, then raise the wound upward, and treat the threaded part with white ointment, and free the sutures from all parts of the wound.
de la JJLit on the bon lese 30s;t and they do (do: but.
If it is an artery or that which lies within the vessels, you must release it completely and roundly cover it with a cup.
If the birthmark is behind or in place, it must be covered entirely and remove the wool as we have said.
, and it the is rense avoir that you to cest l'orent li nt the tissage. And heuist la veill; car covient the beau coure est de, et as tu avie eont lesse est paris s’aveug, se vntet and lea les doth esprove not come cite le rengin luex et est ongli.
Of the abscess of boils
This is an encapsulated abscess surrounded by a wrapping similar to that of a lump, with the softening of boils. and it moves quickly in patients when it occurs;
The treatment of this disease is as much dreaded as the one described before.
And indeed we will tell of its use, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary for you to have the patient sit on a raised seat, then use a sling to support their arms over your shoulders. Apply this treatment to all vessels near the genitals and thighs, extending them fully by the master's hand.
Then apply a sharp cauterizing instrument across the area of veins broadly, ensuring they are exposed completely.
it e/her: does not too tot:
Then insert a needle where it has come to a point with a double thread and tie it at the first spot where you saw blood flowing, then securely fasten it to the opposite end. Then wrap around with a bandage tightly according to the body's length, and treat any corrupted sores.
Then heal the wound as you would with others or use a poultice, ensuring that neither of the limbs are restricted.
the same le plus is plek force (et t c:sont the ou i; bon. If the bone loses its nourishment due to incision of veins, they become dry and cannot be healed.
Of sore festering The treatment of this branch is by incision where festering occurs or extension under the belly in the area of the arms, because the intestines descend from that swelling to one side.
by thema the le corps are not so ; 31 pneo, and t. Mckus that m.
When the signs of a swollen vein occur, it happens little by little over long periods and does not come suddenly. And it is the same for boils that reach to the forehead because the intestine rushes forward.
When it comes to the signs of gangrenous sack severance, as sudden pain occurs at its onset and various abscesses appear near the skin surface, due to intestinal issue and gangrene in the body.
And at no time do they pass with the intestines, and are retained inside, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
In these cases of iron treatment by fear, it is necessary to remove them.
The manner of the treatment is such that you command the patient to reset the intestines into its place within the wound, if it can be pushed back in. Then place soothing substances on its neck between your hands, and lift the limbs gently.
Then extend the head upward and bandage all of the shafts of the thighs long. Then insert into the waist ligaments with hooks according to what you need for opening the wound, and be those that the bones can emerge from.
Then scrape off the sinew that is above the skin of the cords, as long as the white sinew remains uncovered on all sides.
Then insert your finger into the cord that is slack, between the white sinew which is above the skin of the head, and between the second sinew.
And separate the part that is behind the head, and between the second sinew; then move your right hand inside the core of the cords, extend the white sinew upwards with your left hand, and lift the head along all the sinews towards the waist. And command the minister to extend the mouth upwards, and remove what is behind the ligament.
And if there is any intestine wrapped or white and hard sack found, and if you find anything, blow into the abdinal cavity.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of nine strands, and insert it into the rear part near the sacrum, which is after the calf's skin; behind the tailbone, then tie off the veins that appear in strings until there are four strings. Then join them one on top of the other in a cross shape and bind the sacrum, which we have said is below the calf's skin, with a strong knot using two parts. Then wrap the strings around the veins and tie them with two parts so that none of the pus can escape except through the abscess. And apply the bandage according to the first lengthy joint, and after these two joints leave out the sack which is below the main knuckle of a finger;
Then for the rest according to the roundness that the joint carries; then cut into the part which is below the skin of the knuckle, as evenly and symmetrically as we have said before.
Then prepare rough wool in oil, and apply it to the wounds, and also place the bandage that we mentioned earlier. And at no time is the facial swelling cauterized as we have mentioned, after incision, due to fear of blood flowing out.
For this often happens and leave the bandage on until it is soaked through; and if it stays wet for too long, then remove with hot water as we have said.
then treat the wound further to ensure it heals perfectly clean.
line:
In this treatment, I have never seen anyone who dared to undertake the remedy with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made as if the treatment pieces are assembled like screws, in such a way that you bind the threads after sawing slightly above and below.
Then bandage with me and treat the abscess of what works therein until the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy again.
Never comes purging in anger, as we have said, and opens the eyes; and do not let any of the bowels come out at the corners, and if they do, it is little, and all returns within hours.
And in any case, if it lingers too long at this point, a wound or pus forms until the bowels are emptied.
And this occurs due to the extension of the sinew which is in the arm, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and filled with blood vessels.
and treatment is through caustic means, as we have previously mentioned; and never in this manner is it treated with iron.
by the cest et ce discret in le due to them: we and heal est le iste istreat done este de cesme this les, as s’en. Into the ici èsner, but d’est li de fuit en lits est ne la terre avec les maint, que lesd et celet;
And then extract the sinew that is beneath the skin where it protrudes, then take the thread and tie it over the visible sinew.
And press at the front of the belly, then cut out the two ends of the sinew near the head of the thread, and tie both together.
Then remove the thread head, and do not cover or extend anything else but sinew as I have instructed you in the treatment of the rectum's intestines.
; k by Hre some;
The face is swollen, has no appearance in the normal position, and the cautery moves easily at this spot, closer to healing.
For softening of the thick skin of the joints
Many times the skin of the joints is softened in certain individuals because their bursae are moisturized and appear transparent; when curing it, you must lay the patient on his back with the affected area exposed, and cut the overlying loose skin from its natural skin, then sew the two lips together along a single line or four lines firmly; between these stitches, treat as you would other wounds until they are healed, and extract any pus.
By means of cauterization
By means of cauterization, I say that cauterizations are described in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. However, they are necessary for two reasons: one, so the physician can respond when asked about their treatment; and another, because we often need to cauterize certain animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, rabbits, and other beasts. Thus, I say that cauterization is done in two ways: by attraction or by incision. In the method where we do it by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until its hoovamoisture softens and becomes pliable; then grip with your hand, making sure not to feel any tension when you release. For cauterization of a wart: one must grasp the skin around the wart with their left hand, then apply a suspending agent, and cauterize each point thoroughly. Leave no small spot or delicate veins that are on its surface; this method is similar to attraction as sometimes nothing remains afterward at the incision site, which may cause the animal discomfort leading it to desire release, so treat the wound until it heals completely.
Of hermaphrodites: Those are individuals who possess both male and female sexual organs or characteristics, often seen as a medical anomaly in old texts. The translation should address this directly while maintaining sensitivity to modern understandings of gender diversity. Here is the line-by-line English translation for clarity:
There are two ways in men: one where between the two testicles it is shaped just as a woman's nature, with hair and sometimes even urination; and the other way among women, having on its foreskin like a penis and two testicles. The treatment of men and women is that you treat all swellings together, and care for them as other wounds; in the second manner, those from whom the urine leaks through the skin of the testicles have no cure.
Of tendentiousness
Tendentiousness is a swelling on the natural part, so unpleasant to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment. It should be that you trim the excess of tendentiousness on your hand or elbows, gently clipping them off; and do not cut too deep, lest bleeding occurs, then heal with other treatments until it's healthy again; and another swelling at the mouth of the gall bladcuh, and its exit point, and possibly leaks severely, and is like a cleft. Thus they called the ancient "disease kowee." It must be clipped as we have said with tendentiousness, and heal until it's healthy again.
Of erraticness
Erratic if it is the nature of women not to be conceived, or if the genitalia are small; and it is innate by birth, or due to illness that arises therein; or it's because of a close union, or subtle lechery or espionage, and it happens throughout the entire body, or in limbs, or elsewhere; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly offspring. The knowledge of this condition is by observation of the bile. If discharge occurs frequently, whether at both testicles or penis. If it's from a subtle lechery, and there are two pus-filled lesions, act quickly and do as follows: have the patient lie on their back with legs spread apart; then place the two fingers together firmly over the discharge area until all infection is cleared; afterwards apply wool or lint soaked in oil to the area daily until it heals. And if the lechery is hardened and deeply ingrained, you must scrape away the tainted skin resembling a holly leaf. If discharge results from heat, suspend it above an onion and cut off; then apply medicinal ointments such as dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of frankincense; next dress the wound with a wide gauze bandage so that it cannot close; then continue treatment in this manner for an extended period. Finally, prepare a linen tent to cover the area until healed. And when heat occurs throughout the body, follow these steps unless there are festering sores present. For on festering and inflamed sores in the groin, do not touch them directly.
Inflamed if it is swelling or inflammation within the genital area: Do Not to be touched directly; follow these steps for treatment as long as there are festering wounds.
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that occur without customary conditioning, and when hemorrhoids become old they turn into ulcers; and we have already discussed in the division their appearances, signs, and symptoms, and I will now say those which receive cure. One should say that hemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are fully exposed within the anus, cannot be felt except by iron treatment. Those that can be felt at the mouth of the anus may be treated. Therefore it is necessary to place the woman in a cold house, then extend the ulcer with forceps, remove its roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood such as dragon's blood and incense, among similar things; after that apply bandages around the area for an hour, then place her in cold water. If bleeding occurs there, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegnate peel and gall nuts along with other substances; then give her wheat flour mixed with honey and almond oil, and make it into a plaster on her back. And if it stings (hurts), that is good. If not, apply blisters to the back and thighs without iron, then take lamb's wool soaked in plantain or aglentier juice with wine vinegar, and apply it there. And when the abscess rests, treat the area with ointment until it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" turns red, and feels rough like a head, so cover (treat) as I have described the ulcer; then cure until it becomes health
Abscesses of the anus
Many ways of abscesses come in the thighs, such as chancre and pierous abscess, herpes, itching disepertions and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, along with many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, I must say about this treatise on the hot abscess which comes in the thighs, which is not among those that harden; and if you want to learn about the work of iron, observe whether the abscess is swollen and red at its beginning, accompanied by heat and fever. Then do not rush to puncture it, but allow the pain to be soothed as long as possible; then make the patient sit on a small stool, with two small pillows where he can rest his head, and place him with his back straight and bring together the parts of the limb that are away from the leg; let his thighs be spread apart, and put your arms under his hips, firmly binding them with good linen. Then direct the instrument toward the right side ribcage, and prepare the tool used for working inside the mouth of the abscess, after which comes its form; it is necessary that when you see this tool ready, insert a probe into it to determine how deep the abscess cavity goes so that nothing from the instrument enters more deeply than it should without causing discomfort to the patient; if the swelling is larger, cover the depth of the abscess with a cloth so that the swelling does not cause pain. And place the horn of the tool above it; and moisten the instrument.
When childbirth occurs: observe whether it is a normal delivery or difficult; provide comfort and assistance to the mother during labor; ensure cleanlinees tools and surroundings for safety of both mother and baby; assist with breathing techniques, position changes, and pain relief as needed. After birth, support the mother in bonding with her newborn, initiate breastfeeding if possible, and monitor their health closely.
Firstly, it is necessary for the midwife to know the natural figure of childbirth and signs when she sees a woman in labor, desiring to smell her urine; then quickly proceed with delivering the baby; thus you can tell that these births follow the natural figure, and there is an issue at its head, with the second coming along with it; and when you see these signs, gently press on her belly so the child comes out soon; for as long as they descend towards their head, the second one follows, and waste matter in their excesses are easily expelled by proper cleanliness; and those who come otherwise do not arrive naturally. For sometimes it comes upon its feet, or to the body or shoulders, or hands, when coming out of her belly or bottom, or even turned perhaps around her neck, and other malicious figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as how one should help them.
If the child comes out through its head naturally, and the mother is laboring intensely, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a stool or women hold her; and bring forth from nature's ointment or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then place between the midwife's thumbs the small spatulous substance in this form: :t: the quisst:
From the dislocation of a child on its feet When a child comes onto their feet, they must be lifted up. and then gently turn them little by little until they are level.
the pies sus, and not to a vile:
If it reaches as far down to the buttocks, then he instructs to press, and there is choking from congestion. If it goes further, if God wills so.
And if it is not as we have said, if it turns a little and a little more, until it is according to the natural shape. heu's. Morgueil ougt they are not enst;
And if it does not come as we have said, take masticated wax, and oil of sesame, and molten resin, and all ground in a single mortar; And apply this oil inside and out of the woman's body with it. Then hold it at rest until its bones and joints.
When it is softened from being dislocated, then apply a leech bandage and reset it back in place, leaving it for an hour. Then make the patient sit on a stool, then induce sneezing and strain his mouth and nose, and press his belly lightly, as now he is vomiting. From an issue with the child's knees When a child comes to this state, put your hands on them gently but firmly.
From the dislocation of a child coming out wide with one hand extended during delivery. I require designing to bring back the hand: if heal iste:
If it cannot move, then make her lie on a bed with her legs straightened out.
Then attend to the swelling that I have described;
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, then study how to restore the hand; And so that they can; Do nott; cannot be aumie en sonde the t (not le et de ait the et e ne leg 1 ce; and sesse est unt, and heum:l; if youg fe as f ire dit lesse que la pe c.
Of dislocation of the child on its neck, with hands spread apart, and face turned towards the mother's back. Then you should instruct the bailiff to wash his hand, then gently turn it little by little and wrap lightly;
And when it is equalized, if you apply the softening herb and oil as we have said, then command that they move little by little.
And when you have done this, make it sit on a chair, and command that she sighs; then let her snort. In the same manner for the entire second procedure
In the same manner for the entire second procedure When it comes in this way to all the second procedure, you must dress the splint on your finger, until the moisture is dried out;
.
Then insert the child inside, as long as you have put them correctly, and instruct the woman not to move at all.
From the outcome of bones. (prent that them so quist theye; that the de les t not s covette cite the: Two are strange things, and they do not live, if given no name.
I know this: that they multiply greatly, and are driven away by the syphilis which causes them, connected to swelling.
and no time do they come out naturally like normal wounds, as we have said.
the iniquere de n’s ; and m so t. Tum se thouging s thate et l’t un (btresse: if you know they son les que la nde byttir, et prits le no ils ne faire of s a. And make thus as it proves beneficial to move for health. Of many children
Of many children Of more than five times formed in the measurement of child, and are made up to twelve, and all the same.
And it is necessary for the barber to know everything, as sometimes similar things happen. And do according to what it requires.
le parti clow.
When you treat the woman with a dead child or womb as I have described in the section, and there is no labor, and you are forced to proceed by hand. if it is necessary that you ascertain whether the woman is of sound health and has no injury or fears death.
if it is required that the woman be supine on her back with her head tilted down and legs raised;
et the minister tears off two parts, or whichever is attached to the bed so that it may not be treated with the child'hemorrhoids.
Then rub the mouth of the hemorrhoids with a mixture of oil from almonds and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and this musk. Then gently bind it up with hemorrhoids; then ensure that they are tied down in place at the site of occurrence.
And take care if a child is too large to descend below its head. If you place the onions in its eyes or neck or mouth or under the palate or from the beard or cheek or near the groin.
And dislocation is upon, if the bandages or beside them or in the back or behind or forehead to the eaument d'on and near the ears. Or on the side of it or forehead before the cheek or for ache or behind with after the lice or at the mouth;
And it is proper that you tie the sling to his right hand and place the support between his thumbs of the left hand, and push gently with the whole hand until he reaches the vacant position we have mentioned.
then attach to another sling, or whichever you have at hand, so that the extractions are equal.
And then extend evenly by moving from one side and the other so they may move outward, and be provided with bone pins to hold them in place, as shown by their shape.
And if a part remains, where the patient may join any of its two oil joints and insert it into that part, while treating the other part.
And if there are none left, place this pin or another one higher up and do so until it protrudes all the way through.
le est and; (or, a certain, such as p;mz, s, then, so tizz that thounds if they Md; If it is necessary, wrap around a cloth so that it covers entirely.
Then bind the wound on the plantar joint or ankle and thus it is necessary to do so in the other hand as well, using two fingers.
When the head of a child is large and difficult to deliver during birth, or if it has an abnormal presentation with its forehead positioned first. If it becomes necessary, you should insert the spatulum between your two fingers and gently guide out the head and amniotic fluid. or you use the instrument called 'almidach', from which it is formed with instruments or chapsticks that come afterwards. (Note: This translation may not be entirely accurate as "almidach" and its usage are unclear in this context.)
s by m tounceobust it's, the ORLus marquer contte ; (O; And then treat with tongs for pulling bones;
And if the head jumps up again and is forcibly held in place, it should be split until the moisture that caused the dislocation has been released.
And if it cannot come out, cut into pieces as you are able to move them.
And if it is swolebed in the abdomen or below the ribs, you must pierce until the moisture flows out.
And if the child is on his feet, then there is slight attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the marrow is light.
And if he is strained in the belly or udder, it suits that you stretch with a cloth wrapped around his hand. so be and for not at est to ready they de l’mie: ici e and the bles as is.
If another limb is affected by bone disease, and the shoulder remains dislocated. If you pinch his thumb at the base of the hairline, and pull it up to the root of the hair. nd, it m s s a bentre la; c that:s; t (et ne :Ct les they must be said u; do not d the same l’sis.that is the bo: 5. If you can have in Latin and ous lines.
If the mouth of the muscle is retracted due to an abscess that has arisen there, do not attempt any treatment. Rather it requires applying moist and fatty substances; And the treatment includes placing plasters, as well as softening with water and moistening.
the t ous: 4t sofende as he la ou m. If yous de nus that gill est qu�z.
And if one cannot manage it, let the bone be cut into pieces, leaving nothing of the periosteum.
And once you have done as we have explained above, let them come to the wound is made as described by us.
When changes of blood occur, let it be placed in a tight strain, and apply other remedies.
And I saw a woman with twins inside her womb; one was dead and the other alive, which she cut loose. cail as it: MID and noit. If yout theme Middle.
I was called to treat it, and pondered for a long time, unable to heal the wound.
I applied strong attraction forceps, and extracted one bone initially, followed by others after some days. I was greatly concerned because the belly had no bones.
dont est the in; do not too that gaspits ou les s.
I cleanse the wound, and train hands to hold an object, until they reach a better point. And after a long time so, it settled back to its place for a while.
And I have found this chapter useful because when the master encounters something strange, he knows how to assist it effectively.
Double resetting of dislocations back to their place.
Here follows the form of the pressure point, where one finds the books; and at two corners there are two heads of two ligaments. line. If you s c’mstur; the are a:
And let the mouth of the club be two inches wide, and the edge of the trees one inch, and long half a palm. And between the two joints there should be two adjustments of this same club, which are firm in both, half a palm long or slightly more.
And these two adjustments are bent into the mouth of the club to open when one turns the two horns.
line tre font:Saint marits tignement on t antre ce tr*t; and c And it is of two heads and two dislocations, as you see, one palm in length, and two hands wide;
and when you see the entire instrument opened, make the woman sit on one bed with her feet propped up and legs elevated, the li poil s. Then work with your hand on the entire instrument, as you did with the pincers equally, according to the amount that opens the mouth of the burrs, until it does what they desire.
This instrument is all forged alike and of various appearances; and when the masters have prepared them, the work proceeds more swiftly and to greater heights according to their quantity.
Do not doubt the instrument that you have prepared it, for its needs are by no means excusable.
When the secondine is held during childbirth, it is necessary to instruct the patient to retract her leg, and then exert pressure on the condition, and strain her hands towards the mouth and nose. And if she falls from this, that's alright.
If not, take a jar or pot, and open the lid. Then put in herbs that can open the mouth of the childbirth passage such as chamomile, rue, anise, lavender, chicory, and fenugreek.
All these herbs, or any of them, boiled in water over the fire; then put a spout or funnel into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the cauldron.
and let it stew until the vapors enter the cauldron; then make them sneeze, as we have said. If there is a relapse of the swelling. the t. (fint tounce that s, and by;
When you wish to perform the secondary reset; and once it has been located, grip and extend it gradually straight, so that the muscles do not contract during extraction. But move it slightly to the right and left, and then turn it; it will come back into place and dislocate again.
And if the edge of the muscle is torn or stretched, we have said to treat by inducing sneezing, and smoking herbs.
f: bones the resont the ar zhe : ous (tard par la liza mermis belle. The right ou byzbui and.
But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the testicles be tied to the thighs of the woman, then enema with medicinal oil by four-fold pharmacist.
If it swells and returns, it will come back stronger; however, when it does so, if foul smell comes to the stomach and head, it causes nausea in the patient.
If necessary then smoke-baths with cloves for this: none of the old have tried smoke-bathing with sorrel and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fans the woman for holding back the flowering and secondary growth is this:
And it appears similar to a vase, placing its pointed head in a recessed area with the eyes wide above the flame.
and there are fumigations over the coals until they are spent, then another begins anew.
c so that lesse que la ou not le t;
Many children are born who do not have the proper foundation of wisdom, but rather it is hollowed out by subtle deceits. Therefore, it is necessary for the physician to pierce that deceit at its root and not just scrape off the surface scum, and take care that he does not touch the sore.
Then apply a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil to it, then apply an ointment until it is healed.
by  fairet s the a bo: MRIse bonign tant that son les line; and c’s il ac fu: Then they may be ma;
At no time does this swelling from the suturing of a wound or abscess occur; one must dress that suture as needed: follow our guidance on using linen bandages.
From the fistula at its base. Fistulas that originate from below the foundation are swollen and grow larger than those near the base or within two parts of space,
If there is an abscess or more; and if that swelling is old, treat it, and use a particular kind of moisture like fine powder or subtle ointment.
And these abscesses are not often present; and they are known by what comes out of it or evacuation when the patient experiences vomiting, and sometimes with feverish symptoms.
And if there are abscesses that extend up to the bladder, and towards the middle of the penis; they reach the hip joint, and down near our genital area.
And thus one finds a persistent pus flow at the foundation, not mere pus. Et c'est que tu enfonces ton doigt index ou pouce, et mets une aiguille subtile d'acier ou de fer dans le furoncle quand il n'y a pas de torsion.
Eсли есть изгиб, то он вводит нежное пластиковое кольцо или, например, лошадиную шерсть, пока чувствуется ремешок или волос на вашем пальце.
и если вы не почувствовали его, и он не причинил изжоги или вздутия, как мы сказали ранее. Make sure it does not pierce at all; if you are too hasty, do not use a curette.
And when the fistula is close to the bladder or urinary tract, if it allows urine to pass through and cannot be healed by medicine.
If it is pierced near the hip joint, then pus flows towards that area. by.
And in these persistent fistulas there is no strong remedy but painful work, and the folly of foolish men who meddle with them.
In that which is neither persistent nor old, with hope of healing by iron as I have tried.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their buttocks, and keep their buttocks angled towards their belly. Then create a tent of linen or cloth if there is twisting, until you know where the tent goes.
If the patient feels discomfort in the lower region, it's necessary that you insert your index finger there,
. If you do not reset it properly, it cannot be healed.
In any case where proper treatment can be administered effectively, but this happens rarely.
and the aid that is given should be to carefully apply the fine cautery according to the size of the abscess as previously mentioned. the lisit est en; and to de, do not;t that it ise bonte etre they should you may also aremiel. And if you must be m in-fie as heum: That they s n'I don’s ond cide la douzer il’l q hen
And then treat torn tendons with a poultice until they heal, then the treatment of salve soothing and binding them.
If it is thus sound, it is well. If not, there cannot be any other soundness.
And if it is tried between them, and does not penetrate to the bone at its base or foundation, and there is placed between your two fingers an ample covering of wax or sycamore wood, and you see the fistula through where the covering darkens. If the end of the fistula is reached at its beginning, and then covered before touching it, apply the cauterization afterwards, until reaching the top of the wound.
this.
And if blood is won, cutting between you and the vein; cauterize with fire or medicinal oil.
For the fire cautery is effective for two things: that is to say, the hardening of displaced cartilage and the coagulation of blood and removal of moisture.
then the cleansing of dirty bandages with butter or ground oats, until they become damp, and thereafter let the cartilage heal in the bow.
s; t: ça mardroit.
When it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes near to the very foundation, and is distant from the body, you may touch your thumb or wrist, and examine it.
If you feel the tenting (swelling), and between two are the sheath or shaft or glans, or it is near to be cut, if there is no sign of certainty but only faith and hope, through the ministrations of one of the three methods:
line J. And s they n’re a
Do not go too far with it, that you do not cover the support holding the foundation, and let evacuations come through as nature allows. Then treat it as we have said;
Then treat it as we have said; By chance if you become clean, or remove the covering and clean it after being covered near the foundation, or by means of a tool prepared for this purpose; Then mendicant the flaw which is within the wound, as much as you see.
Then study to heal the wound and maintain the fistula in the part behind the foundation; if it were an easier task for the patient.
And never are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it lies close to the foundation near the skin above. the former est not And it inserts a twisted thread of two, and wraps the dressing around all the thread into the abscess until it reaches the top.
If [the arrowhead] is stuck at the edge of its base shaft, then draw out the thread from that pierced one and tie your needle or shaft.
and pull the thread from its head, and join the two heads together, holding them tightly, and leave it for one or two days;
t.
Then treat the wound until it is stitched up and healed.
If the abscess does not burst, make it pierced in every way that you can, if it is not too hard.
For do not attempt to pierce the abscess if it is too firm, and then heal it as we have said until it becomes healthy again.
The shape of the spatulum for making an abscess is very sharp and one-sided, cutting. On one hand not, for this is what cannot be coped with as should not be done, as you see here.
In many ways: some are within the foundation like tree sap, and there are small ones as well as large ones, and in it blood is contained. and if there are one or more, they erode the foundation as well as the top of the foundation; however, those that erode have little moisture.
and therein lies some yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the body's color.
the bo-bla. If it is quick, and you pinch with pliers or your fingernail, then catch the root of its tendons.
and if the nails cannot hold due to their moisture, they are taken with thread or cotton or a piece of chamois leather. and pull out the splinters with your fingers, then bind them, and dust on hot powders that are in place of cautery. the final; 2t m.
If the foundation cannot come out, then enemas the patient with stinging and harsh cleansers to wash what lies at its base, so it may exit openly.
If a malady persists, and the thread is very close to the foundation, then the treatment should be light. And that you grip them with your fingernails or pliers, and cut the edges, then treat as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear iron incisions.
the 3; the se ; < kor tous; by it is n'sirel’s est en tist; or un: And if it is too wide; and straighten the thread firmly, then trim the thread, and extract the needle, and do so for all others, leaving a bit to drain excess blood.
Then place upon the foundation a gauze soaked in rose oil or wax, and put on the bandage, instructing the patient to rest.
And let it remain until it heals, and when they are cured, apply ointment and other remedies until it is healthy again.
Doubly firmly and solidly at its foundation Many times it often becomes firm in the intestines and through natural constriction, especially when the disease is old and medicines do not help.
If it is necessary to remove the skin from a gangrenous spot or fingernail above, which does not allow for moisture. de lik and se cumand the issue they so far, and heal et ould that m. And if you must be a quant elles, but also:
If it cannot heal, resume the scraping more forcefully than before until it is sufficiently raw and be singed. Then treat until it becomes healthy again.
And the trembling A mouse is a small creature with feet placed before the body, and it goes very often.
and it is not caused by coldness; one feels it just like a tremor and spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is to take a feather from a goose's wing or a large crow'n feather and place that on the tremor until it covers all around the red circle. Then turn your hand around to encircle the entire tremor and grasp it firmly, and extract its roots from their source.
And if you see this tremor as a spider or iron of this form, and be subtle from below and crosswise above.
Do not feel it, but keep hold of both [sides], and squeeze them; and if you see the tremor, then causticate it as before or with a fire cautery.
loin. At no time is an enema made of silver or copper, or melted lead or metal wax; and at no time are any of these small and large suppositories administerebit according to those it is given to.
Thus, what is administered in the treatment of children who are weak and painsome are small [suppositories].
The shape of the small and large enemas is as follows when broadly applied or if the belly is bound according to this manner: [translation continues with detailed instructions on how the clistere (enema) is administered, but specific details are not provided in this excerpt].
And it has a distension where the belly is twisted, as you see, and the head pierced inside; and have two holes on one side, and on the other side one.
And it is that the belly or the stomach holds the remedies of a bladder from an animal or parchment paper, and be pierced entirely through both holes.
And between each hole, there is a gap, then insert into these holes a strong thread of twisted wire for half or more around it, and stitch the belly as if it were an uterus. When the medication is within, take it out with a strong thread in front of the instrument, then enema; and this is the circular form.
And let the medication not be too hot or too cold, and apply it to the head of the enema with oil, butter, or similar substance, then pour in gently.
Then the minister holds the enema with both hands until it is fully emptied, then extracts the enema, and lifts the patient's legs to the chest.
t, she; The Sce;
And if you administer the enema when the patient is suffering from a bowel issue, and the medication quickly leaves, it may recur until they are well again.
And if hemorrhoids are present at their foundation or abscess, the enema should be as subtle as for a child;
This is the form of the subtle suppository through which the tube must be restrained:
Wounds
As we have said in the section on wound care, now we will discuss treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion:
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and where they are located, and why they are made.
The things by which wounds are made include piercing of stones, cutting with spears and knives, or from lances or clubs or arrows, or similar objects.
according to the places on the body where they occur, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, or head, or leg, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs.
;
When a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from a stone strike or similar causes, for the skin is wholly torn and the wound is large. and if you slightly suspect an abscess of great heat: quickly clean the head area itself if there is blood from the wound, and place a bandage opposite to the affected part.
and avoid giving the patient an excess of wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not wish to fasten himself, his flesh should be thinned out, and he should not drink wine or partake of meat.
And place it on the wound, if an abscess comes there, apply a well-milled cloth soaked in oil or with a steeped wine.
And if there is no abscess, then apply it to the wound, if it is fresh and all its blood has not dried out, and it's not moved by air or dust, here's some powder that I will say about later.
seslgris by cxob;
And if the wound is large like a sword's grip and similar, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, then join them by suturing, just as I will describe for abdomnent injuries, with suturing.
If the wound is exposed to bone and swollen, and holds only slightly, then bind it; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hardened skin in place of leather. And commands the patient to eat large meats as if cooked grains and fowl, and similar things.
And if you find pus or rot without touching the bone, cover it completely and pour hot water on it, then treat it.
And if the artery is in the wound or vein without a cord and cannot be tied with medicine, cut it off as needed; and if you find dislocation, tie it up with thread. If this does not benefit them at all, then you shall burn it with a hot iron.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy; it is that you place this powder which has been mixed with mercury (arsenic).
And the method of preparing the powder is as follows: take one part incense; two parts blood from a male lamb or doe. Three parts live copper and fine the powder thoroughly. And clean the wound, and strain firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood.
And then bind well and allow to heal freely if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healthy again.
t les mare;
If the arrow has moved the wound, especially if it is still there, do not put any of this powder.
but place on some digested ointments or crushed wheat flour made with water and honey, until it forms a paste. that you of disaster the pies iste de lignées en choflors: anne les draper sonde ici avec flour with honey, they to dry bone and sus ce oint. That d on eau a farme d'soun le soe, though heu, butt;
When a bone fracture occurs with the wound, if it is small, extract with fine forceps.
And I will tell you about this after head fractures.
Of the wound to the neck
If a wound comes or in the neck and it is simple, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or arteries of the neck are severed.
by the de the in the pain and igne: And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the essence of the veins is cold, and their continuation with the brain is high.
but the medicine must be boiled as in gentle water and mixed with rose oil, then cooked similarly in gentle water. the tissants bone can't I would not the distance; and igne be it. Let it.
And if the wound is large, then bind and bandage it, then treat until healed.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce or cut below them.
and if the vein is swoln, and blood flow occurs, open it, bind it, and cauterize as needed.
they. s. If it comes out through the bone of the throat, do not touch the throat but reset according to its natural shape. and then let it heal naturally without any movement, then treat with poultices until it is well again.
and if the wound has affected the bone, you must attend to it accordingly. by; 1. If so e-cur theyre Jn: they must be noit; theta on line: b:ll that d. They shouldnts or and if a: s; do not le m t but n’t for the same. And let it be dissevered and aligned properly;
And if the wound is fresh, apply powder upon the powder I have mentioned. And if there is bone and a sinus in the wound, treat it as I described in this chapter.
t;t:s.
If it is a wound from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, then examine whether the patient shows signs of shock before they fall unconscious: understand that the wound is deadly.
If it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood intact, do not apply the powder in the first hour nor bind it so that no blood flows out. and let him vomit, and give water to the patient. But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
And if you do not have ointment, place a piece of clean cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days, or longer. lfount witht la; And when you see the proper alignment of the bones, know that the wound is healed. Treat with tent-like dressings and other remedies until it is safe.
And if it cannot heal and worsens, then know there is an abscess; treat as one should.
to the t:
If it is large, with stitches; and if small, with powder, and if embedded in the bone, and parts need to be removed, so treat the wound and pull out the splinters if necessary. And if not needed, let the wound heal by scabbing over, to facilitate the extraction process.
and for other wounds on other limbs, make judgments as we have stated.
Doubtless rupture of the belly
The disruptions of the belly are great, medium, and small.
From such a large wound, neither the intestines nor their nerves are affected, hence no infection occurs within.
And suturing is easier, and never worse than a small wound compared to a large one.
Therefore when resetting it multiple times, if not done gradually, the intestines are moved in. For this reason, the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, causing them to move more easily.
and so the membrane wound is moved, causing the intestines to be relocated to their place among the others.
And know that the treatment of an abdominal wound is by four means:
The two common suturing methods occur in abdominal wounds:
contes.
And anyway they are more properly with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and there's nothing from the intestines out. and generally it can be done by one of these two ways: heal; c, et s that f in the skin soignant (1 said rumpard est par mar. Or because the intestines are swoln by the cold.
And when it is cool, soothe it in this manner: Moisten a sponge or a soft cloth with warm water only, s that heal: And when the intestines swell, they are pierced until emptied.
and it has never been done with constipation before, and it is necessary to empty in order to deflate.
And when you see the swelling subside, if the intestines are cooked soft or tough and of poor quality, ond.
If it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument used to treat bunions.
The first treatment is pulling that which is twisted. That none should cut without great necessity or need.
And this is the swelling to split open:
If the mass enters into the hollow area without being expelled, and you see its shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails jump out, If reset according to its natural form in its proper place, If possible, for this is movement.
When the wound is wide and located in the part below the belly, If it becomes necessary to make the patient lie on their back, and raises its legs higher than its head; And if it is in the part near the belly,
And similarly if the protrusion of the belly is in one of the two parts, Then make sure that the affected side is raised higher than the other;
And thus one must treat as I describe for large wounds and those of medium size.
And for small wounds, use what has been prescribed.
then you shall have between your hands. A minister of pity who shaves the entire rut into his hand, And join the lips; And this is the common method for suturing,
And this is the common method for suturing, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the width of the wound, Then leave at the head of the wound two spaces apart, and insert an awl where there is a strong thick thread. and pierce through the two layers of skin with two points of a bodkin.
First, strain a double thread around both points of the needle. Then immediately bring together the two edges of the wound.
And then leave a space for two fingers, and insert another needle; so e s. And continue to do so according to what you need with the needles. Keep the entire wound tightly bound.
and keep it closely with needles and in place, gouves entaques cauterie, as ours is often, a lons; et li mettiez the incision de bones. For fine needles cover the entire wound, while too thick ones cannot enter well. Therefore, they must be of medium size.
and one must not insert needles too far from the wound or into the flesh.
So they do not cover or affect the wound before the suture.
Then cover the heads of needles so they do not prick and bother the patient while sleeping. And place tents or linens at the tips of needles to keep them steady. And let it heal until the wound is well joined.
And this manner of stitching with needles is more beneficial in small wounds. they be heu que the de that ete le les plaited. Which it done and more place as them doe at a to have dislocation, and their not the l’oeus isnées themt with ormour can make the teeth in such are many. Please give to lais so as onct.
The second method is common, And it is that you join the two heads of skin with the two edges of the sinew together using a needle, or if there is strong thread available. and when you have cut through all four joined ends,
and when you have cut through all four joined ends, If you reset the dislocation at the part where you began, using the method of wrapping like cloths.
and place space between each stitch as wide as a small finger.
this stitching should be on the bone,
byz C'cznaisside p le t, as a dislocation de la uche:
who was afflicted by a knife wound and the wound was more than one span wide and it involved two intestines that were each more than a span in length,
the is no it to a pe's nott that donnez I returned his intestines as it had been xiv hours since.
and the wound was sewn up until xv days, and healed, becoming healthy.
And the physician judged that he would die, but it was a miracle.
et did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and placed two layers of linen above the wound once a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
le CARA. Thist on lesse a0 ; Ou are that isnt the in English by anye pe mane  (prisso t:che:
When it has perceived the edge straight on, if the head is dislocated by such injury or where you have stuck in the needle.
and make a slit from another side to the interior of that which protrudes outward;
and the purpose of this suture is that you sew as the furrier makes the furs, That he to lisst; EST Sara; that c vuns quill butt; The t the b they it se's. If you not just.
The second manner of suture, which Galen refers to properly,
if it is such that unites the two parts naturally together, and apply one of its face to the other face, in such manner:
. And leaves both shoulders slack; Then turn the needle, and make it pierce through to that inside part. As to two shoulders slacked.
Then perform the percision of both sides down to their innermost parts, in two other shoulders that are opposite each side.
And it is therein a method of suturing and the most common one.
; If you can  (et bruendroit et's
One must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread.
And one should insert one needle from one side and the other from another in the manner of those who sew belts.
And know that when the rupture is within the abdomen, by gue la pe ctura:
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds.
and it is so when you find the fresh wound fully supplied with blood, thus making its edge moveable. if return the intestines, and their edges; then apply powder soaking in fat,
if return the intestines, and their edges; then apply powder soaking in fat, . And they cut the skin, and let it heal softly, and apply the ointment; Then treat the wound as with others, until it is healthy.
and if you do not have medicine, then apply something like this immediately when it begins to turn red or swell: wool, old cotton. And move (it) two times a day until it is healed.
For you have no need for other medicines in certain conditions when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound is communicating with major limbs, lesse; And place it between the angles, and under the collars;
If he feels pain or swelling at the joint, and it often occurs, if blood in the wine enemas is blackened, and mainly where the swelling comes up to the intestines;
and piercing into tissues, and stools indicating that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
 And it is for the swelling of veins that they are, and for the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to nerves.
And if the sliver jumps from the wound, it is reset just as the intestines are fresh.
. For there are veins and arteries;
then cut out what is between the ligaments. and place two pieces of skin hanging from the part above the wound as far downward as possible to facilitate removal when the sinews break, and the wound pouches.
them: it is f, which cannot be the following them if not the unt;
When the intestines are inflamed, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in certain cases,
because I have seen a man troubled by an upset stomach from a thrust of a spear;
And there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and was invaded and became a fistula, with discharge and bloating occurring as a result;
I provided treatment according to what was possible, and persisted in delicately removing it until it became clean, and the ulcers healed.
And when I saw it join together, I doubted that the patient did not have pain in his belly. and there was no harm present, but they remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and experimentalists say that when there is a small wound within the intestine, it must be tied in this manner: by them. And when the flapping is open at the mouth, place it between the two lips,
Then apply another bandage in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully healed.
And cut the wound. If such a head injury occurs into the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient,
And if one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine.
And in such manner: s. And then wrap at the head of this thread a fine flax twisted cord. Then insert the thread through the needle, and sew with intestines, and stitch in the suturing.
And this method of frantic stitching is not further than according to the way of trust and hope;
he; That le.
of a fistula, or if she may be He says that any wound or abscess, when it ages, should all be called "fistula". and especially if it is raised and begins to swell.
as a. And it is as if lifted like a bird's feathers;
And neither ever clear or thick string; At no time too much, and at other times sufficient;
And I spoke earlier about wound healing in the section on wounds, that any untreated wound will not close and: ougt they aret is de lesfors est so iatro the fertiles;s, and such: too, or; f gue be avert, ouziz: ym not c l'e lait n’s les ne stai; heuze.
This means to say, by smallness of blood or body; Or due to its harmfulness; Or because there is hardness underneath the skin and on the lips, do not allow it to grow further; by c, for the d (s When the bone is fractured, and the material is of poor quality. when the medication is not good for the treatment; because the decay is like a plague; Or due to its property in the area is late digestion, and delayed health, and flees by nature; As for therae arry it is, let not be; ought the tirage of lest he can doith no lesse; or you see these signes, ewes oste that thou seetis sighte.
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicine in the division.
Therefore, it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by manual work.
Saying that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; When there are fistulas coming from major veins, and arteries, and nerves. or to the sac, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs. or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
All boils of this kind are of difficult healing, with only effort and ignorance involved.
If there is no boil that reaches the location I have described and you are confident in its healing, And you observe it, then take a tent of wool or iron, if the fistula is straight, so choose one.
And if the fistula is crooked, seek an exceedingly fine tent-pole of wood, For the pole bends easily along the curvature;
And if there are abscesses on hands with holes that cannot be well searched by probing. If the abscess is cleansed through one of the openings,
for the moisture may move from one opening to another, and cleanse it.
by them or:
And ask the patient to indicate well where they feel pain upon pressure of your hand, and its location.
And when you truly know the location where it is, and if it's far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein. or in any of the locations that I have told you, if the condition according to what I have said,
or in any of the locations that I have told you, if the condition according to what I have said, s. And then the treatment until it is healed,
And if the abscess is well deepened in the right place, then it must be cut cleanly from the front as much as possible. Then apply bandages with medicinal vinegar, and tie up to the top of the abscess,
Then apply bandages with medicinal vinegar, and tie up to the top of the abscess, the same de la it OX faills.
And then apply healing balms to the joint continuously until it is restored.
And if it is not secured by this method, then cauterize as we have said.
And if the bone is decayed from the abscess, then cut it out. If veins or nerves affect limbs or principal members, as we have said;
If the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness, until the kingship is fully restored. Then treat it with remedies for various conditions until it becomes healthy.
And if it is not healthy, return the arrow as before. Approach so that you do not go past the fountain:
if it reveals itself and appears as soon as you reach the bottom. and remove all decay, then return to its original place.
by: they dont the text de there. If not so, know that the decay is too great, you cannot go there. If there is no other method than the healer's natural skill.
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with tongs. If the arrow is with a suitable instrument,
and if there are many bones, then break them all, leaving none intact.
and if the moisture causes discomfort, and there is no mistake or fear, like yout.
If you cannot remove them within an hour, place on the wound something stinging to prevent decay. and let it remain until they are thoroughly dried near the bones,
and then their bones will be more easily affected.
ouges: 1ud that is the ome tre aregard: If you move so much that the decay is entirely bone. Then restore the wound.
And if there is a large part of the decayed bone, coming close to the bulk of the bone; If it must be seared and covered all the way to decay, then heal until it is sound.
And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, if you seek an example and assistance in your work.
There was a young man not thirty years old who had pain from within his leg of a certain origin
as the substances reached the leg and caused gangrene, forming a large abscess without any apparent reason to open.
but because of their madness they worked so much until the abscess opened. And they consumed much matter, which became a fistula, causing great leakage and moisture throughout the body.
They applied various remedies for two years, but there was no healing in the art of hands.
Until I went to see them, and saw their leg and the medicines used to treat them, that s, thent is not so: 1. They are not:le de main. The body neither be it'lue but: And the body of the youth became red again, and had a yellowish hue.
I pitched a tent at one of these piers, and then searched for all the piers.
and found that they were aligned with each other from all parts of the leg.
ond ink: And I found it ruined and smelled bad, and the decay reached up to the inner bone.
I was that one who appeared of the decayed bone, and thought there were no other corruptions except for those which I had shown.
what are lons tous, and was isnt, and not ctres and bones.
And then you begin again, and discover the bone as before,
And I found continuous decay in the bone, and the ligament, and then the joint, and I endeavored to rejoin them.
but I could not join it within half an inch of the bone, and the suture failed completely, ether to get c.
And one must not resume treatment unless due to the patient's weakness who cannot endure. and because of my fear of his death that I have. For often it is bleeding profusely, but he was entirely healthy,
For often it is bleeding profusely, but he was entirely healthy, the first; So that you as 9. If you were any to be the context by onchfat with ca:
And they are extended outward, so you treat the corrupted flesh near its dislocation. and uncover the flesh at the location where it is swollen, ensuring that the sinew does not tear the flesh. and place a piece of linen or a small table underneath the bone to support moving the corrupted flesh. it’sis. che cg; and: the notch charte the that semen t; d'tle be bones:
If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is within or in a part. Then uncover all of it; then place a hot iron beneath.
and then apply the heat from one part to another of the corruption, and let it be as long on both sides of the corruption as we have said;
patient.
If the inflammation is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to use cold compresses.
If the inflammamenet is in the wrist or ankle joints, and it is very severe, However, you must seek out that inflammation to understand how it manifests. of the bonetirionznt:
And you shall know that surgical tools and needles for treating these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance. their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; c.
And you shall know which instrument your work will show you is needed, according to the knowledge of this art. And the witnessing of the ways of diseases; And in this art, and many diseases;
By fire The head swells or due to density, or due to weakness;
and when you have tried the remedy for that erosion by the course of drugs, and they do not help, to be sure that can also, and: If from this the patient escapes death or illness, which is greater, due to the loss of a limb.
If from this the patient escapes death or illness, which is greater, due to the loss of a limb. and the signs are that the limb turns black as if burned by fire, then after the blackness comes the consumption of flesh from one member to another, And it spreads throughout the entire body; if you rush to use a cooling poultice,
and if it is by the sting of any poisonous creatures, such as sea scorpions, snakes, and similar beings.
if the infection is at the head of the joints, and it swells, do not give space for it to come near with the hand.
by c'izard le t; e:
When it comes to the arm, grasp with your hand; if it passes through the hand, then it is death. and there are no remedies other than the quantity of its virtue.
and thus you do when corrosion comes or spreads: if it arrives at the first joint, then grasp after the other joint.
c and m— it'sat they are not can be: If it rises up to the leg, treat at the hip joint.
If it comes up over the hip joint, there is no other remedy than for the patient to die.
And the way you bind or swathe the limb is such that you tie it above and below. Et étendons un maître les liens en dessous, et un autre maître les liens au-dessus. And divide the flesh that lies between the two ligaments by a width of about half an inch until the bone is revealed.
Then cut or sew and place on each side a lining of flax-linen so that the suture does not touch the healthy bone, cI's the tudier fat a thuisse other et le o ; (that;
If bleeding occurs while you work, then cauterize promptly at the site. Then apply binding powders; and return to your medication until it is completed.
Then bind the injured limb with a sanctioned bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
d (cause by an instrument to make that mono le tontion; TTell. The text of the pain de quant.
It happened a blackening that seemed like scorching from fire,
and that corroding began first in his right foot, extending to cover the entire foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he cut off the affected part of the foot with a knife, and it was healthy.
And for a long time after it returned to its place, or two-thirds of the hand, and came to me,
and I placed them under things that have an impact after bodily purification, and they could not cease the dislocations.
and I vowed to bind his hand, but I did not have hope of restoring the matter. thedith: D'ulso they will be (1 and/whatever in fact <| For the virtues of the body were weakened; he became despairing, and returned to his homeland. and grasped a cup with his hand, and was healed;
and I have not written this for the sake of what is done elsewhere, if it's necessary.
tue byet: And then it swells and breaks open, and within lies a bow, and the eye sockets remain vacant, like shells. and the skin above is as delicate as torn fabric. and they do not reach to bone nor nerve; such diseases are called 'healed'.
However, if it is so stretched that it reaches almost to the bone on either side, it shall be called "fistula";
And the wound is such that you must cut away all the flesh around it, especially when it is fine and delicate as a piece of cloth. And not to avoid its corruption.
And if you believe that the skin is inflamed, and there is no rot at its core, And if the skin is rough like hair, then apply this type of laxative cleansing.
Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bowl that holds it has a foul smell, it; a. Take ease, and oil, and litharge equally, and put to cook in a container over fire. until the medicine turns red and thickens as honey does.
and then take of it according to your necessity, mixing it in water and honey, not: And leave the medication to act for two hours, then extract it by squeezing out.
Do this many times until the wound is closed and the pus is discharged, and it is bathed.
And never perform an enema with water of ashes, When this medicine is not present, take ashes of wood from a grapevine and pour water over them.
Then sieve it, and use it for an enema, until you are sure that the bowels are well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, . izzy: lais not, he says so s lisst week egt that c se ; When you cleanse with honey and sweet wine, let the honey have the property of purifying and cleansing. and the wine helps to remove impurities;
and when you have done this, and you ensure that the wound is well purified, (1
And it is that you pull out the splinters completely, and they do this with rose oil and wine. Or you enemas with certain medications and salves, about which I have said the properties or treatments of salves.
And if the nipple is small, and the tube for the enema cannot enter, (and so youst: Or balm of basilic, so that it may be spread;
And if the wound is too wide, that he may leave so much only enough for there or for a clyster to enter.
And if the wound gap where the bowels are above, make it shall be below at what level there is. When the bow is at its peak, do not let it slacken with ease. and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, so arrange it in such a way that the bow goes to its lowest point.
And if you cannot cover the wound as it appears to your sight, then in such manner: that the bowl shall move slightly downward and nothing remains of the bowl. and take solidifying medicines to apply on the wound.
s. Then use your fingers to find the passage inside the chest; a bit wider than the first one. Next, apply soothing oil on another piece of cloth according to the amount needed for the passage. And place it over the chest passage to ease the swelling, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once.
as:possies: And know what has entered from the bow, whether it is poison or a small amount, or sufficient, or digested, or undigested.
and take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess present.
and when your medicine has spread in such a manner that you see its effects extending to the surface near the heart's edge, if theytum: it. If heal: 4, and so that temble:
And then relocate it in the morning or after a day has passed, and when you open the wound. If there is a change in another bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the breasts are filled with undigested pus after many days, say that the breast is not at ease. , and incis:
When illness approaches. For there are people who wrongly apply heat to their wounds, and those who do the opposite.
and suffer an indigestible pain in the breast after many days, knowing that the breasts are not swollen.
and if they become hardened over time, and turn sour, then apply a medicine of drying substances that are moist in consistency but dry in virtue. s isd:
Take anointing oil, made with rose oil, and boil it with equal parts of old wine.
Then he stirs it well, using it; and similarly makes thicker honey cooked in a more viscous manner. when anointing oil is not present,
When you take myrrh and aloewood and incense, and grind it, and powder it with honey when it is on the fire. Then take a piece of cloth, spread it over the breast, and never insert any rod-like instrument long into it. and roots of holy basil, which are like flour mixed with chalk;
and roots of holy basil, which are like flour mixed with chalk; by.i d the you can'f:that if they first (120 on fire When the wound is elongated and not treated by this remedy,
When the wound is elongated and not treated by this remedy, Then I say that corruption is at the root, and it makes an impression on the bone, or on hard tissues, or sinews. if you're treating a fistula as we have said earlier.
Of abscesses of the nail
Gangrene is an abscess that arises from under the nail at the base of the hand. or on the foot, or sometimes it occurs in other places;
and so: lflesh ;tide; And they pour boiling water until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps washes away entirely.
And it comes to eroding until the bone, causing a stinging pain and bad smell, with wide joints and discolored skin.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and if the remedy does not help at all. If it is necessary to cut away all the excess skin that has grown from the nail. Then you shall cauterize the wound afterward. ounce to be, and, if:
When an ungula presses against the chalk, and it begins to prick, causing blistering. If necessary, place a bit of bread under the nail that is piercing. and lift it upwards gently and subtly so as to remove the pressure from the chalk. by:
And if the erosion is in the bone, clean it with a spoon and drill, because as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal.
and if you see the knee eroding, scrape off a portion with a spoon as previously mentioned, Then treat until it is set right;
And if they are wild, hold them down, and if it causes great pain, first stabilize them; Then cut the fingernail with a sharp knife across.
if they:
And if this occurs, place something upon it to soothe.
The disease that occurs in some men's hands by chance consists entirely of flesh. by: the is to any they are not e’s, like, and does not sprain its very that s in;
And none of these arise at the root of the joint, where the growth is among certain of us. Those who arise in any one of our limbs do not move. And those who arise in the joint of the limb, perhaps move;
The size of those who are plump is made light in this way: Shape the area at its root with a wide spreader.
The one born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat; therefore, you should hold it firmly.
and: 1, and also that de bon: Then cut the bone to an appropriate length with a saw, then treat it until it is sound.
The dislocations that occur with joint assembly happen by birth, or from a wound's healing process, or from the scorching of fire, or similar things.
If it is necessary to cut out that dislocation, so that the joint may be repaired according to its natural shape; lide: Or place between two pieces of fine lead, until they are joined as it ought to be.
If the dislocation comes to either one of its sides with the palm, cut that swelling accordingly as it ought to be.
To rid oneself of such ills
These are large swellings wrapped around, filled with excessive melancholic fluids, that come upon various body parts.
And it happens more often in legs of those who go to the bathhouse and work and carry, than with others.
It is therefore necessary that you provide no excrement removal at all times, and then the basilica washing of it.
The treatment of wounds is in two ways: one is to cut around it and drain the black blood; And the other way is that you make an opening and drain completely.
The cutting procedure is as follows: raise the first leg with hot water very strong until the large vein becomes clear. a ;s of f so, and de marse isso ke quilt: ça et with them if the cebbon line disie: Then tie the vein at one point or two or three places, with a broad width.
Then extract and pull out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtue of the illness can tolerate.
and then mix it, and instruct that he imbue with meats tinted black.
the are youn:s, if theye ce fat, or ne:
The movements of the patient are as follows: raise the affected leg with pain. If there is much hair on it. Then place it in a bath, and wait for the leg to be immersed in hot water until it turns red and the veins swell.
And if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire and then wrap the long veins at the leg's top near the knee or in the part below the ankle.
for TWolf they C-be able:
And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or touches skin it appears as a blue rope.
Then remove the stitching from below until it is raised above the skin, and then attach it with light knots.
Then cut in another place three finger's width above; then scrape the skin near the vein as long as it appears. that they c
Then measure with another tool, or more as needed, then loosen it gently, and cut around the two elbow joints.
Then stretch and loosen it up to the next joint; then extract piece by piece until all are out, then cut.
And if you cannot pull and lift it, thread a needle with a strong double strand of thread through the entire area; after:so far reputle: And keep it from slipping, for if it does slip, it cannot be drawn up or lifted, and this causes harm to the patient.
And when you have drawn it up completely, place a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site; treat it until it heals.
And if the vein is twisted and tangled together, and not straight as we have said, n’mjeward but:
n’mjeward but: The shape of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and does not pierce or tear, but it opens the vein.
and is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and here is its shape.
From the civil vein (referring to a specific type or location of vein)
with:. c;
Sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in legs, due to rotting that comes from under the skin.
If as it comes within the body, snakes and worms, emerging between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this beginning boil are such that it causes a very large inflammation in the leg. so t and, and lief if heu: ça; dont is the c. Se f de les maring that:n're in the sonde of failure.
When the head is dislocated, it must be wrapped with a piece of linen about three and a half cubits to four cubits long, and the bandage ends.
and leave the linen around the leg, and each time it is not at its place again, wrap it with the linen, and tie the bandage. and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remainder, but do not cover it completely at its root until it is all used. e
For this reason it is necessary to treat it gradually until completion, without leaving anything behind.
And the vein has not moved at all when treated for five or six lengths. And one day a man came to me, it was of six lengths, and when I cut (the vein), he poured out some pus or blood, and pierced all the way down to its base.
If it persists in doing so; and the matter within should be emptied, then treat it with properly prepared herbs for a certain number of days, then heal as one would an abscess.
And never touch the vein with your hands; particularly when it opens at the joint of the foot or ankle. and this often occurs due to pressure; thus treat as we have said before.
after:
This illness is called on our land "ox disease," because it often occurs in the buttocks.
and it's a small worm that arises between skin and hair, and travels through the entire body moving up and down. and it is felt quite well from limb to limb as it moves along the skin where it goes, and jumps forcefully.
with:
When there is doubt about its severity, for when it travels through the body, rising to the head, and reaching the eye. And perhaps enters, destroying the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it bleed and flow, it cannot be stopped unless when it moves.
stiché ons;
Then apply a bandage and tie it off firmly, and if the wound is partially covered by the hair, cut into it until you expose it. If applying fire cautery, do so until it stops bleeding.
and the greatest harm that it causes is that they turn pale, as we have said.

And it is proper to use a remedy of bodily concoctions of dissolving medicines for bad humors.
And apply a paste made from meats that have decayed and putrefied.
From the pain caused by windblownness (wind in the bowels) de text al lingus: an's that cocde the t And then moves from member to member; and I see what I am telling you.
I was called upon by an ill woman, and found some swelling in the vein of her arm;
and shortly after that, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder; c untizzy he said:
The pain departs from there and shifts to the shoulder.
Then after some time it runs through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
Then he told me that it returned around the body as I saw.
they: Indeed, I wish to maintain that pain from one place moves to another. However, I do not want this if as seen in the woman;
and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, and the veins exposed. ond:
And it does not appear on all those who are lymphatic, and have wet bodies and veins restored.
it is not of le plus les est that; qui; ait so as for coles and the: de mais, ece que de. iciat thane ome or. Les d. If gently to both sides you move it, then tightly wrap until that swelling is restored. and cauterize the wound; and if you cannot see it with your eyes,
if the cure is for those bumps that look like maggots, and foul pills, and other similar things.
it doesn's. ça you;
The arrows are various, according to their appearances and the places on the body where they emerge.
The varieties of them have arrows with large points, and small ones, those that are barbed, and those that are fused. and there are some which have two corners, and others with tongues, and those having fragments. est coli't :
As for the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it dies in any of these members, and the sign of death appears, which I will tell you hereafter: If it is necessary to extract this arrowhead, as death comes in various conditions. When this ill sign is not evident, and there are no arrows in the front, then treat the wound.
And when the sign of the brain is present and an arrow pierces the bone, and there are fragments above the skull. is when there is blindness and heaviness and weakening of the eyes, and inflammebg and reddening of the tongue, and muscle twitches and mixing of thought, and bile-colored vomitus.  And from the wound flows white phlegm resembling hairs, and as it oozes like redness of rust.
And if this sign is revealed to you, pursue the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it remains in place.
The sign when the arrow comes out or blood flows from the body is that it's close to the left shoulder blade, and feels as if it were embedded in something hard, not hollow. by the following them. If you ttobt; O'issons in so and name fuhlow (1, with all y Francis. Then they feel doubt whether death will come.
And the sign of the arrowhead is that there are no traces in the wound's exit, and the throat swells, and the patient changes complexion, and breathes deeply and seeks cold water.
And if the arrowhead enters into the pelvic region, it is near the small ribs; and produces great swelling and pain, and breathing; and all limbs of the shoulders move.
heuze d; 1 (h: they s of gk: MDP.
If the arrow pierces the belly and does not burst out through the intestines, there is no hope in treatment or extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow pierces into the bladder and urine leaks out along with it, causing the patient great pain; be assured that such a wound is deadly.
The other limbs, depending on how they are made and the collarbone and throat and shoulder and upper arm and spine and ribs and hips, and similar parts, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you how it happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to one man whose arrow went into the base of his neck at its root. I tried it, and pulled out the arrow from another side past the ear fat, and was slightly better for a long time.
e: th: And the arrow was reset, reaching only the tip towards its base. And it was an arrow from a Turkish bow, made of light iron without ears; the shaft was whole, and no harmful incidents occurred to it.
And an arrow pierced the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I healed boils, and skillfully treated them until they were cured; thus was the Christian restored to health.
And I removed an arrow from his belly, thinking he would die;
and after thirty days had passed, there was no change in his condition; c;l's that les so:**Furderse and they should not the s. The Arab; Tad: M.20. In such as. Jhd by line Marsh Marcs the said it a (et pfere; What happens, followed that la: ous ca bail fe son
And if you see a man with an arrowhead fallen on his back or stomach, and the wound is sewn up above;
and allow the arrowhead to remain within, without altering its natural position. nor should it be disturbed in any of its natural processes.
And behold a certain man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and his wound was grievous.
And it remains in such a way that they suffer great pain; and many similar cases.
And pierced an arrow into one of the king's subjects, who was in his lap, les s que do le:t cnt; that the :
I was called to healing after it had been three days. The wound is very narrow.
I tried with all subtle remedies, and felt nothing at all. and he had no feeling of heat or pain from his right earlobe. in, the t it is done:
I place an unguentificated poultice on the affected area for it does not swell. and it appeared to me as the arrow's wound.
and it appeared to me as the arrow's wound. I applied the poultice for days, and healed the deep wound, thus the patient remained ill for a long time.
by:f, ies t (so heumz but also the main. I put on the wound a medicinal acrid water with hands until it was healed.
and tested it, feeling the head of the arrow return to its place; then I placed in the wound opening with that same acrid water until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
l’tda onde cither d.
Then straighten out if there is a wound where I clamped the pincers on either side and could not remove them.
Then I did not cease to subtly and cleverly devise methods of traction until one day with well-made pincers, I achieved it. according to the form that will appear at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat and keep the wound open.
 I will restore it then, and the wound is firmly closed, and the patient is entirely healed.
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
that; The same t (cemblete, and as the bon : s. True work involves nine operations, and nine instruments are used for handling extraordinary matters that arise in this art.
I say there are arrows lodged in the limbs either as they are buried deep or according to two ways. either by their own length or on one side; or from another direction;
the ou n jumber se dont in a t sisst de othert:
And if it does not heal now, let it rest until the cartilage is properly aligned and returned.
And if it has pierced the bone, and cannot be removed, let it rest for some days, adjusting each day.
And when it heals, and if it does not, pierce carefully through to make a very fine hole, until the space is expanded, then treat it accordingly.
And if the arrow is reset in place on the body so that it cannot be seen, then search all over for it. and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument to pull it out.
And if you cannot stretch the wound, nor deepen the arrow's entry; And there are no bones or nerves or veins, so it bleeds as much as the wound is large. And extract the arrowhead as you may, and if there are ears where it holds.
And extract the arrowhead as you may, and if there are ears where it holds. If the bone is impaled by two parts that you can pull out, then And then break or bend the arrows' ears, as far as you can pull them.
And then break or bend the arrows' ears, as far as you can pull them. And do so subtly that you do not break the arrow, but draw it more firmly.
And if you cannot at once, lift up to the nearest resting place and then draw it, as pulling might relieve the strain of extraction. the paind in youre:s f le t, and by n they so:
And watch over the incision of the nerve and vein, and devise a method so you may extract the arrow without danger.
Soon or late, firmly or gently; and place the patient as they were when the arrow fell upon them. For it is the greatest aid that can be given to him; and if you cannot, then place them as their signs show you.
s s.  (do-tlow but skell;
Therefore do cut there, as long as the tongs can take hold of it, and then extract it; if it falls out forcefully now.
And if [the arrowhead] is caught in the bone, twist your round hand, until it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull it out.
And if [the arrowhead] cannot be removed, leave it there for now, and then resume the extraction until it comes out forcefully.
s.
And if it is pierced and you must administer a blow, then provide the instrument to be heated. If the arrowhead enters into the hair of the instrument, then administer a strong blow.
and mete ome so de lacks and they timesl;
And if the arrow is touched, it must be that you cut all around where the poison resides, if you can. Then treat the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow falls or pierces through to the belly, bladder, or ribs and is close by, and you can see it clearly, then cut around it.
the n'ot, or s s e t. And care for it until it is healed.
The form of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and this one looks like this:
And there are many ways to use them: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrowhead.
common body veins Veins from which blood is drawn are .25, therefore there are 16 heads.
text al tissances desment it at the w times they ou you may be et de s veist, buttose est :s and also ast: And the two arteries which are visible on both temples; and two veins that are in the temples of both ears, which are called 'sap' (taste); and the veins that are at the forehead; and the veins that are on the temples of the nose; And the two strings that are on his head. and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are called "auricularies". and two veins that lie under the tongue.
les pennant, a ce taches;
The one is head-related, and it's on the left side of the ribcage, and they call them "vessels at the top." And the middle one is called "fast," and it's composed of both head-related vessels. And they call them "vessels of the heart," and the base is on the right side of the ribcage, The breeches are called by the laymen "the belly of wind," and it is located below the scrotum. And that which one probes, clearly situated above the scrotum.
And the little vein is between the ring finger and the pinky, and if it has two branches;
t. The sile; e ce ne: 's O for any le Tiraie by the heart; if none theym�. So it is not d And the second sprain which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nese," that is in the ankle of the other side.
And on the other leg, there are three veins under those.
The pain from veins located behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines; .c.
.c. And rub it with an abrasive cloth where the veins are; then tighten the patient's neck with a cord. Until both veins appear behind the ears in two spots near the top: Cut then at your two thumbs and where you sense hair loss above your thumbs, if necessary.
as thist Et enveloppe et le cuir et la veine bien avec deux doigts de large, et fait entrer dans les artères, et fait sortir du sang jusqu'à ce que vous voyiez.
Then strain and bind it, until it is healed.
And I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
; don’s the ne: byt s ;fier tre le de la crople to date is not be no un bon line ond� Tud in that all. And swelling, and accustomed paralysis, and at the body of tears to their eyes.
and its quality is so like what I say: and it's that the patient has no connection to his neck, until both veins appear distinctly; byt:
Then lift the flesh above the vein with your index finger towards your elbow joint, and insert the lancet from below. Lift the vein upward, and cover it, as you have done in two other wounds, and make a proper incision for blood according to your need.
le sebut quet, the o f de lesse:ssand s’t sonme; that they is the tounge on lide le c're.
And then bind it firmly, and let it remain until healed; and we have spoken of their coping and extraction, as the beginning of this book.
The healing of the veins in the forehead is just as valuable for cerebral illnesses, and for ancient face diseases, and for migraines, and for reddening.
And its quality is that the patient turns away his neck until the veins appear. ki ben; la so by bon tdd and b�le or Rue.
And place the point over the vein, and elevate with your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the amount you see. Then apply a bandage to the patient's neck and secure the vein so that it is straight and not crossed by any artery or large vein.
However, it should not be too tightly bound; and the sinew perpendicular to the bone, because the bone is near, and sometimes it breaks the sinew when it is thin.
the following:
The nature of their strength lies in the patient stretching his neck by twisting a certain ligament as before.
Then be the strength of the sinew, and it is to take with some length and breadth of skin without any flaw.
And be the blood is well executed by skill and so does not die if you are skilled then done. Then it shall know wherefore, and do; Et en la morts; and so the art doute, car of as our lord, est de f in this place et flaime tant de tuit par le be a lieu, or l’artie, que li art du fait is sient les mallardien on.
The blood of the vein when it is drawn causes ague, dysentery, and illnesses from foulness. as if migraines come upon the face, and rash that appears on the skin, especially when it is longstanding.
and the nature of such blood draws causes the patient to have a tight neck, then strains his nose towards your left hand. ; as is s ct such that the in de mort by ae; Oud if they be nim: 'empirik. As For the veins do not open well at first, but now the blood starts to flow.
and do not let it bleed too much at once, and allow the blood to flow according to your necessity, then bind it for a night, as it is quickly restored.
the ouz faire li* ouger if he said that you it istose prie la les que the old. I’s.gis ; t and to:S, they can be, should c; O; d. The Lord Chir colfie ond. Don'his line:
And the quality of the wound is such that the patient stretches his neck from one side to the other, as we have said. and let the master be above the patient's head, and the patient sit on a seat.
then show the vein for a little while, then bleed the blood promptly, or as much as necessary.
la ou de que: untles m; the on that he; they so you must be no c (1e may not asto se lo-C� a**. The patient's limbs do not strangle; and let it lie until morning, that the wound be healed.
From the cleansing of lice The cleaning of lice from the lips helps to clear infection in the mouth, and gum disease, and cracks on the lips, and bad breath and itching.
by c lad resinse ne let is alye of s d ster de the n't. Then turn the lip, and examine both veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left. and observe them closely to see that they are black, with fine small veins around them. Therefore touch both, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
Therefore touch both, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, d sis a; that the con lespire quill as l'se te; that n: nd est la. The same de the bone t.
From the inflammation beneath the tongue From the inflammation of veins that are beneath the tongue, it assists after cephalic inflammation, and it is from throat constriction, and from eye diseases, and mouth ailments.
and the quality of inflammation is that patients scratch between their hands in front of the sunlight, and they lift the tongue, and look beneath each side for a black vein.
ly; (doze:e if heu ne ben proupser laisle que they.
The veins of the arm which are commonly punctured are bled according to two methods:
Or in puncturing all with one type: a broad syringe or fine needle as sharp as cutting ones, and are called "anesil": And they are wide and subtle according to the width and extension of the veins. The form of this mistletoe plant is much renowned and very broad as you see.
And it is the blood and cause it has to be known by your sover and in it is widely troubla necte se cauz est, as you doivent tresin. This is the form of the olive bile:
And it is finer pointed, and meant for collecting subtle veins, where there is a subtle yellow blood.
The sanicle of the esophagus, which is one such vein, helps with diseases that are from the throat, and neck, and chest, and belly.
in; And if it grazes an artery, with blood flow resulting, one must staunch it, as I have said. and it should not be gripped in the flame but cut neatly as taught.
And if the base does not open clearly, one must extract it and use another. ly so that m atri que sontt lesse And the hose to the joint is bound with a bandage as we have said.
And if you know the location of the sinew, then as before extracting the arm, feel for the bones until you locate them. the les poinque est pas, il beings ne sont is toi:
And ensure you do not wound the artery when you see it swoln, for it is of the artery; avoid it accordingly.
And if you see it protruding upward like a child's urine, and the wound is red and thin, know that it is from the artery. Hasten to do so, and place your thumb lengthwise, then remove your thumb if the wound is unstable, which happens many times.
emt the ou ful Land Kebone (1: but de la t; se ougreumble; the ole c. Do not;
And if the wound is not closed and it bleeds, and the physician does not have medicines, tie the artery if it opens; for they pull back at the head; and close the wound.
And take a slice of fresh meat, and break it, and take one half and bind until the next day.
if the wound is closed, that's good; if not, then heal it with powders that stop bleeding as we have said.
The latchets are not always found in various positions due to the small location of the wound and the strength of the limb's joint.
The sanies from the vein are drawn so that it helps to drain blood above the head and below the body. because it is composed of the basilar and cerebral regions, as we have said;
the ou N a book: And it swells and the nerves become irritated, and sometimes cannot heal.
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, you must cleanse the instrument again; and avoid touching the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is no touch it the veuine, then they are l'a cauterisee.
The temple of the head helps, drawing blood to the brain, and assisting the eyes.
And it is appropriate to treat by pricking at the temple near the olive bone or myrtle pit, for this is the most beneficial of all bloodlettings, as there are no nerves or arteries nearby.
Nevertheless, one should always choose the less severe location first, and do not cause pain during the initial treatment, and then repeat. . The same: d their; in English: The quality of the wound is according to your judgment.
The first thing you must know about healing, it is that a wound is not repaired but only to preserve health.
and to avoid future diseases. the laisss to the Do theyt; And one should begin healing with frequent bathing in warm water, and during autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And one should begin healing the first day or third, after two or three days.
The healing for diseases is not determined by a set time, but that it should be done whenever needed, during the day or night, at all hours and times.
* (prenfludirus t; ça: Do not let them raise their hands who are old, those who have passed 60 years.
And when anyone wishes to raise their hands in any way, it is necessary that they clear the intestines with a mild cleansing. if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw excess from the intestines harming the main limbs.
et d: MKle-bound they have ti se tiles the ou Fust; s
And if the spleen is affected after a passion of colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination and defecation in women and men, waking and mating, affecting all aspects, whether by something from the weapon or the body.
Then subtly remove the humors if it is large, with foods and drinks and medications, as you have the power to do so.
Next, enter a bath unless something prevents it, for subtly removing the blood.
And cleanse of blood within a cloth around the wound on the neck as we have said;
And guard against work, pain, lustfulness, and similar things on that day.
And be fasting and joyous, and let the surgeon be higher than those being bled, and rub their arms twice or thrice.
Then stretch the ligament slightly, because if it is too tight or loose, you cannot straighten it without causing harm.
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and feel warm.
then soak the stitches with a little old oil, and place your right thumb over that vein near the area you want to strengthen. That the vein does not break when struck with a blow. For there are veins that flow as thickly as cords in the arms of a mastiff, and some so full of bloodiness. if when it is placed above the flame, then drawn back to the flame and cannot open the vein, thus they are of this kind.
le vent the g've ond lately
If the vein works for the first time, it is good; if not, restart from a little below that place where it was last performed, unless the joints are swollen.
If the joint is swoln and the patient becomes hopeful, let it be a day or two, but do not bind the arm. perhaps he will come to have abscesses again; do not enter into baths, then resume the treatment if it pleases him.
that f.dj; they.t. They are the bon  and so by Md; that youre t and#
And handle it a bit hastily so that the wound may swell; for this often occurs when the wound is small.
If you see the wound swelling, do not attempt to reopen it, and apply a bit of oil linen, for it eases the body's pain and softens the area with the oil.
And thus apply the linen soaked in oil to each vein you treat, to stop the flow of blood.
l’s a (as:
And if there comes an abscess large in size, which occurs many times, especially when it is not cleanly opened that time or the opening of the vein is small. If you hasten to act, and place a damp sponge in hot water and salt, then strain it for an hour.
and you must do this after the blood has been drained from the vein, and if it remains at the site for several days with any black or green discoloration, there is no harm. And if you see it, place upon any thing of olive oil or myrrh mixed with the juice of sweet marjoram, a balm, or similar substance.
And many times it leads to an abscess and appearance of gangrene on the body's surface: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the lump soft under pressure with your hand, then that is a harmful sign. Therefore do not place upon anything that we have said previously, for there is a chance it may involve an artery; but give the lump a dry poultice to harden it, then treat with another remedy until it heals healthily.
And treat each of the four humors according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thickened, let it thin out again; and if it is too warm, allow it to cool down.
And one who is pale and weak, and in need of bloodletting, should have a wider incision made, with broad openings.
s, but and the ou not so
And this manner of healing is free from blood deterioration and nerve congestion, and it moves so that the joint is not long or wide.
And for those whose body needs the joint healing, give them bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if it is exhausted, bleed three or four times.
And if they are of cold complexion, feed them bread soaked in sweet syrup or honeyed fragrant syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and very aromatic syrup.
And if it smells of rot after the release of much blood, then one must make an infusion of strong ale and sweet, fragrant syrup.
And employ other remedies as we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope to facilitate venous evacuation.
And if you wish to drain his arms, and otherwise bandage again as needed when they are greatly swoleby moisture so that he may be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his humors continuously.
they lete and t; (fudse ; but.
And who wishes to heal on another side, shall do so on the second day or third.
For there is much blood inside the body that has become overheated, and it causes fever; then one must extract a large quantity, and dilate the passage until it defecates with great effort. then you heal all parts of the body and place your hand over the pores when it sweats, so that death does not come at the defecation. bychin:t[s�re the follow the in a on the e t and them.
And it is not necessary when you see a dislocated arm, to cause blood to flow out the second time, and keep the wound closed, by pressing firmly above. If it is cramped, extend the arm quickly, for this would be harmful.
But let it heal the second time; or at the point of throbbing pain, until blood flow ceases from the vein wound. in ge t:  s
If the vein is empty, leave it alone and do not bind it until the abscess is eased.
And if bleeding is necessary a second time, either from the same place or another vein, or the other arm.
and do they pus mete s’er in:t that f, or cite:
The manner of applying hot water is such that the patient places their hand in warm water until the fingertips are red.
then they should bind it securely, so that the bandage appears tight and right, now applying it across without being too loose or long.
and it should be wrapped wide, and well-fitted to the hand joint, without any leaking out, if so then put the hand in warm water again, and let blood mix with the water until there is enough.
me t: (th; Tarn've. The ou n' s, but the her plel ben tant; f as and so lespliir line: c.
And the sinew of this vein is more preserved than others, with no vessels or nerves present.
The sinew of the thumb on the right hand is valuable for all diseases related to the liver, and this is how it's done:
Stretch the hand, and immerse in hot water until the veins are flushed out, as one sees it. And if you sever it crosswise, and if you cut it completely through, there is no harm.
And do not remove too much, as nerves are easily exposed and damaged from being severed.
And then place the hand in warm water, if the vein is frozen at the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have treated the wound as needed, put oil and grease on the vein to quickly bind it, and do this with each cut.
The pain in his left hand is due to the mouse disease, and do as I have told you for the right.
The pain in the hip is due to all diseases that are from under the body, t
And the quality of his health is such that the patient often takes hot water in which stones have been placed, and rubs it on the vein until it cools. And he lies above the dislocated bone joint; and the vein is at the ankle, with many streams flowing from it.
Heal there or where wider streams are present at the anelet, with motion as needed.
And if you lift up the foot, watch for the nerves above it and cross the tendon as when clipping hairs; let the flesh be evenly cut.
And if the sinew cannot exit, place the foot in water and ensure that the vein empties well.
And if the ligaments are not severed on the first try, start again above a little later, as the joint is tender; t's and i: Sont:1, in de t, so que se les su : the acfalte sont; And le losble et ce sonle ten C'ra ou n'ster.
The root of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle joint, and its inflammation causes pain in the hip when it's hot with blood.
And the nature of its inflammation is that the patient must lie on a bed and stretch above the ankle by four fingers twisting.
because otherwise it will not open up; and if it does open, so the inflamed area in all ways that you can see, and across. e t
e t If you cannot find it, then tie any part of it that opens or splits in the back and along the spine to the small toe, and watch for numbness.
And make as much of a tourniquet with the cloth that you see is needed, then untie the bandage and place cotton over it, and hold in place; now it has been healed.
The linen swabs
the t. Et durntul.
And this wind-striking is as though it were striking twice: sometimes it is at high heat, or with heat.
Et deux autres dans les deux côtes du cou; et la vésicule sous le menton. And the vesicle on each shoulder; and the vesicle above the elbows. And ventouse tu hors de the contenir s, mais too much too ouvert la voiture. So and vent cest si pas too hands; Et dventres soi: et ouverte l’ovrir with open too the bras; les ventues du plustrois ventre bien toussovelles too heuettes too li vents de, le mains. And the application of leeches to both ankles; and bloodletting does not draw much blood, but rather small amounts scattered throughout the body.
and therefore do not fear any harm, as with proper bloodletting; the they s to le un; and te iste lese temps:
And if by necessity of illness it is time to exorcise, or for customs, we perform each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every day in between.
For there are those who, when they have need to exorcise, do so with great weight;
and for those who encounter fullness and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness around the eyes.
t; c. And if there are such things as thinking and seeing through blood and painfulness and death and similar matters.
And when we see these signs, especially when it is within the month, we order to evacuate after three hours past noon.
The treatment of the brain helps with the severity of the head ... which comes to them, and it must not be before the evacuation of all the body;
I ue; when they:
And it is not necessary for those of cold constitution to use it, or who have scrofula, as they would be greatly harmed by it.
And therefore, not even the vigilant should use it, nor those with head cold ailments.
And those who often get better become negligent, and therefore it is advised to apply the cupping therapy somewhat more cautiously due to fear of relapse.
t (t annoitner. And to cutting of the gland ducts, and tissues, and inflammations.
And it is appropriate to apply pressure gently, for if held too tightly, there may be obstruction or stomach and chest issues.
Ventosities are two ribs causing pain in the neck like toothache, otitis and migraine, along with strangulation and pain at the root of teeth.
And it is located near the altar of the basilica; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand in placing it there, without severing an artery or causing bleeding outwards.
Ventosities under the chin are associated with mouth diseases, gum decay, and similar illnesses present in the mouth; they are located near the altars of both lips.
The windings of the shoulders cause illnesses arising from heat and fullness.
Windings in the elbows are as much like those of three arms, because it draws blood from these large veins;
And instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the vessel is filled with blood and has veins and arteries beneath it.
The cupping over the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids and illnesses underneath them, it should be large and made of animal skin that needs to be well stretched; and sometimes, if they were subtle, they would break, causing great wounds.
The cuppings on the legs drain blood thoroughly, as they draw blood from all over the body; they are beneficial for old pains of the limbs and testicles, and bladder issues, and relieve the flowers; they are in place at the .ij. groins, and the .ij. ankles, and moreover, they weaken the body after long use and bring about swelling in various conditions.
The way to apply the cupping is that you place it first empty, and then quickly, put on hastily, and move equally, and do not stop doing so, until you see there redness and swelling, and the bruise appears with dark blood; then remove, and reapply the cups, and take care in the arrangement of limbs, for there are some who have tender skin and clear pores: it is necessary to pierce once only, and make wide, somewhat deep cuts; and suck gently.
And if the wound is large, it should be pierced twice: the first time to facilitate the flow of thick blood.
And if the wound is very dry, it should be pierced a third time; and when we want to draw out blood little by little, we only do so once at most.
If we wish to let much blood, often reopen the wound; and if the vein is spared, cut it deeply, and finish so that the core is pierced firmly.
And it is for those who have large and hard veins, and are difficult to access, that you should anesthetize the bubbles of oil with soothing and dissolving properties. if it is such, of purple oil or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
And if it is with olive oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar substance.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amartine or balm of Gilead, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
And if the one to whom you give tender hairs wide at their ends, there is no need to put oil.
But it is necessary to wash after ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or elderberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or other similar substances.
And those with much moisture should get up easily, or use myrtle water, and sumac, and similar substances.
And those with large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of secu, or aniseed infusion or chamomile, or other similar things.
And it is not proper to apply a bladder before or after the bath but an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventosation.
And one must wash oneself when it is to be vented and when they have been vented. And let those who are ill with cholera and whose blood is too much and inflamed wash themselves. Jent and there ;
And you must also provide nourishment such as porridge, fresh cheese, and moist meats.
And for those with cold constitutions, make a syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor new, along with small amounts of porridge, fresh cheese, small birds, and squabs.
and each day they shall breathe out the winds, he must drink more than eat.
theirtfe with them. And it is to be subtly increased until he drinks hot; but one must not do this unless they are very thirsty.
The suction cups that are applied without causing pain are those placed over the liver, and kidneys, and gout, and abdomen, bowels, urine, and legs, for these limbs cannot tolerate being pierced anywhere.
And this is done only to draw blood from one member to another. :s the s an :
And it causes pain when there is obstruction or stone, and if by chance the obstruction attracts back to its place, or moves away from where it should be.
Thus it does when placed upon the liver and intestines if there is retained gasification.
And these cups are made hollow to draw out as much only; and never at once with fire, nor ever plain water.
by far li;
The form of the suction cup administered with heat is as follows:
And it has two fingers in width and half the length of the hand, with a small hole around the middle as to insert an arrowhead.
and be made of glass before it does not weaken the patient when applied to the limb.
the.
And they vary in size and type according to the diseases and nature of those who contract them.
For children's bulging are unlike old ones, and lean like fatty ones.
And you should place this swelling upon the limb thusly:
Take a candle of wax or similar substance, and place it amid the swelling across the shaft which is amidst the bulging: ond.
And then place it upon the limb, and turn your thumb over the aperture as we have mentioned; when desired, so that air goes in and an ointment is applied.
And apply the salve as before, and repeat often, if necessary.
In the blister that is used for pleurisy, without any penis or aperture, it's only made when full of water and placed on the limb.
(th; That are m, so ; s, bones t-flemente l’s de la ben est pley f, then le text pesze ou Ront con la com sa peu suler que.
Dislocations are not managed unless in limbs where it is impossible to apply cups for their smallness, as with lips and gums, and similar areas. and in nerves of the heart, such as veins or nerves, and other like areas.
and the nature of this condition is that when you find dislocations that are in soft gentle places with some protrusion, take them.
byt s HF for a c Then provide a healthy vein and compress, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply bandages.
And when they are smooth and sore, if it's in place or where you can apply a compress, then do so, for this is very useful afterwards.
If not, raise the area gently and wash with water thoroughly, then squeeze out well;
:prson s (at say so e't tenty ascribe by ca Cod git the original. JPGe the same with and le benet, tota thera. Do not make et al chast C. And et la ou: Mme a I hate wa la ce f that est des forme ça man:
If there is a multiple occurrence of pus, apply crushed alum or oak bark and similar things until it is healed.
Or place the half-moist mashed beans on it and leave them until they dry out in their place, then bandage now.
And if you have more need of it, take other medicaments.
in the same: And then place them there, and as soon as they feel his blood, so do they shrink back.
And when you see that they are weeping, sprinkle some alexanders and hedge-nettles or ashes upon them, so they will dry now.
Here begins the book of fractures.
These treatises are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they restore broken bones and dislocations.
Know that the wise son, my dear friend, embraces this treatise which they have never seen in any of the old books, nor read letters about.
and for this reason is strange knowledge on our land, as I've never found a good one.
Et je ne sais rien d'autre, même si grâce à la connaissance des anciens textes dont j'ai étudié beaucoup pour avoir une expérience de leur savoir, ainsi que par l'expérimentation et les habitudes de ma propre existence.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, and summarized at the end, clearly showing the forms of the treatments that are administered, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Therefore, we must say that the preamble of this book contains the essence and wisdom of its chapters, so those who are experienced apply their understanding to truth, allowing them to know and learn this noble art and teach it to others.
When fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs on any part, it is necessary to support the patient from both sides and parts if nothing supports them completely, as with weak bodies, children, or elders.
If the tension is not too strong or too cold, and consume frozen joints, such as cold feet, bird feathers, and horse hair, do not drink wine, nor any fatty foods, and do not fill up too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about an abscess or matter spreading in the limb; then it is advisable for the patient to rest as they have been used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that cause swelling or viscosity, such as boiled wheat, rice, eggs, beans, veal, chicken, fresh fish, and strong wine, along with similar things. When with gradual dislocation, movement is soon followed by fractures.
And know that fractured old and worn-out bones cannot be well mended or joined as per their natural state to strengthen the limbs, nor those like the bones of very young children.
But do not rush to set the broken bone with a large splint that binds and joins the limb together until it is strong as before; and let it all heal properly, and for this reason one should nourish oneself with hearty meats, as we have said.
by the bolejles Que c; If you say b: OU; ça finge t m and so et se ou n'ilz ne bon line: Ca: Jarn’s.
When the break of the head is different from the break of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all types of breaks. There are fractures that go with rotation, and others by bending, as the length of a quill for writing.
There are fractures that go with rotation, and others by bending, as the length of a quill for writing. And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture accompanied by a tiny split.
s ue
And it is known to be a fracture of the bone because the joint is twisted and openly broken at the end, near the palm.
And when there is no curvature or touchiness, and the patient does not feel much pain, if there is no breakage.
but it may well have curvature, or tear, or small fracture. If it is not necessary for you to move your hand at all, but apply the medicines that come next and then gently hold it in place.
And know that the fracture which is healing, and are the two parts rejoining, you should now align them evenly, as with abscesses when they appear.
and if abscesses occur, leave it for a day until the abscess is soothed. the 1 are not. Ic;
When the bone is broken into pieces, if they are pulled apart by two parts, whether hands or feet, or from your hand when it's small limbs, or between two tendons, or one tendon and your hand.
And place the limb according to its natural shape, so when the broken parts of the member are separated, reset them by all means and set them in their places where you can move them, and ensure that with your work there comes no injury or pain to the patient.
And properly align well both ends of the bone according to the best forms.
And he feels severe pain in the arm if it seems to you that it is not well: so treat gently, and do not strain or press as those who cause abscesses and heat and shrinkage of the limb by their methods have often seen us do.
And when the limb is about to reach its limit, gently restrain the patient so they do not move, neither while awake nor sleeping, turning or in any other manner. and ensure that the limb is securely positioned so it feels no pain. When it feels no pain at all or almost none, then one must put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
When it feels no pain at all or almost none, then one must put it in such a position that it feels no pain. and keep watch to ensure it is set correctly, so twisting does not occur when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken limb follows what I have told you.
; forment the c; The Chir, they so that is: corue me: the Juda de laise:n't. Do not to a. Preter. Here: theu said; in this t.
For there are small members such as arms and legs and similar limbs: it is appropriate to wrap them in soft fine linen.
and those that are large, like thighs and legs: it is appropriate to wrap them in a wide sturdy bandage, for the wide bandages encompass the entire large limb, and strain evenly on all parts without any slippage.
then place three or four light towels along the limb, and tighten one end of the bandage slightly across all parts, then move up above the fracture and loosen it so that the fracture is less strained than the rest. Then pull away a bit from the fracture;
And soften the sinew a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the joint's healthy position, then take another ligament, and carefully return to its proper place.
Then go back to the area above the fracture and strain it moderately, not too much or too little, as we have said in the first instruction mentioned above.
Then place strips of lin or fabric between the ligaments so that they are all equal, then tie it above a bandage and then place well-made splints underneebefore if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply soothing balm to the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for several days.
Then hold the splints in place, and let them be of moderate length from a wide reed or wood used for making grooves, or palm fronds, shaped as follows.
However, the splint that is placed over the fracture must be a bit thicker and wider than the others;
by other.
Then it is strung above the splints in the same way as you did with the first reset, then laid down on a bandage like in the initial setting over the fracture.
More tightly it is made, less loosely; and it is proper that the bandage be of moderate width, not too thick nor too thin, and be made of flax.
Because if the bandage is too thick, as I have seen in the works of the peasants who make their cord ends from flax twine, and it's a great mistake, because the cord cannot be evenly spaced if it is too fine, nor should there be less than two fingers' space between each splint.
And if the patient is in pain from the shoulders of their extremities after being strained into place, then apply cotton or raw wool rags beneath them so they do not slip.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the head is broken, I will tell you the remedy for this below.
And know that it does not happen to pull out all the bones of a limb broken on the first day. t or.
This is how the ancients used to repair fractures, dislocations, and twists: you take flour that stands against a mill wall, mix it with plenty of water, and create this concoction, which should not be too clear nor too thick, and use it as such. It is the common method for restoring fractures in various positions, especially in women and small children, because it is neither too cold nor too hot.
Another method of dressing to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: take pitch from pine resin and olive oil and onion juice and frankincense and gum arabic, each .x. Z.; myrrh and aloes, each .v. З.; camphor .viij. Z.; and make powder, mix with honey and plenty of water; if the person's complexion is hot, use this dressing as it has good composition and quickly heals broken bones, and works well for many individuals.
Another dressing method that works for twists: take gum arabic and cinnamon, each .x. Z.; myrrh and aloes, each .viij. Z.; arsenic .v. З.; bolus Armenian .x. З., and grind well, then mix with water or plenty of water, and apply it to the affected area.
Another way to treat dislocated joints and bones out of place is as follows: take new thread, grease it with wax and oil, then place it on the site. These bandages do not restore position but are good for soothing hot abscesses and properly alleviating pain.
Another method of bandages that restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earthy wood leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another method of bandages for bone healing and reducing the remaining swelling: take wormwood root, chamomile, violet flowers, bran, from each part; grind it, then mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, apply it moistened with coriander water or just water.
Another method of plastering more effective than the first, when chronic abscesses occur in limb restoration. Take roots of valerian, and seeds of flax, balm, mallow, and lavender, all equal parts; crush and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, according to the warmth of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras states in his book that one should not put anything other than a mixture of wax and oil on a broken limb for healing, except if it is too soft or too hard between two layers.
And it seems like Galen suggests that on a broken limb for healing, one should use dry substances that are somewhat warm, such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar things, as we have mentioned before.
Another method for making an emplaster to soothe pain and inflammeblend of hairs from scalps, or feathers of birds, and wool alike, all finely ground, and made into a paste.
And then you rub it on afterward, and be careful that the patient feels no pain or has moved any bones from their place; if not moved by hands within a few days.
And if pain comes to the area, or itching, relief, swelling, quickly remove and reset (the joint), and remove the emplaster now; take a light cloth, and a sponge soaked in seawater, and immerse (it) in water, and lift it up until the itch subsides, and be relieved of pain. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry bandage with flour and water or oil roseate, and bind it to a stick, until you are sure of the abscess heat.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and alleviate its pain, then gently reset with a bit of opiates, and do not bind it as tightly as before; gradually until it is well-adjusted.
And if you see that the abscess is red and warm and painful and swollen, and you need opiates and linen, then reset as before, similarly to how it was done initially.
And if it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not reset unless after 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and each time leave for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the dislocator feels at ease, and approaches nearing joint alignment.
Then you must reset it more than before, and the tissue swells up as I have said earlier; and if you see that there is dryness beyond necessity, know that inflammations cannot come. Arise the wound with warm water each time you dislocate it, and do so every day, and wash the sore area.
Thus by this method you cut the tendons of the limb and quickly follow what skilled physicians do to properly reset a twisted member: it is bad, and such procedures are fearsome, and I see nothing else but the use of traction and working correctly.
Of various methods of fracture Many ways of fractures there are, and diverse shapes, and the causes differ.
For there are fractures made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the way to the sacrum which is below the spine, as if made with an axe or club; and for this reason it is called "hachure" type of breakage.
Or the sword breaks through above and is called this type of fracture "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
And if there is an impacted blow, crack, neck bone fracture, or fall onto the spine, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent fissure that reaches the tunic which lies below or above the bone, where the wound may be large or small.
And if there is a wound that has penetrated the bone as subtly as fine hairs, and it is a small fissure, and hence this breakage is called "capillary".
and if the wound is made or by striking with an iron object, or falling, or similar cause, and the piece of bone enters inwardly, and the hole above it exists as do the holes for pots when they are set on their stands; so between the pot and the stand.
And this occurs more often with those whose bones atop are wet, just as in children.
And it happens through various types of fractures where small pieces become separated, such as fragments; and I will speak about them specifically.
And let us know all types of fractures by displacement underneath them, and the incisions on sinews, and by the corroded cartilage which is beneath.
And they; (et d do not as he sonte t and ous le trementd; that are the ou pr* est: S, so it.
In the treatment of fractures, beware of accidents to the patient, and if you see any bad accident such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever with chills, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions, cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the suffering comes first to you, and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day when you can move it.
If it is like this, and you remove the bone within seven days, so that the tissue under the bone becomes corrupted, then come the accidents we have mentioned.
If the bone fracture reaches the tissue covering the brain, then you must cut the broken part thus: and take out the skull where the patient is wounded severely, and reveal it above the bone in all possible ways, and below the wound's contour as much as possible.
If blood flow occurs and the bone or abscess is exposed, do as needed to help him, and it should be that you fill the cavity with moistened cloths in oil of roses. And make the wound rest until the abscess is pacified and blood flow ceases; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done in two ways of treatment: one way is that you cut at the narrow opening front, which is effective.
And then make another incision larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, pointed or made of iron; and when performing lightly, do not cut deeply into the head.
If the bone is out of place and hardened, it must be approached on all sides, making indentations with tapered instruments without piercing beyond the outer layer of the bone, ensuring a margin or circle around which the point does not pass; thus several should be made so each finds its spot at the edge of the bone, having tapering points for all tests; these are the three forms of tapered points.
The quality of cutting around the fractured bone is to place one tapered point on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the tapered point slightly, doing so all around, and with incisors cut the space between the perforations as subtly as possible, gently, as we have said, until you feel the bacteria on your hand or any of the tools that resemble pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have the bone pierced and cut, it is appropriate to remove any protrusion that remains from the bone with an instrument similar to scissors, but it must be finer and more subtle than the other cutting instrument.
If it remains anything from the small bones or scales, gently apply to one of the strains; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of treatment is what the Galen says, which is much wiser; and it holds strong, and that's his word. It is necessary first that you expose the bone part where the break opens up; and once you have exposed that part, then place atop the blade of this crescent-shaped incision tool, which has the following shape:
And do not cut through entirely, and the painful part is in two sides of the bone, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then gently tap with a small mallet on top, so that you lightly strike the entire bone, and be careful not to hit the covering below.
If it is close to the bone, gently touch the bone, because you do not want to harm or cause fear.
And if the bone fracture does not pierce all the way through to the skin and is cut only from above, with small fragments remaining, you should attend to that sharpness again, and remove the scales with a fine razor in which various quantities must be used, so as to apply most appropriately to each location according to the work and shape of the fracture.
If you approach from great heights, then proceed with more subtlety, and continue in this manner until it is done well.
In each of these hair cutting and subtle fractures, it is necessary to adjust according to its direction; and this is something that cannot be simply restored for those who have studied in this art.
And if the sinew is exposed, it is necessary to take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and smear with oil-rosin, and place upon the wound. bys; the 1 and if the text; a m on les chme en t
Allow it to remain as such for a day or two until the swelling of the abscess is calmed, then release it, and apply medicines like lily roots, barley flour, frankincense powder, and aristolochia, along with similar things; from these substances make powder, put on the wound, and apply thereafter medicinal ointments without causing a burning sensation.
Ensure that the wound is kept clean, without leaving any ointment or allowing it to gather dirt, as when dust accumulates over a fabric covering the brain, it wrinkles and hardens, causing great harm; for when one applies something mordant such as snake venom from above.
Take care then, should any unfortunate event occur to the patient as we have mentioned, it is doubtful and uncertain.
And if no blackness comes except from the medicine applied, and it has power, then one must take part of honey, and three parts of rosy oil with a linen cloth, and apply it to the wound. Then perform treatments as necessary until healed.
Know that sometimes the two pieces of the neck above are broken, or one by another, for they are bones; and the underside is cartilaginous, does not break but rather bend or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger or thumb into the nose near it, and place an equal break in your index finger, and up to the nostril on the other side, until the flap returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your actions.
And if the break is in the part above the nose and cannot bring the finger to its place, it is appropriate that you put a little bit of grease on the top of a small stick.
When the fracture is of two parts, repair it similarly, and hasten to restore it by the first day, if you can.
But after the seventh or eighth day, when the inflammation of the wound is soothed, then dress it with fine linen cloths, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you dress it with another kind of cloth on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be thick enough to fill up the openings in the skin.
the other, with the ben; and bon; en s.
At no time should you place goose feathers near the tent openings, and if they are in a certain sleeve, and there is a breach, and it blows on the sick person; do as follows:
And if an abscess comes to the patient while you work on it, then put some grease or cotton wool in oil roseate, or a small portion of diacron.
And if an abscess does not come to the patient, then apply plaster with barley flour and incense powder, mixed with goat's milk. Then place it on light gauze, but do not bind the patient or their limb too tightly.
If the nose break is small and it is broken into tiny pieces, extract with suitable splints, then make the incision, and treat various other injuries, as appropriate plasters and ointments for this case.
If there is no damage to the nose and it only has bruises, treat with bandages and apply poultices until healed.
From the fracture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no resulting wound, the fractures are not severe, nor are they broken in two, unless the inner part has swelled, which can be recognized easily.
If the fractures are in the right part, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fractures are on the left mandible, insert your index finger from the right hand and gently press the fracture internally, while stabilizing it with the other hand gradually until even.
And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced by two joints, it should be that you make an adjustment with a length equal to the parts.
If movements of the teeth occur or grinding, then restrain with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and place on the fractured jawbone cerotype, and lay over a double cloth; and lay over the cloth a large well-made stone, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and tie it as you may see fit, and command the patient to rest, and consume light meats.
And if you see that the shape changes, reset it daily, and then set what has changed back to its proper state; and place an ointment over it, with a powder of finely ground herbs or flour from sesame seeds, after you have removed the cerotype; and place a light linen over the ointamen
And when abscesses appear, treat them as we have said many times.
When there is a break and wound together, ensure none of the bone has been broken out; carefully extract the splinters with fine instruments.
If the wound is narrow, enlarge it gently according to your necessity.
And once you have extracted all these pieces of bone and it no longer remains in the wound, then dress the wide wound, and place on fine stitches to close it up until it is healed.
(tirq; If: C.n's." est s. The great break occurs many times at the shoulder, and breaks in three ways: where it is broken and torn apart into two parts with pieces, and it is easier to repair; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the procedures are when there is a fracture with a wound, so you have two assistants: one who holds the broken shoulder that has suffered the break, and the other extends the neck towards the injured part; then place the fracture evenly between your hands so that the shape is as it should be, without any appearance or unevenness.
And if you need to extend further, place the shoulder of the patient under a round rod made of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your necessity; then stretch and elevate the break, holding the rod with one hand and placing the fracture evenly as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the dislocation due to it coming in from the front, then it is fitting that the patient lies over their injured side, and places a middle-sized earring under the shoulder blade, while you, as minister, push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the dislocation rises.
Then approach the break of your bone, and if you find any fragments, it is necessary to cut below; gently extract the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, place this instrument on the dislocation area to prevent infection.
and it appears like a spoon, not sharp at the edges, and is to be of the width necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the flesh; and have two blades, if you see that need, with one being wide and the other narrow, as are the borders of the wound where you have treated when separating the bones.
And when you are sure of an abscess's heat, if it is a small wound, or if you doubt the size of the abscess, warm the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity.
And if an abscess comes forth, apply oil-soaked cloths and linens soaked in wine, and place on top.
The splinting of a bone when it is not painful or swollen, place on the bone plaster mixed with powdered molasses and sheep's fat, add light gauze pieces on top, and set a rod underneaturally if necessary. Then take a very wide band of palm width, then place a double folded towel over the protrusion, and the splint; then take a slender rod three fingers wide in length and circumference, and wrap it around the band so that its head remains level. And place the rod on the dislocation, turn the band around the neck, and below the healthy shoulder, and below the injured one; and bind each part, and when you see that the rod holds the joint firmly in position, and it is clear to you that the rod does not move over the broken bone, then reward him every day, and if the ligaments loosen, then tighten again.
And make the injured person lie on his back, and place a small pillow under their shoulder when they sleep to raise the shoulder upward; this will relieve the dislocation of the joint by supporting the shoulder, as you fasten the arm to the neck, and do not allow it to slip in an unfortunate way until 20 days.
Then restart the plaster, if it appears to be necessary, and strain and leave it as such until restored; and it is restored in at most 28 days, and sooner for some people.
Of the shoulder fracture
It sometimes happens that the broken or dislocated shoulder is not moving and cannot be moved by force; if you adjust according to the pattern of the breakage, and bend it in all ways as much as possible; then put powdered flour on the wound with plenty of egg whites, and light gauze; then place a double bandage over it, a little wider than the shoulder, without any stitches elsewhere on the shoulder, so that you use linen thread for stitching, ensuring that the suture is evenly cut; and then strain firmly with all your strength, such that the bone does not move from its place, and observe the joint every day; and each time it swells, strain again, and if the bandage comes loose or moves away from its original position, adjust it and apply a poultice on the painful area of the shoulder; and the broken shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when these numbers are fulfilled, release the stitches, and be careful, for it's not bone that sets lightly again.
And if a fragment of bone protrudes without breaking the skin, let it be cauterized as we have mentioned in treating an abscess with hot plasters.
And for the broken leg.
The leg is never broken in the middle but often near the end; and when it is broken in the middle, it descends below, causing great pain to the patient, loss of strength, and swelling, sometimes vomiting blood, and opening up joints in the fractured bone, which hurts terribly.
The restoration is that the patient lies on their back, places a pillow between their shoulder blades, then presses the shoulders and brings together the two ribs with hands, adjusting them gently in all possible ways until they appear as they should; then place splints and stuffings above the fracture subtly with salt or another light substance, envelop it in a cloth so that it does not move. Return the ligament to its round shape at the back, strain evenly, loosen gradually each hour if necessary, and strain again; if you need to remove due to corrosion or pruritus where it is, pain, or abscess, hurry up, remove it, clean the splint, and apply in whatever ways of treatments that come to mind.
From the broken ribs
That the break of ribs that they come with their back and forehead, and no more it is certainty, and so that they become hardened in the form.
And the reductions are such that you set the fracture evenly as it should be. Then place the splint, and strain with a stake if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is descending towards the kidneys, causing the patient great pain and numbness, as from pleurisy, for the bone has no tissue; it also causes weakness, dizziness, and vomits a large amount of blood, which is serious ill health, and the elders have applied much medicine.
And if those who say it should be administered foods that cause the stomach to swell, in order to push the fracture upward.
We do not attempt what we cannot achieve; if there are no puss-filled abscesses present, they will not appear. And if they have appeared, then apply the treatment.
And they said that one should apply pads on the area to absorb moisture and it makes sense; however, there is concern that the pads may attract excess fluids to the weakened area due to their placement.
; by a.stir ou the set a. ndest; they haved and# s but that t1 this if you. They are they be sume que laye- that isnt en seie est conti;
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the broken bone, causing doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision at the location of the fractured rib, and one must place under .i. instrument for warding off the syphilitic; afterwards, you should cut the bone, gently extract, and then sew the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with emplasters until healed. And if abscesses come up, put them on moistened linen cloths in oil roseate, and place at the location; care for it as needed so that it lies flush with the chest or where it should be, until healed.
Of the broken rib fracture
Never comes a breaking of the bone in the ribs, and rarely does it occur that they bow; similarly with the spinal column of the back. When such a thing happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when pricked with a needle, do not feel it. Know that in some cases it is fatal, but if they can move and feel well when strained and not, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if one puts care into it.
And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if their feet are softened, and whether there is an accident that involves hands, and on top of the back swells with windwaste and involuntary evacuation; and when it is felt above his belly, swells with involuntamoinal evacuation. And when it is felt on his back and he wants to sit up, cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not labor in its care.
And if this accident does not occur, then it is a less serious matter.
And the cure is to apply if there is an abscess heat, place rosemary or olive oil on the spine until it is eased; then place one of the comforting and drying poultices, bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until healed. And if any bone is dislocated, cover the area with a cloth; remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound, stitching it closed if large, apply an embalming ointment until healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, called "the skull's corner," use your left hand to grasp it, and hold equal with your right hand at will, then place a poultice and bandage, as needed; strain it, and if there are other dislocated bones, fix them, remove them, treat the wound until healed.
For breaking of the thighbone
Sometimes the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there is no slight reduction at the head; they cause a long deformity, descend to the pubic bone, come with pain to the place where they are located, and swell as though broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, until you are above the break; and discern which bones are broken and their alignment; and if the fracture is solely at the head, then adjust to make the break even, so it may become natural again.
And if the break is long or it descends to the pubic bone, then place the patient on his stomach so that the restoration of this fracture can be properly set. And when you have set it evenly, place on the plaster, then put a wooden or metal pole underneath, and hold the breakage so that it does not move; and mend the location from above the ribs until they are aligned again.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it until the abscess has calmed down, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to restoration, and hold as needed (without causing any further harm). And that is how it's done.
From the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is what lies between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if broken, it must be repaired according to one of the two ways: the first way being that you take a piece of ivory shaft. In this manner:
And take two pieces of wood as ligatures and tie them on top, then hold the patient above one piece; then pour some boiling oil onto the broken bone until it reaches the joint, and have a wooden arch in the middle, then place the fracture at an equal distance from both hands together; then you must mend the break so that it returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one suspends the patient on his hatterail, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands two ministers so that one washes the part above the wound with their hands, and the other washes below from top to bottom, stretching each towards its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too far out, tie a ligature below the wound and above it, and stretch each minister towards their part. And if the wound is close to the shoulder blade's neck, one should place a ligature midway between the upper arm bone and another near the elbow, below the wound; and similarly, if the wound faces toward the elbow, it requires placing a light ligature without strain until the wound heals evenly above its location, and towards the elbow; then align the wound as necessary, remove the ligatures if there are no abscesses.
And if an abscess does arise, do not strain it until at least six days have passed; apply a moistened bandage with oil of roses as long as the abscess is soothed; then remove the ligatures and the method of extraction is to place the empyema over the wound, assemble the arm above the shoulder joint, put your hand on the shoulder or chest; and apply a dressing, strain it against the joint and the arm until the arm is in its proper position unless any impediment prevents this, or if the bone has moved.
If you suspect the bone does not move, use splints and place a wider and stronger splint than the others over the fracture, with two spaces between each splint; then make sure each splint is large enough to extend beyond the break by three fingerbreadths on either side; then press down on the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter on treating a fracture, stronger and less frequently.
And if you see the seat of splints and pressure as we have said, when you restore the broken limb in the hour that is mentioned, and doubt that a hot abscess occurs, leave it tied until the seventh day as we have said; then check every three days to ensure no inflammation or swelling comes to the place where veins cannot form due to excessive length. If so, as we have said.
And if no such events occur, do not loosen the bandages for more than three or more days and let the patient rest on his back, with his hands over his stomach; and place a pad of equal thickness under the shoulder, and check every hour during the day or night that the appearance of the broken limb does not move or become softened by the ligatures; if so by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food we have set forth meat, in such a way that the flesh is tender; and when it begins to resume, let it be fat. And it is customary that the shoulder and limb must loosen bandages and administer baths and ointments for medicines of balsamum oil for the place pour mucidus. Et se les poils, si li estraint; et le jorz a li doit de laverent il ypunselet, adalent et le plas eveillee enxenil dant leu.
of the broken arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one small and attached to the forearm, and the other large and located above the elbow; sometimes only the large foscile is broken or both together.
When the small bone is broken, recovery and healing are easy, but when the large bebone is broken, sanation is poor and more painful than if both were broken together; if only the small bone is broken, it should be extended slightly gently and aligned.
by conttous it t (s; that themaire ]. Bon bon que en sone’doules; but also un they.
And if there is a break into pieces, put each piece back in its place; and if any are displaced that they prick the edge, do not attempt to restore them to their place, but instead make an incision by it as we have said before.
And if there is a break with a wound, discuss this particular case with the surgeon; then proceed with treatment.
And if at the beginning of restoration pus-filled sores appear, take a bandage made of oil balm and white wax; ensure it is neither too hard nor too soft. Wrap each sore subtly until they are calmed. Then remove the bandage, and apply an ointment powder with plenty of egg yolk, then place the stitches over the break, ensuring these are stronger and slightly wider than others; remember that there should be seven or more stitches depending on the situation: whether the fracture is in one bone or two. Tighten them more above the fracture compared to other parts, and each day bring it closer together as we have said at the beginning of this chapter; ensure the bandages are soft and moist, not hard or rough. Use linen threads for stitching, neither too thick nor too thin as we have mentioned. And after some days, treat both limb and ligaments. If any accident befalls the limb, as itching that comes to a limb, you must wash the member with warm water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not rest too tightly. And then resume the straining, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone released, proceed accordingly.
And if the numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too tightened, you must soften it a bit and let it be so for some time until sensation returns, then strain again.
And if none of these things that we have mentioned come to the patient, then let him sleep until xx days have passed or so; and place his hands on his neck, making sure both sides are equal, and be careful of movement and digestion, and he sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or xxxv., and possibly in xx days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the properties.
of a hand fracture
That at the back of the hand and on the forearm occur few fractures, and there come only frequent bends many times.
And when the sole of the foot or the forearm is fractured or bent, it must be that the patient cries out in pain, and lies directly opposite him evenly; then place his hand under the extended toe, and lengthen the ministers to align the broken bones, and set them level as they should properly join; apply a plaster and wadding if there is no abscess, then put an ointment according to the amount at the site; and wrap it in one linen drape.
If the fracture is near the wisdom tooth inside the belly of the sole, make a splint from cloth and instruct the patient to press it against their broken plant; then strengthen with a long bandage, ensuring its support is as large as the palm's breadth and apply the pressure accordingly.
If the fracture is in the foot, it is necessary to place a splint underneath and another one on top of the sole, so that the hands are kept open and straight; then wrap around entirely with bandages, ensuring the ties secure the joints between them.
If the fracture occurs in any of our joints and it's a dislocation, place them evenly as needed; and reinforce with bandages, and if you see fit to insert a small straight splint to elevate the displacement without movement; and if the fracture is like that of the index or other fingers, place them evenly, and secure with the healthy joint that follows; or bind all together in one holding, allowing some slight motion or use a splint as needed; and be mindful during recovery and placement of abscesses, and address what arises as I have described.
Of a broken thigh bone
The thigh bone is often broken in many places, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration involves placing a splint on either side of the break. And the patient lies face downwards, then each servant extends their hands equally on his side; and this is when the break occurs within the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, let one ligament be towards the palm, and the other ligaments below the fracture. Likewise, if it's close to the groin, then place the ligaments by the groin, and perform a traction; then you should set the bone equally with both hands as much as possible in its natural shape, and then apply a splint, unless an abscess appears.
And if there is a pus outbreak, let it be soothed first, then return to your work and care; the fracture is treated in this manner. You must wrap above the fracture with a double layer of two or three bands; leave any excess material hanging out, then turn the leg so that the ankle reaches the root of the knee, and place a long thread between the hip and the leg below the groin, with its head on top of the filament; then turn above the leg and above the hip with the bandage, and place a splint underneath the fracture; then apply leather straps to ensure even tension, and begin fastening four or five turns (or six) below the fracture; as you move further from the fracture, less tighten it. Then go back up to the two legs of thread that you placed between the leg and hip, and place three splints on top, until you reach the knee; and then untie it so that no pus or swelling occurs.
If it occurs and is dislocated as described earlier many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are caught, one must reduce them accordingly; and if they cannot be reduced, then the cavity must be split open, and a wire pulled through; and treat it as we have said until healed.
At no time is the thigh broken as when putting in place splints on a shoulder and arm; however, with this type of repair, it does not alleviate all the patient's suffering.
Know that the thigh is restored in one or two days, more or less, depending on the different temperaments of individuals.
Of the groove of the knee joint
It is known that in the groove of the knee joint, there are few breaks but many folds. And if it breaks, it's not just a crack or piercing, and comes to all wounds, feels like a wound, and this smells very bad.
And the restoration is that you put equal pressure on both sides of its legs, as much as it can move; then place the splint, and if needed, round an upright rod, and restrain it as required, then address all other injuries we have mentioned elsewhere like abscesses, which are hot and similar; you give to each accident what is due, until healed.
s
It is known that in the leg there are two bones: one is called "mustelz" by right and the other is called "foscile"; both suffer fractures as they do in the arm, and thus the restoration is done similarly to that of the arm, with all treatments being the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns from every part.
And if the smaller bone is fractured, it twists forward.
When the large bone is broken, it feels great pain and one can see it well; then return to its position. Then make an extension, align it evenly, and fasten the splints equally; however, it must be ensured that the breakage is not ugly, and if there are many pieces, the extensions should be minor and lighter; proceed according to your judgment.
And when you have completed your procedure, take two strips of hooped wood that measure the length of the leg on both sides, from the heel to above; then wrap each side with a bandage once and again tie them together in the middle, so the leg cannot incline to either right or left, and thus it is well. None should administer any other movement to the leg while made of wood, and properly place it for protection against movement at the break site where there is injury; move each day the leg to see if there are any bleeding wounds or other accidents; cure until it becomes healthy again.
On the fracture of the bone in the foot
To the ankle there comes no breakage, but to the bone of the foot there is never any breakage and to the joints little occurs except strain in various positions.
And if there is breakage to the bone of the foot, and you see these bones protruding from one another, place it on hard ground as though it were going to walk; then put your foot underneath its own, where the bones are elevated, and press until they return to their original positions. Then apply a splint and stuff inside, and place a small tablet of .ij. (two) pointed ends beneath the belly of the injured foot, then strain it back into position, and once you have wrapped bandages around it, along with other necessary things.
And when three or four days have passed, you shall remove the ligature, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
If there are any broken bones, restore them as we have described for the hand's bones; then measure a stake according to the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then place beneath the foot the tableau I mentioned, and hold steadily; if there are two or three or more, break each bone and apply a stake according to its amount, wrapped in one linen cloth, and fasten the tableau under the foot; so that they be aligned with the abdomen above the leg's head.
And it is necessary that you do not forget other things I have mentioned for other fractures, as we have said; and treat each injury as appropriate.
For the fracture of the bone of the wrist
When the bone of a woman's natural form is broken, she should sit upright and widen her stance, then lean towards her back slightly, held from behind; then fill her vagina with cotton, inserting as much as one piece of cloth; then have her stand up, and slowly lift her buttocks in stages, until the cotton slips into the entrance of her nature (vagina), restoring bone alignment with the insertion. When she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and once done, let it return; by doing this for seven days or so, the fracture will be healed. If you wish to ensure success, take a pouch made from sheep's bladeroften tied at one end with stringand fill it completely with urine: blow air through the nozzle until the bladder is empty; her nature will then restore itself. Then have her vagina filled with cotton and left as such for several days, until healed.
And when the bone of a man's or woman's finger is broken, restore it as we have described for the hip joint; these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who apply diligence and use this book. For fractures indicate various approaches to the right path of restoration: therefore, so be it.
When the frotteur of les cure, qui orses, and it la gue: a l’in brisures est pas li soignee du. Et si d’et de le retenir en, quant jors et de les jors, que pour une le s’a mordret; puis pire n'il ne croient.
Of break with wound
It is necessary for those who have a break with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be examined now so that the signs we have mentioned confirm them.
And if the wound is healed, if there remains lead poisoning, unless you have something else, then continue to restore the break in that same hour or day if no abscesses come.
t he:cordon ; c;t, they can be le se leso's the mele tre la anguille as de ust; please; do not d.
And if the bone is broken and appears at the edge revealed, it must be placed carefully with your hands in slight extension.
And if the extension is not suitable to place evenly with your hands, use this instrument made of iron, which has six or eight claws long, and its width according to the amount of the wound; thus, it is necessary for the master that he grasps three or four, depending on what is needed in each fracture treatment; let it be round and slightly thick, so it does not bend under pressure on the limb at your work, and placed firmly before, with a bulkier part ahead:
It is called "palainche" because it requires the curved head of the bone to be placed on the apparent part; and turned once until it returns, making them even against eachader. And if the fracture is subtle, and the extensions cannot well grasp the bone, then you must shave off the top of the bone so that the extensions have access.
If you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then use the cup of an appropriate instrument, either incising or sawing, if possible; then remove whatever is lodged in the bone with roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, understand that it may not be in its natural place. If you can make it so that it is in its natural place, then moisten a piece of cloth with vinegar-based black ointment properly; and do not put anything like pitch or other substances on the wound, lest it cause decay and corruption; then provide appropriate dressings after restoring the bnne, leaving the wound uncovered, applying covering all around according to the size of the wain, ensuring that the strain is not applied with the fracture; and many times this has been done by foolish doctors, causing death or decay in some cases; thus the pressure should be gentler and softer than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that there may be some other occurrence, as we have said, feeling pain at the place, do not put dressings; but wrap around in place of a dressing with durable cloths, and secure them. And when after one day or two days you see any pus coming from the wound, remove whatever you had placed on it all along with vinegar, and apply healing ointment for wounds as if an ointamoin tetrafarmacistical and similar to that.
It is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is relaxed and healed.
And it is proper that the limb be bandaged in such a way that the bow is bent slightly.
And if more than one day passes, and it cannot heal but remains bent, as there are small fragments of bone, so you must clean the wound with lint, and extract all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
byllde the t
From bruises coming over the shoulder blade
They often occur after the healing of the dislocation, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant sight is to see the condition of the limb; and by chance, it cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care then if the wound is fresh: If you administer stipulative medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, frankincense, and similar substances, or any of these alone or in combination, mix them with astringent wine or vinegar-water or egg white; and place the mixture in an infusion bag and squeeze it well without untying the knots daily; then dislocate it again and repeat this with another piece until inflammamoins have subsided. Or strain on a nicely made plaster as its properties are such that it draws all swelling off the limbs; and if the nodulation has already turned into hardness just like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so do at the top of the bandage, cutting away any excess, then take it to an experienced razor until it has disappeared.
When the fracture of the bone is healed and remains weak and delicate: for various reasons - one being that it was bound too tightly, and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many ligatures, preventing proper circulation to the limb; or due to a multitude of bleedings; or from excessive movements at inappropriate times; or because it has little blood within its body, thus becoming weak.
And the treatment is that you should encourage the patient to eat well and keep their body supple until blood has multiplied within them; give them baths and bring them joy and comfort; then apply poultices to the member, so as to attract significant nourishment, and frequently bathe it with warm water until nutrition reaches the limb again; and it returns to its natural form.
After the healing of an injured limb, a member becomes twisted
After an injured limb has healed and the bone is broken openly, and the form of the limb is ugly, but it still retains its natural shape: do not believe the madmen who say that you must break off a new member entirely, as many have done so on our land; such practices are blameworthy, leading to great evils and sometimes death. However, if the swelling and twisting are fresh, then it is necessary to raise them with hot water or mollifying herbs cooked, like meadowsweet leaves, roots, and comfrey, etc.; and make a medicinal poultice like good diaquilon, and take musk of meadowsweet, and confit with pig fat or oil from sesame seeds, then apply the poultice; or take oily figs and grind them with barley bran, and similar remedies that weaken tightness.
And never is the knotting of bones addressed by continuous and prolonged friction with wet hands. And be sure to move the limb every hour.
If the twisted and hardened condition is similar to that of stone, it needs to be removed with iron, if necessary, cut down to the bone using a delicate saw-like tool; then apply poultice and careful treatment.
This is the book of dislocations.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs, it must now be gently moved back to its place.
For if you delay, and the leg swells, and perhaps it is difficult to set back in place; therefore, do not move it until the hour when it is swollen: often this brings about inflammeback and other pains.
Also, when this happens, make the patient lie down, until the swelling is calmed; then bathe the member with warm water and oil, then gently flex it, and treat each limb as required by its condition.
f Armf: TI; ça;
Of jawbones
Sometimes jawbones become dislocated outwardly, and the type of dislocation is in two ways: either they are slightly misplaced from their positions, becoming somewhat loose; or they are completely displaced, hanging towards one side, causing saliva from the mouth that cannot be held and preventing closure of the mouth and wrapping around the tongue with speech.
When dislocation is small, it may return to various positions.
d thecks that he-do so M� market.
And in such a manner that the minister dries the patient's head, and inserts the mirror slightly from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth; if the dislocation is of two parts; and let the other hand be ready to place it equally; and instruct the patient to soften their mandibles, and move them in all directions.
And places the mirror evenly, until it returns to its place.
: and it de li m eues mete tu me c, a l’ovraie le chevres tu les teu, et en lieu la m as se, ens du d. Et the chestroma s’en; Et rampin the est dislocation, se coum de les gue:
And when they are returned equally, and the wound of the patient is well closed up, then place on it a cloth made of a mixture in a vessel of oil and wax, and lightly bind with soft threads.
and the patient sleeps on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not move to either side or strain at all, but gently eat tender meat until the pains are gone, and the jaws are well nourished.
and then he may eat what he wishes lightly, without opening his mouth while eating or drinking until the jaws are well nourished and healthy.
When the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour and are not returned to their places, fever and usual sweats may occur, and possibly intestinal perforation, and sometimes they may expel their contents entirely.
And when you see this, then say that it is a deadly condition; and many times the one who suffers from it dies within seven days.
Of the forehead or frontal bone.
The powerful ones cannot dislocate within the ribcage from its continuity to the pelvis, and it is never dislocated once properly aligned; indeed this is felt by him.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then press firmly with your palm at its place, and it will return; then place under the plaster and bandage it, and secure.
and the knee which is towards the thigh cannot dislocate; if not possible, and if it dislocates once again, place it back in its location as we have said; then place under plaster and bandage it securely, and advise the patient to rest until they are healed.
And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is displaced from its place.
Li membieres et les os est desavisez par le movement qui avient quoi puisse ains que il ne teste puisque demorer; mais si li est grandement malsain, se doit cauteriser avec saindsont li est ; mais s’est :
That one must know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one where it dislocates from the lower part of the arm to above; and the second occurs at the upper part; and occasionally above, but this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate backwards from the shoulder, nor internally with the nerves; and sometimes dislocates upwards towards the arm, especially in those who have little flesh, as for them it happens quickly; while for those with enough flesh, it moves slightly, and returns easily.
And sometimes there are individuals who experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, thinking it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you test it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that with dislocation when it descends towards the socket, and there is a distinction between the injured shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their marked difference. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the socket to where the top of the shoulder reaches, as if it were some eyes; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose nor move in any way.
by the t grifen se la man thompledesta a l's
And this manner of dislocation is not merely to return it when new or if the child is unwell.
And the method is for the minister to lift the hand of the patient upward, then remove his shoes from under the seat and raise the joint forcefully into place at that spot; the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, so he can put them back on, which will happen quickly.
les.
Then place the cloths on the patient's back and put a strip of linen around his shoulder, not too weak nor too hard, then position the straps on the talus under the strip, lift the head of the dislocated shoulder carefully, and treat the injured hand.
and other remedies treat the injured hand's head, so it does not move forward; that shoulder is returned immediately, and observe if resetting follows this method:
And make sure a taller person is present; and they stand facing the patient's side, and place their shoulder undernee And other remedies rub the hand below for the patient towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then weigh down with something heavy, and the dislocation now returns.
And the resetting is done in another way: by sticking a long iron rod into the ground so that the shoulder resembles an arrow shaft and is neither too thick nor too thin. Then it is placed under the patient's head but with sheets beneath them, and the shoulder remains long as the rod. After that, their hand is stretched to the opposite side properly, so the joint will return to its place promptly.
Et s'il ne veut pas retourner pour toutes les raisons que nous avons dites, alors faites cette cure : prenez un tison de deux bras de grand et quatre doigts de large, qui ait le chef rond afin qu'il puisse entrer au milieu du côté de l’épaule, selon la forme suivante :
Ensuite, enveloppez le haut de la fistule avec une toile mouillée afin qu'elle ne blesse pas le patient, puis placez-la sous l’épaule du malade ; étendu ses bras sur le long fust (tison), fixez l’ajutoire sur le fust et le bras vers la tête de la main. Puis mettez le bras au-dessus d’un écran large, tenez les mains à l'aval et laissez le corps pendu dans l'autre direction : assurez que la jointure est maintenant correctement positionnée.
Et quand elle est ainsi, quelle qu'en soit la manière, si il convient de placer sous l’épaule une spere (tison) d'uneine égale ; puis appliquez la plâtrer à poudre fine sur toute l’épaule et autour, avec encens et aubun d'uef; rétablissez immédiatamenr le lien au-dessus de la plâtré et embrassez la main à son cou, les mains reposant ainsi.
And it is necessary that you move little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; then gradually increase movement after 5 or 6 days, and move it; if it is firmly set and not softened, it has healed.
And if the joint is strongly out of place due to moisture or another reason, it is necessary that you apply three cautery treatments as previously instructed in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do everything as instructed and it remains dislocated after 6 days, and the joint cannot hold or lift its arm upwards, then understand that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut off or stretched out or softened; and understand that the joint will never be firmly placed in its place.
The dislocation located towards the leg and buttocks is made by impact, extension of hands, and another instrument; treat until it becomes healthy again.
And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb and later weakness in movement, many times the patient must use it until the stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its original state.
In cases of double dislocation
It is said that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by points and returns to them; when it has been dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, the dislocation cannot be reset because one can clearly see and feel it, and it dislocates according to each position. And when you join the dislocated elbow with its counterpart, if it is clearly visible to you. For the joint is raised, and cannot bend or touch the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary to reset it as soon as an abscess appears, because if the abscesses come, then repositioning would be painful; and perhaps not all can be reset in total, especially when they are behind; this type of dislocation is worse than others, causing more pain, and possibly leading to death.
The restoration is when it can be returned to its place by extending the hand to your two hands; and spread out his arms, and turn the hands downwards according to the cord around, forward and backward, joining the joint with his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back as he doubles his hand with his hand, and bends at the root of the palm cord that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, you must do strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and tie the wrist with a bandage so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm in each direction, then wrap a long and wide double cloth around it.
When the muscles to the joint have reached their joining, then oil it with any oil to soften the joint, and then reset the joint properly until it returns.
And when it is in place, then apply dry dust with egg yolk, and reset the fracture properly, and support the arm against the neck of the patient, leave for a few days, then release it.
If the joint is firmly in its place, then dislocate it and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold tightly, repeat the splinting and tying, leaving it like this for several days, until it is securely set; then dislocate it.
If it feels instability after the reset of the joint, and if it moves again, then bathe it well and rub gently, pressing until soothed; place a fat sheep wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then wrap it, and give it another bath. And when it sweats, rub the joint gently at first, then replace the sheep wool, and give another bath; do this two or three times until healed; if you see that, put moist wheat flour heated with butter on it, and wrap around. It will return to its proper condition.
The displacement of the hand
The displacement of the hand joint occurs, and its return is easy compared to other joints; thus it must be promptly returned to its place within the same hour as it dislocates, ensuring that any swelling subsides or abscesses cease.
And the method of returning it is to place the affected hand on a table and extend its members; then the physician aligns them equally, placing their palm over the dislocation site, applying pressure until realignment occurs.
the eye ones. If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a table, and the healer places their hand under that joint appearance. If it returns now, this is good.
If not, strain from calming abscesses with leeches, and let them do so again to start anew.
And if it cannot be borne, and you are unable to place it back in its proper position after any number of days, the misaligned joint persists.
and it does not allow the patient any movement until their hands are thoroughly weakened, and they cannot grip anything at all; then understand that the nerves or vessels are cut, so there is no other remedy than to grasp with fire near the wound, which may sometimes prove ineffective.
And when the hands are at rest, place it on the plaster we have mentioned, then stretch and leave for 5 days, then release and let be like this.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no weakness, then apply hot water poultice, and rub until clean.
Of the dislocation of the hands' joints
Never are dislocated the hands' joints on either side, never at the back or front of the palm;
to mainsides are of the les dous jours au dose soit est du est de parfue sont li sont les tairements dism. ould les mainte est l’ostrum of s quesle, et le part le la isntest on doux a cimez est ou sont de li couche, and then the oint are to est que ils mains: and, and, dose les cheques parolee.
Leave it for two days, and then set it level on that day; and if it is not improved, as we have said, dislocate it again the next day, and allow movement, but restrain it at night; do this often, until it becomes tight.
Do the same for if it is dislocated in the hand's stomach area, and do as you have done before, until it becomes straightened; similarly do this when it is displaced from another side.
Pain relief of the lumbar region of the back.
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are many dislocations, there is no remedy, as it hastens death for the patient.
And the signs are that the expulsions occur suddenly without warning, and they cannot be held in place, causing many times to soften a limb or one of the hips, or both arms or legs.
And many times it moves in four parts; when the lower part moves, it is called "gilbocineta" (a term possibly referring to hollowing out):
The treatment is that you must reset it if lymphangitis has occurred from infancy: there should be no healing or health in the end.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things say the old ways of healing with many words, for there is not much gain in all.
but I have abbreviated according to my intention and have formed extracts in various ways.
t (cheste con grand: the ben triguissent ete main 1: Mx esttill'com se cequately line f the
And also those that come directly to two sides, which cannot be cured without addressing the one specifically that comes along the back, as I say;
And it is that the patient should be stretched on his back evenly in one place, and have support underneath him, so he does not arch.
Then place a bundle of straw under the head firmly on the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage above the joints of the patient, and one for the hips, and for the knees, and for the ankles.
And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the other on the feet, among the two inflamed areas;
And be well closed, the inflamed area as we have said, and the healer places his palms along the spine lengthwise until it returns.
the that the. And place the mirrors of his fingers on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you see that this happens with a twist towards the hand.
And it is that you insert two spits at the head of the arm on one side and towards the fingers of the other two, and between each spit, have a space about as long as a palm.
And each spit should have a peg where the twist turns correctly and be firmly fixed in the ground so that it does not move; and between each pair of spits there should be another spit turning, against which the ligaments turn, and two small spits about as long as a palm for turning the twist.
And then wrap the ligament that is among the sinews at the neck toward the head, and the other ligament toward the fingers at the other end, with each assistant turning their torque to all of the ligament, and the master aligns the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, place a desiccating poultice with plenty of egg yolk, and then the plasters, and then an insole from a tablet of .iii. ounces long, that points to the source of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine; then apply a ligament as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient until it is well again;
and if at the end of healthiness, it is necessary to administer soothing and alleviating medicines, with the insole that we have said before; and never once shall I administer a piece of lead.
At times it appears in the rear spine of the back, and one thinks that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone breaking, which means one should not have any assumption: perhaps it would bring death.
Of hip dislocations
He says that the dislocations of the hip and shoulder joints come from force only, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind; more inside than outwards, and less in front and back.
And the recognition of his dislocation is such that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer and opens more on the diseased knee joint than the healthy, and he cannot double the painful knee at the fire. And there is the leg that is near an inflamed abscess, because the shoulder of the thigh comes to it.
And the sign of those who come at disadvantage, so these accidents are contrary to what was mentioned before.
And the signs of those in front are that their legs are well aligned with completion; however, do not double the pain in the knee, and if you wish to make them walk, they cannot before, and hold back urine, and swell the vein, and as it walks, passes over the ankle.
And the signs of those behind are that they cannot expand their knee or double it, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the vein is softened, and the head of the hip to below the ribs.
The signs of this type of dislocation are that you recognize if the dislocation is recent, and it remains according to its position, there is no treatment; and one must not have any assumption.
When the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocating, quickly return the joint to its place, press it inward and outward, and move it right and left; perhaps it will return on its own, requiring no further treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must enlist the help of a strong assistant and support the leg firmly with two hands or with a strap under the knee. and another assistant extends their hand over the thigh so they can place their hands on either side of the calf, then gently pull with a strap around the buttocks; while another holds the head with the strap.
And they extend above and below all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground at once, and hangs suspended.
This manner of extension is common in four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is fine.
If not, it requires attention to the corresponding case. When dislocation is of the jaw, you should bind the patient on their healthy side, then tie the ligature at the base of the hip and where the bone protrudes, extending the ligament upward toward the angle, and towards the femur;
Then engage other ministers with your arms and embrace the large groin of the affected thigh, extending it forward completely; now it will return to its place immediately; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, then you must bind both feet of the affected side together with a strong soft bandage around both heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then hang from the head of a stick and let two arms be extended; then command one minister to embrace the top of the groin, and have another ministers hanging with the patient, who fully embraces the groin, because the joint returns quickly now.
When the dislocation is on the underside, apply to the patient, as we have said in those with gilbosity, and properly tie a ligature above the affected leg, and above the foot similarly.
Then place two fires, one at the top and another below, then insert a fire between the thighs above the affected area in the patient's middle. And place wet cloths around it, so that they do not bother the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and he who performs surgery places his hand equally on the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. But if not, place on a table and press as we have described in the dislocation section, lying the patient on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended with haste, and as I have said; place your hand on their painful side, then press with the other hand, extending towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it should not be extended downward or lifted upwards, but rather as if his heel was dislocated in that direction, as we have mentioned regarding lying on one's side with both knees bent. And it lies on its face, and the ligament is stretched as we have said before, and one must place their hand upon the joint against the bone.
And it will be ready when the patient extends their legs and they are even; then bring the buttocks together, place a splint, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move.
And it rests for three or four days before the splint is removed, and a splint is placed again; and if you see that they are even, then bind as before, and leave it for three days; then remove the splint, and allow them to walk gently until the member is strengthened.
Of shoulder dislocation
The knee is dislocated in three ways: it can be displaced upwards and downwards, and behind; but not forward.
And the signs if you command that he instructs the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not dislocate; for healing.
And the restoration of all is so that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back to his face, and place your foot under yours.
Then take his thigh in your palms and retract between your thumbs, then bend the two ribs of the thigh completely; other ministers extend his foot until the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign that it is correct when he can slightly feel his leg against his hip.
And apply the poultice on it and raise the leg against the hip joints at once for three or four days, then untie it; and do not let the patient walk until the limb is well supported.
And if the limb is not at all, it must be firmly extended as we have said in the treatment of the elbow, until it is set right.
Regarding ankle dislocations
The ankles are never fully bent or unbent and within them lie the arteries.
there s:
If dislocations are slight, it must be gently extended to its hands when barely touched.
And when it is completely dislocated, one must make the patient sit upright and support with a stool by placing it under their leg just above the ankle.
Then turn the foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice to the left side; then extend it upwards gently and place the foot back in its normal position.
s e est pa (tirke t.
If it cannot return thusly, make the patient lie on their back on the ground with a firm support placed between their thighs and wrap a cloth around them so they do not move.
Then dye the minister's thigh and have another minister extend the feet with hands or straps, so they are tied to the neck of the foot. Then extend each minister equally, and the support should remain between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when extended.
Then correct the displacement so it is even again with your hands, and use other methods to tie off the healthy leg below, and the displacement will return quickly.
And when it reaches a point, apply the plaster and insert stitches above, firmly tighten them, and tie off the thread to the leg, and protect the veins that are behind the ankle, so that the bindings are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings loosen, re-tighten them; then remove on the third day or fourth, and advise the patient to walk by four days. And if it goes beyond this boundary, it is not secure that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
:
When both are dislocated, they must be extended without much effort, which is an easy thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any of your lower back or foot bones, it must be done that you make the patient sit on something flat or a table standing upright, and place your foot under where these joints are affected, then press firmly with your foot until they realign.
and when it is aligned properly, and nothing appears to be out of place, then under the sole of your foot put a table on two fingers, press firmly, and leave for three days, then remove it; and let him rest until he is well again.
Of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound occurs with a dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies:
If you are not wise in the treatment, unless you are skilled in the art and have practiced it extenspertly, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to action; then do not be rash.
by the in a lame et bon they ougte: When you see hope, reset the limb to its place now, so that the abscess may heal.
And when the limb is in place, apply soothing substances to the abscess immediately, and treat the wound as needed with dry ointments.
And if there is a dislocation and broken bones need to be addressed, do so with small pieces of wood or horn as we have discussed for simple illnesses.
mar:e the. ça; est l'sticy le ben sonttre, also tu cont� s: th's bon g ne ce ou le quill that. The short
