Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the tail of the science of medicine, and together with its fulfillment through explanations and statements. And it came to me in a vision that I have completed this work with this treatise, which is part of the book of surgery, namely "cirurgie".
And because the work of hands is well known in our region and is widespread everywhere, if it perishes, there will be no one left to practice it, and let us not delay the wounds that little old descriptions found in ancient books written by the hands. And from this came the error and pride, understanding is closed, and knowledge is separated.
Or I think that I will revive this treatise in its entirety according to the path of explanation and announcement, and bringing together the forms of fire cautery instruments, and other tools from the work with the alignment of the declaration and preparation as it is proper.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated. And it is necessary for someone to meddle in the science of anatomy as Galiens says, so long as he knows the judgment of bones, and their forms and joints and separations, and knowledge of bones and nerves and blood vessels and the number of limbs, and movement and resting, and its origin.
And as Ipocras says that it is not much with the work of hands and in this field particularly.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that who is not familiar with what has been said before, he will get into error and hurt people; I have often seen many such as are meddlers in this science who abandon it and its sense.
For I saw a foolish man who inflicted an abscess on the neck or groin of a woman and cut her arteries there, because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her hands.
And I saw another man who betrayed a large stone from the belly of a man, and he took with him a piece of the bladder, and was killed therein three years later.
ouns esprit desuet ayevein thees: "eaux leu lait, euexamitejournele it'soldescripture oferre. Whatgloat esse ateirol:wok:meatloire. Whaten'air fromage.autein:fromentire.
And there was another physician who treated a duke of our land, who had his leg broken, and with the break he got an open wound; and the doctor's ignorance forbade him from setting the fracture on top of the wound using strong linen, and left no chance for salve in the wound, and then commanded not to loosen it anymore; and he waited until the leg was completely healed and the knee joint came to ruin.
I was called upon to come to him, and hurriedly came to unbind the leg; and when I saw that I had unbound it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all avenues of correction had already been exhausted or the limbs were involved, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb as long as the limb was entirely lost.
And there was another physician who collapsed the abscess and then inflamed it due to the malice of his lordship.
For a cancer, when it is pure in its melancholic state, there is no need for touching with iron if it is not partly open; otherwise, one cannot entirely eliminate what has been corrupted.
Therefore, dissecting the body's parts, you must understand that works of hands are divided into three categories: in other words, there is danger in various positions; and I will show in each page of this book where it has fear and danger.
For the reason you must guard yourself so that the foolish physician does not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons and engage in your most painful and resolute manner, and use the better way so that with the grace of God you shall be saved; and let diseases spreading from you. And let nothing make doubt in this world to glory.
llastreveslustelocched 13reveuledifrevelvaillexseurone.rescarter:nature
I have devised this treatise according to .iiij. chapters.
The first chapters are about fire and medical cauteries, and these chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and forms of traction, and instruments for performing cauterizations, and everything necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about dissection and cutting, and suction cups and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered with the forms of traction.
The third chapter is about treating dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered from the head to the feet, as well as forms of traction.
So, with our memories of the work, it is necessary that I state the quality of the aid and the harm caused by each condition.
I say that the quality of the aid and harm is the longest and most subtle science and secret replies; and to this topic spoke several physicians, and they agreed on it; and please them little with their words, as fearing lengthiness.
I say that cautery assists universally in all conditions where there is matter, for example, two conditions: hot condition with material and dry condition with material.
In the hot and dry combined condition of matter, no one came to an agreement, and they said that cautery is great help; while others said otherwise, that cautery is only helpful for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be a treatment for heat-related diseases caused by heat or dryness; and those who said otherwise claimed that cautery does great help in treating heat and dry disease that comes from within humans. For when you compare the shape of the body and its moisture to the hot condition, you change the shape.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it many times through experience.
And in all ways, no one dares to contradict those who have tried it and know the master of cauteries, and the diversity of human conditions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the remedies and spaces of ten days; but we fear for cold and moist conditions. And all the wise ones gathered together and agreed on the cautery.
And you should know, my child, that a fire cautery is full of medical secrets and more mercy than the hot cautery of medicine.
For the fire is simple, and it does not come from wounds but only to the member that is cooked, and it does not harm other members if named.
The hot cauteries come from members other than the one treated, and bring diseases of serious discharge to the affected member; and by accident they cause the disease.
The fire by its highness and mercy of its substance does not do such things, unless there is excess.
And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it was above the verdant fields of things; and because of this long duration of speech, I apologize for it, as I do not like to spare you the secret that is returned or by fire, and the quality of the work, how it relieves diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstration; so take it into consideration.
And you should know, child, that they agreed on the time when fire cauterizations must be performed and exempted themselves from it.
And I say that fire cauterization is suitable in all times, because the nuisances suffered by it are aided by the use of the cautery; and primarily if the cauteries are for necessary wounds that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the member due to delaying treatment.
And you never think, my child, as the wise men do; for to a disease cured by fire cautery there is no return; and they say so; but it is not like they claim, because fire cauteries are not medicine that changes the constitution, and dries out the humors which cause pain, and they are valued more than medicine used for speeding up its value and virtue.
And it is said that the disease grows again according to the constitution of the malady and its body, and the virtue of the illness and its appearance; they are assembled in him with superfluities through acquiring foods and other things, unless cauteries were administered therein or it had little excess and moisture, as fire cauteries for pain, and similar things, and no such pain returns again; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not call fire cauteries the backbones of medical treatment, and this is to see; they believe it doesn't compare with other treatments in any disease, but their understanding is false, and we apply fire cauteries as a means of treatment for no illnesses and it is worthwhile. 20e quatorne :esme laissu envoiur les pense durement cautere la letres: "Bé: "srele "Iesla testes of itoncles acoin "C: Theuccessor " :erence.
The old say that gold instruments are healing tools compared to iron ones, and they did not mention harmful effects but only the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; and they said the hairs from cautery do not fall off, but it is just a sight since I have tried it myself, and I found that in some people.
And as for heating gold instruments, you do not know how much it is affected by the color of gold, and if it suddenly cools off at once; and if you heat it too much, they become like fire; and therefore there are enough difficulties involved.
And for this, we use fire cautery because it has made our work more effective in the past.
I have ordered this chapter to be organized around these main points, so that the content becomes easier to find.
The use of open caustic instrument (cauterization) is discussed in this context.
These cauteries are valuable both for their thermal and cooling effects on the brain, and due to various causes such as severe headaches ("soda"), numerous bodily fluids affecting important areas like the head, ears, and a multitude of dreams and chest pains, mainly maladies originating from cold so-called "frostbite," paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that it expels the maladies with a medicinal solution which resolves the chief (head) by removing either III nuisances or III, depending on whether the virtue and power of the instrument allow the patient to endure; and then restores the chief again.
And then it is suitable to place between your hands, and put your fingers on the body part; after that you insert the palm' Written by Dr. David M. Schleicher for The Counterpoint, a publication of the Foundation for Economic Education (FEE). Read the original article here.
And it sets on the skin with ink, and then draws down and pulls out your hand little by little dislocating; then lightly lift your hand, and reward the skin so that you see the bone .i. small piece; and if you do not see it, then repeat cautery until you see the bone as I have said; afterwards take a little silk, and put in moistened cotton inside, and place on the skin, and let it stay for three years; afterwards cure the tetrapharmacy wound which is called "tetrapharmacy", so that it heals.
And they said the old man that as long as more water is poured on the wound, it will purify itself; and for this reason it helps to heal.
And none of these said that you must leave the cautery so long until a part of the bone is broken off, and then treat that which has been broken from the bone, and heal it.
And the other says that you must leave the cautery so much until it is as wide as .i. button which women put in their shoes for it to draw out fluids because of this reason, and therefore you should pour water over the wound long enough; afterward, you must heal it well.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me entirely good in every aspect; there are none that cause fear in anyone' Cookies are a popular snack among people of all ages. Explain the health implications of consuming cookies frequently, and suggest ways to enjoy them as part of a balanced diet without overindulging.
The phrase appears to be fragmented and lacks context, possibly referring to the pain in one's mouth:
sainct laisse sié queles l'it'santillement:es : 'nature. Iting : 136000000.comme itérits :1èrele. Ifraising of thean05eux. ITEMostre (a lesiure, aspeak4 himana andclaus :1200escrivente. It'wisere: 13rdentice.
Beware that the shoulder joint of the patient is naturally strong, and it should not be too cold; however, let us cauter around there a little as we have previously mentioned.
After making cautery on each horn bone just at the bone, as we have previously mentioned, and do one cauterizing around it called "vassels"; and place your hand so you don't see the bone directly: in these cases, the patient feels too much greater pain than others, and I will speak about them later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those used for most of the head's core, and this form is:
at the core or center of the bone When there is sudden pain in the central part of the bone and the illness extends to the oil (blood), and the joints are cleansed with universal medicines, and all other treatments mentioned for dividing diseases have not been effective; however, one should cauterize according to two methods, which is medicine and fire.
The cautery of fire and medicine, when prepared as a decoction (a method of boiling or steeping herbs to extract medicinal properties), it takes two applications on the respective joints; then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can restore the decoction under the skin; and if it is restored well, it leaves for about thirty-one hours. Then unbind and treat with fire sticks the restoration area until now .ij. years or .iij.; then place on cotton balls soaked in wax as much as needed to cover the healed area.
After the cauterization has been done and if you see that it is healed, and if there are any of those burned medicines or treatments I have written about or used in burning medicines;
The iron caution (cauterization) is done thus. Lighten the heating iron of this kind;
And call it "closed" because the head is shaped like a clove or has only a little curvature, and in appearance seems small; and place on the painful spot and touch with your hand, and move slightly forward, so that the edge of the spine's skin bears more weight, and let your hand prevent the artery from burning, as it moves further away.
After applying cotton to the wound and placing it on the spot for two years; then I apply moistened cotton in tallow, and then treat the ulcer until it heals completely; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the "cultellare" cautery at all points of its tip, be careful not to cover the artery within this migraine that is not ancient.
of the ulcer
When curing an ulcer as we have described in the divisions of diseases and it doesn't improve, it is required that you heat the "cultellare" cautery until it becomes white; then draw a line across half a dozen fingers on the remaining wound area, hold your hand once, and stretch so that the artery is not covered in this healing process, and also warn of the mandible which remains mute when moved, and the nerves do not have any regard for malady or spasm, and warn to let the blood flow from the artery as it becomes coagulated, or coagulation occurs, immediately especially with concern to whom we know nothing about and who is not a student or practitioner; but I will tell you how to handle residual sanguineous fluid in this section of the book, and show you where on the wound it appears as noted.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease and the sufferings are present, then cauterize it again as we have said in our teachings, and treat the wound until it is healed; and when you see, administer with the cautery we have mentioned or with the one used for extracting the artery, using two knives; and these cauteries are better than any other and more effective.
of the pain in one ear, colder
When the ear comes with pain of frost and it has been provided with remedies and other treatments that we have mentioned in our division of diseases, for these pains do not cease, thus heat this "pouin" cautery as follows; from which form is:
After piercing both ears, and if the pain is in each earlobe: and at .xxiii. car ongein of allum deffortes les sejourrede l'orse eaicte cele perefice :entrail des fois il estamee.
Of the torture of the mouth
The torture that must be treated with cautery is only those which move by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and it should not make use of cauteries from wounds or exudates of blood clots.
When you treat this kind of torture that moves by phlegm and expectorations from the head and gargling, and it then requires that you cauterize with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little distance forward on the temple, and the third in the alignment of the two lips; and place the cautery where the area is open, and apply the cautery to the top of the ear above a slight distance from the horn' pivot point, and another in the temple similarly distant; let the cautery remain as long as the moisture bursts out; and that is the shape of the cautery:
And there is the cutter-like shape that we have shown you before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after curing it, as I have previously mentioned, provided it remains sound.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said before, and there is no profit, the patient does not have fever, yet he performs three cauterizations: two on each horn pivot point of the skull, one pushing back the head (as described previously), and another called "vasselz" under which the mouth-stomach area is covered; and you must treat it as we have said before.
Of litharge
This kind of disease requires giving the patient large years and mercury-based pills to treat the brain; afterwards, he removes the headpiece of the affected person, and places it on the occiput's emplastre (a piece of metal used for treating wounds) made of cinnabar or sulfur which is described in the texts about bandages. And that is how you perform this type of cautery: as I have said before.
If it is so then healthy, good; and if not, he will do. And for each one of them, two strikes are made downwards from the top of his head to an interval of one finger between each strike, and with a large piece of iron .two pieces of wood; and treat him as they treat others, and if you see fit, and the patient suffers much, then he will do for one hundred blows in moderation; and if necessary, another two strikes on the horns, and treat it until healthy; and whichever cautery is called "olivare", as I have said before.
Of cold steel chief It is required that the chief be seasoned by years and everything we have said before; then he strikes down the patient's head twice, once on each horn, and one behind it and three above the spine of the neck; and if you have more skill, and the corpse is moist and the patient suffers much, and the illness is severe, so strike him with four blows under the spine of the back; then leave him until he becomes a skilled physician, and care for your hand; afterward treat him until he is healthy, and the cautery which is called "olivare" as we have said before.
This term translates directly from French to English as "epilepsy." In historical context, it would refer to an illness characterized by recurrent seizures, which may have been treated with cauterization techniques according to medieval medical practices. However, in the absence of further text or specific references, we can only provide this direct translation without interpretation or additional explanation.
The epileptics must use sharp cauteries only for those who are asthmatic, and it is required to first season the brain with years of experience and other treatments that we have mentioned in relation to how long the patient suffers greatly from severe pain when medication is not effective. This part of a hypothetical medical text might describe a specific treatment protocol for epilepsy during medieval times, where it's suggested only certain conditions (in this case asthma) might warrant cauterization and emphasizes the importance of experience in managing such severe cases.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer much, then he will perform gargling and chewing to season the brain sometimes with bones or meat; after that he strikes down the chief in moderation, and makes one cautery according to what we have said before, and one on the back of the shoulder, and one on each horn; and if the patient suffers greatly and is suffering, then he will perform cauteries as I have described for someone who has paralysis and stiffness of limbs, on the spine's backbone and neck, and that specific cautery which we call "olivier" in accordance with how I have said before. This hypothetical extract might describe a treatment regimen designed to alleviate severe symptoms of infantile paralysis (also known as polio) during the medieval period using various methods including gargling, chewing bones or meat for supposed therapeutic effects, and cauterization techniques.
If the patient is an infant suffering from epilepsy, then he will perform one gentle cautery in this manner: ...
Liere: .iij. In thexentorce leu, eau feces deschiface dite deffa de ceufin theursse toise ices etiquel estilej'sesurge. Theovine frommeaux ofice jecti incesioure (Johns.
And if due to melancholy the superfluity declines towards melancholy, and his overly moist skin is twisted by reason of melancholy, then it is good for him to drink something so that his brain be purified, according to what he has before in this division.
After the head of the malady; after making .i. wick (made of lin well crafted, like a circle, and placing it around the head); and the patient's hair curls are gathered together tightly from all sides; after this preparation, using burnt goat skin for the fire; and light the fire immediately so that he can endure it on his wick; then remove the circle in parts around the head, and let it cool down; and do this once every week with another suitable treatment until he becomes healthy.
Or if you see to cauterize the patient, by making points in several places on the cautery. This method softens the brain significantly; and then apply cotton wool dipped in mutton fat and grease.
of the hairs When the signs we have mentioned in this section appear first, then it begins and drinking something purifying for the head is done to the patient; also keeping his skin from all dampness, and making him sweat or take baths several times without food.
After he commands the chief to turn it around, and does cautery inside the chief's head, and makes two cauteries on either side of his temples where they meet; then throughout the whole cauterization every vein and artery that are under the skin should be touched with this or that cautery according to their distance from the temple, and he must instruct them to let blood flow freely, and if you see too much blood coming out, you should cut it as best you can.
And I will teach you how to squeeze out the veins and make an incision as necessary so that blood can be drawn from them; and never once do we perform a cautery or cuts in the back of these two bones.
double joint of tears (likely referring to a part of the anatomy associated with crying)
oldre an chascune voie depres de lou chief.
Two corners of tears coming out from between the eyes.
When you give the medicine as we have mentioned in this section, and it does not benefit at all, however, after treating the head of the patient, and he performs a hot fire cupping on the scalp (using four small cups), and then he makes two more cuppings called "clavicles" under each shoulder blade; and warn him about the artery that you must not touch. And this is the shape of the cupping known as "clavicles":
If the paper of this oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the hot fire cupping known as "olivare" should be performed; since it has this form.
And if you make the two cuppings under each shoulder blade as well as on the shoulders themselves (which are also called "sorcilz" or shoulders); and do not let go of the hand until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to what I have said before.
Two hairs which are pointing towards the oil Never happens that the hairs of the oils are converted into particles or dust, and they do not touch the oil, and so it is done according to two methods: namely by fire, or with hot medicine (as in cupping therapy).
Or the fire cupping instructs the patient to let the hairs remain long and straight until they fall out naturally; and if they are touched at their roots, he restrains them so that they do not move while they grow.
When they are growing hairs, and he puts the patient's face on paper. And then place a sign of the hairs near the hair; and then put cotton wool in acair. And it is done of fire cups of quarters depeccre douce caucer les poilz liens, et desu eveit en la lice as en iaun:esme laisse, seigneurs en leve aliteralte thexer the papiers.
ller afin of theent. What:lustrelastesque deffles toit, and itte theirse, жаiase fromat:sionning from the,cummericexacteccure.
And if afterwards the hairs come back and the paper is softened again, then perform the cautery on that spot myself, as you have done first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper has been raised to its natural position, and become evened, and do not pinch the hairs with oil.
The hot medical cauterization you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment leaf shape of myrtle; take French soap and fresh lime, one of each .Z., and grind them together well; do it hastily so that they don't cool down, then sprinkle it over the shape made with the myrtle leaf on the paper you have prepared; and if the illness is only in one oil, then work on it accordingly, and also both of them; and put cotton wool moistened with clean water under each eyelid; and let the malady be at your sanity, showing your demonstration there, pressing a few times when the patient feels irritation from the medicine, as they feel too like fire. Once you have done that for a long time, let the medicine take effect on your duty. And when the irritation is no longer present, lift the paper also as if it were lifted by force of fire or incision; and if so, that is well done. If this not, then reapply medication on the spot or the medicine has not been applied yet, as long as your actions remain evened out, and your eyes are properly set; then place cotton wool moistened with soft cloth until the redness of ointment (diacnes) subsides, after which you treat the affected area that is called "diaphoresis" and other similar conditions, so long as it remains healthy.
And if you have learned that you must take great care not to spill the medicine on your eyes; and if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs stick in the oil, then resume the treatment on the spot where the paper is softened from the medicinal paste as you did before; afterwards treat until it remains healthy. This translation conveys guidance for post-application of medicine following cauterization—stressing the importance of not allowing any spillage onto the eyes, and the steps to take if there's a need to reapply treatment in areas where the medicinal paste has softened the paper used as a barrier.
And you know that men's stature varies greatly in height and smallness, and according to this, no longer the straight way is returned to him who studies such an art. In essence, this fragment emphasizes the individual variability among patients when it comes to treatment outcomes based on their size (height) or condition (smallness), suggesting that medical practitioners must adapt their methods rather than follow a uniform approach for everyone.
And of the care with fire in ulceration by cauterization
When you heal a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not yield results, then it is necessary for you to perform cauterization according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your health; and dress their hair between your hands so it does not move or shake, afterwards apply moistened cotton or infused olive oil on its top; then cauterize it partially: if the chief looks like a bird's quill, assemble the cautery there; if you see any point from one to another head, and if you see them as well as beams between heads, but everything that is done in this way holds value for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open and removing its residue, and drying it; and if it is closed, perform the operation and make holes in it; afterwards place a hot caustic there, and hold your hand at the part underneath the oil where your hand does not cause any foolishness; then apply the caustic to the oil's fat, and corrode it.
If at the beginning you use the caustic on the bone, it would be better. If not, then repeat the caustic once more if you are experienced in doing so, and let it rest for 2 years; afterwards apply moistened cotton in burlap, and treat with dry excoriation until it heals, and after 40 days when the bone is exposed, use corrosive medicine accordingly as described by your mentor.
And there is a method of treating a fistula that none of the ancient doctors have mentioned. Firstly, open the fistula and create an opening in it; afterwards place a thin silver coin (caiman) underne mantle where its shape lies. and make the quantity of about .з. (approximately 0.3 to 0.4 grams) of powder; then hold your hand or caiman firmly so that it does not move, as the molten lead does not mix with its oil; it is necessary for you to place the powder-moistened cotton in an ointment jar filled with beeswax or infused olive oil. The lead will shape the head of the fistula, and this method ensures a mercilessly healthy sanitation.
And if the fistula is healed by the caustic we have described, it is beneficial. But if not, then it must be administered to the bone marrow, and return the fistula to the core of the bone according to what should be done in one's own right.
or cracks on the lips There have been many "cracks" on the lips that are called "poils," and mainly on children's lips.
When you heal these "cracks" as we have described in the divisions of diseases and this treatment does not yield results, then it is necessary to use a small circumferential caustic according to this form:
And put it on those cracks as they are formed; after the bone heel in his sanity:
Of the incision on the abdomen
When the abscess originates from the root of the stomach or in the uvea, or in the roots of the teeth, after it has formed pus and ridden out and become a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, but there is no gain: nevertheless, it must be that you use .i. fire cupping according to the amount of the fistula; afterwards apply your hand around the base of the fistula, and on its lower side; and do this once or twice after curing what we have said in treatments, until he is sound again; and if so, it is good; and if not, you must discover the root and remove the decomposed bone according to what you find in your chapter.
Movement of teeth roots
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth roots move, you treat them with medicine which is not effective; then place the head of the mallet on your healthy tooth immediately after using cautery that forms a vein in part as you apply a cloth over the tooth. Hold it hot quickly with your hand while feeling the heat emanating from the root, and remove your hand allowing the patient to feel the warmth coming from the tooth's root; then release the cautery and reapply it according to your desire; afterwards fill the mallet with saliva, seal its mouth for an hour and healing fistulas.
And in part the moving teeth root is confirmed, and the restricted gums are softened by decomposed moisture.
Of the pain in teeth
When the pain in teeth arises due to cold or fever, and treatments with medicine are not effective; therefore it is necessary to use cupping according to different techniques: and cupping with wax and cupping with fire.
Cupping with wax if you desire such as of various types; after placing cotton and wrapping a tent over the pointed tip of it, and smearing burnt beeswax on the painful tooth instantly and hold tightly until he cools down; and do this often enough for the virtues reach the root of that tooth, and if you see melted wax with cotton in the next tooth.
e caure taille.
When scrophula are of slime and cold moistures, not responsive to medicines, first scrape the head with fire in this way afterwards there will be two openings for the fumes to escape from; then place the cautery under the abscess once or twice as much, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small enough, apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, leaving it for three years; afterwards cover with cotton soaked in woolen cloth until the exudation stops, then treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When the moisture overtakes the channels of blood and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must first be treated with solvent medicines; afterward perform fire cauterization at the root of the throat, making sure to keep it away from the neck but also not too hot. Then do another cauterization at the joint between the collarbone and the spine's head, which we call "clavicle," in the form shown before; treat the wound as previously described until it heals.
Of draught (Of a draft or aspiration) All diseases of the channels are cold moistures, and this disease does not have fever or chills, being an old illness; therefore make two burnings in the same channel according to its former shape; then perform another cauterization between the nipples; and carry out a cauterization called "clavicle" based on the previously described form.
And if you see, perform two burnings in the entire "punctures" according to their shape shown here; and these points should be placed just above or below .xxx.; after treating the wound as described beforehand, carry out a cauterization called "poinches" for about three times based on this form.
And because they are lighter, that's why you do three of them in the same place.
Dislocation of the shoulder joint. When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movements as we have experienced; therefore you must first reset the dislocation. After applying a soothing medication on the patient's back and side; then apply heat in the area between two small bumps with your left hand; if the joint is dislocated within those areas, scrape the cautery that has .ij. notches according to its shape shown here.
Androctur keuture: desir leu en cauenture douceur deitur les cuisinour keurture, et queil lapeurs. aundes queirre : Lepremeredre, etiquet. The Frenchmeilleur cautere aoutre lexitur. Whatsofyssire outrolet mekils andre thekes.
And there is never any alignment on this.i. nerve for which it has seven cautions.
After applying heat with a wire on the wound; after allowing the patient to rest, and not exerting their limbs too much for long periods until they are well-reassured.
And if it is dislocated above, little happens; however, making a caustic with thick cautery on the clavicle bone, or applying many burns while pressing it. Because the joint connection is directed towards the marrow and is healthy in the patient's maladies.
double cautery for bleeding
The ancient doctors said one should perform bloodletting with the roots of aristolochia (also known as Dutchman's pipe), and in this manner: take one root that is the longest you can find, dry it or boil it to make it large and long; coat the wound in oil, and heat it up, then cauterize .i. caustic between the hand and the forearm with .ij. small cauldrons (.ij. are two), and .ij. caustics slightly descending into the area below the beard; and .ij. caustics between the fifth rib and the sixth costal cartilage, declining a bit backward; and .i. caustic on the navel, and .i. other one on the stomach, and .ij. caustics between .ij. costals (ribs) that are far apart from each other; and do not press too hard with your hand but rather open it as much as in odorizing plants.
And the ancient doctors said that no one used fire caustic as if to a barber (razor), and they scourged and put it between the ribs until it reaches the apoplectic state; and leaps in his pain, just as we have mentioned in the case of the liver. But in this work there is fear or that patients die immediately from these maladies, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of a mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said about the divisions in healing methods, and it does not benefit at all; rather, they apply three good caustic methods that everyone agrees on.
ce.iij. Celtre. Ceintendans les peice cetera:laterre cestime theodre despres itaconjour, l’antere. Ijacces'sisle, ilteinste andante duetting aicare fromercismejulieting presse ofich:olden.
And another way to perform cautery is by heating the instrument with two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and holding the place where the movement occurs, or if the arrow enters from the right side, and raising accordingly the place according to the position of the arrow, according to the length of the limb, and the cautery be performed according to the width of the limb.
After heating the two prongs until they are perceived on the other side, and then pierce them with cautery, and so you will have three; if you see it, if you cauterize all of the instrument to three points. Then after the treatment when it has taken prolonged fever, this is what happens that it differs from the previous treatments mentioned.
of jaundice
Cautery is not useful for jaundice, but rather in the excited state of "asclytes," as we have previously described in our divisions. When you perform the treatments according to these methods and there is no benefit from them, it requires that you make three cauteries under the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the muscles, two behind the spine along the vertebrae, and one near the pelvis; and place the cauterization well close to the level of the joint.
After leaving the cautery over for days to allow prolonged fever to pass, and not abandoning the treatment of the malady after cauterization; and healing would occur, and all these points would be united with God's help.
The shape of the cautery used for the abdomen is a clavicle that we have previously shown (before); and that one for the back is oviform, according to what it has been placed before us.
of the inflamed joints When the joints are swollen due to jaundice and covered with white copper (citrinum), it requires that you perform cauterization on the back between the little finger and ring finger; and hold your hand with the cautery rotating. And do not enter too deeply, so as not to create more white copper deposits therein, but rather apply the cautery according to this form:
After performing the cauteries on both legs one of each leg (the other; and let it be curated longesque done de laissames esurant: .iij. Cautere, et parler: iiij.
of the medicine
The solution of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as its retentive and digestive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines become obstructed, and it cannot be treated by any methods; and you see the patient very suffering with great vitality, so I will. i) give a strong cautery to the stomach according to what he has said before or on fire cautery of the stomach, at which circulation occurs; and ii) four cauteries subtly in the belly, and iij. cauteries under the hips.
And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, he makes fire cautery to the groin, and I) one cautery on each thigh, and iiij. small cauteries near the large stomach, for the treatment is profitable when it has good aid.
of the treatment of haemorrhages
When haemorrhages are the foundation or one or more of them, and they are ancient and large humors that are cold and moistly corrupted, and they are treated as we have said in sections, but it does not profit unless you make: III) three cauteries on the spine behind the back, those which are farthayer from each other along the vertebrae and pierce repeatedly; I) one cautery under the belly. II) two of them.
And if you think his stomach is cooling down and the meat does not cook, and it swells in the face, for then the great cautery on the stomach as before has been said, and I) another on the liver, and I) another under all the caustic palate; and let the fire burn over a long time. Afterward treat the wound so that it is healed.
of the cholestericity which is named "thelul" (This appears to be an incorrect reference in Old French as there's no historical term called "thelul". However, a possible relevant translation might relate to 'cholestery', referring to conditions related to gallstones or bile issues.)
When you treat with cholestery (presumed correction for "thelul"), if the cautery that seems like a razor is applied all over it where there is cholestery, and let your hand be as long so the cauteries weaken at the birth of the vein, for he will not cut; do this once or twice or .ij. times, and if there is much cholestery, then cauterize each one in such a way that we have said; afterwards treat with ointments until they are cured; and if you cauterize greatly on the cataract, he will have more help.
about disease. And if it comes from cold and dampness, leather of bloodscafful; etec. It may not be injurismenest saufil desengel in Old French text: les plimesmens. Il estandes. Leu deffacute caustice: ephile develoft oulden en la finsextra, anda :12. OUll thecture francekonsulthele mevepreymentreli'sinsule oftext. Theurfaire, tocet anatomes of thefeinan.
When the strong ones cannot bear cutting or sewing, which we will tell them in their own language, comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
If there is no fistula, and it is old and full of clots and moisture-corrupted deposits, if you must treat it with great delicacy, and be aware how much the tissue has been penetrated; after using a scalpel that seems like a second rasp, and inserting the scalpel into the fistula according to the amount of tissue that has entered, and repeat the cauterization as long as the deposits and corruption are present, one time or two times or three times depending on the need; then warn you against burning nerves and large veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, warn them of these vessels, and do not make such holes in the abdomen hastily, and think that it is not permanent; after curing as long as necessary until they are healed, and if the tissues are ossified for a distance, then you know that the fistula is completely healed; and if the materials are bone fragments, and corrupt the bone at the bottom; then in such cases as we will explain to them later.
of kidney disease The great pain of frolic comes from rain and strong winds, and it does not take into account women's needs, so you must do cauterization on the uterus in one part and the other with a caustic clamp that we have mentioned before; and if our cauterizations were done in this manner, there would be three incision lines, and they would provide greater assistance.
Vesicle disease, often referring to conditions affecting the bladder such as cystitis (inflammation of the bladder) or urethritis (inflammation of the urethra), typically involves a range of symptoms including urinary frequency, urgency, dysuria (painful urination), and hematuria (blood in urine). Diagnosis is made via clinical examination, urinalysis to check for signs of infection or blood, and potentially further imaging like ultrasounds or cystoscopy. Treatment varies depending on the underlying cause but often includes antibiotics for bacterial infections, pain relief medications, and advising patients on fluid intake and lifestyle modifications to manage symptoms. Chronic conditions may require long-term management strategies such as intermittent catheterization or surgery if there is a significant anatomical abnormality contributing to the disease process. If the bladder is weak and moistened with mucus, causing it to retain urine, then perform caustic incision in the posterior part of the bladder where there are hairs on both sides, one on the right and another on the left side; and each cauterization should be as much as you would poke a finger, either backward or forward, according to your need. Make a caustic incision in the posterior part of the bladder if it requires it; and perform such incision with caustic clamp according to the shape described earlier.
of the stone If the stone is cold and moist, and it does not allow for conception, and the flowers are rotten and their ends delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it must be done with three intromissions in the belly, as we have said about cautery of the bladder, and three intromissions on the back; and also with clavicle cautery, as we have said.
Of the hunchback
When moist exudates descend to the hernia of the hunchback, and for this reason it ceases to move from its place, and there are signs that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; and they find the lesion in a particular segment, then it must be cauterized on the hernia just above the hernial sac with a cautery like a circle, and directed inside the hernial sac as if it were turning around, so that the hernia becomes within the circle; and such cauteries are done as those used for stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, then it is done with large oval cauterizations and also by puncturing in the same way as all other kinds of cauterization; and treat until he has recovered.
Pain of the hernia If the pain is in the hernia sac, and it's cold and moist, and his maladies should be cured as we have said about division and the cure does not work; for the disease is old: therefore, it must be purged of the large humors with foul-smelling pillules or other solid remedies.
After he had performed the cautery; and the way of this cautery is such as follows: it consists of several medicines in bundles, and fire cauterization according to many methods, which one does so: that you perform thirty-two circular triangular burns on its shape, and make them deep and great, and leave a large distance between each circular burn, and thus the olive-shaped cautery; never done in the midst of the hernia, for it allows there to be twenty-three according to this form:
And if you see, when the cauterize to the circle that we have mentioned in front of us regarding the dislocation of the hernia; but make it halfway so that the circles contain the entire hernia, and all the edges are sharp.
And it is the way in sciatica, when the pain is located in the hernia and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg; and if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then they make .ij. cauteries where the patient says that the pain lies, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. pieces, a little on the left side; and either cutaneous caustic is applied, or arsenical coating; and if the patient feels that the pain has extended to both legs or near them, then they make .iij. pieces or .iiij. cauteries called "points" on the cautery where it is touched by the pain.
And if it is the skill, then they make more; and when the pain lies on the genital side towards the thigh, then they apply a cutaneous caustic or circular cautery well so that you do not let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries too much, and do not cause further harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have seen others who made cauteries on the joint of the leg, and they allowed it until the whole thigh was freed, and even the knee, and all the joints were examined and decayed in turn; after an abdominal solution that led to death.
And if the pain is in .ij. parts combined, make cauteries on one and on the other according to this manner. // And the surgeons said regarding the hernia cautery, do so with such a piece of iron and either place it at the head like a small nutmeg or a little less, or with interlocking pieces between them from space distance as much as a handful; and have the interlocking pieces on .ij. parts, and also in this way, and make an iron punch well made; and this is its shape:
And burn so much that it becomes red and hot to the touch, and then place it above the hernia of the sick man, and twist it along his healthy side; and after the caustic has been applied with .i. cautery again and left for three years; and make a pouch of wax, and leave the wound exposed for over ten days until it is healed.
And Albacius says that in this matter we use little of this caustic for the pain of his discomfort, and if there were some good cauteries, which he may endure it; and all is well done.
sic. Whatmeans fromme:old French. Whichcour: "The- Thecauser (Austinceline. AiXarre'sac andrager. Oldrum fromenture ofxer, thebear.
When pain comes to the back, or by falling, or from percussion, or too great evacuation, or due to similar appearances of cold material spread thinly, there is no need for such cauterizations, since that which comes from the infusion of cold material suffices.
It is required that the putrid pills or similar signs are voided after this, with three lines of indentation in the back, and in each line one to two causticizations according to virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and it must be done according to the type called "pounds"; and if you see it, do three pounds or four per the knife-like shape following this form:
Many times this disease occurs in children, and the signs of onset are that they have a narrowing as it happens when they lock up, and fear; and you change in the lower spinal vertebrae of the backbone and the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Whenever you see it and you heal it, if you causter at the knife according to this form.
If the causticization colors each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, if you causticize on the spine with the knife-like object in two or three lines, and place the points close together; after curing so that it is healed according to what we have said, and beware not to administer cauterization in a slimy form of nerve.
of the joint pain
When the pain of joints is due to moisture that spreads over each limb' corners, and when the pain comes in spasms, they call it "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicine cannot cure it, then you must cauterize as follows: do a lot of causticizations around the joint connection, and make the causticization olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you pierce under the joint, do causticization at all of which they call "point." And when pains come down to genitals and other joints, and this happens many times, then you will make causticizations on each member with two or three cauterizations per part, throughout the olive-shaped causticization; and if there is need for more work, do it, but don't let your hand remain longer than necessary until the arse shows as firm.
And if the pain comes down to the genitals and back, give it causticization as we have said in our chapters. And if the pain is in the hands, make cauterizations with the olive-shaped object; and if there remains no pain at all, then causticizations on each joint and hair, and scalp of the hand, and if it comes down to the thighs or thoes knee joints. And if you governement it well done in good medicine, for cauterize lesse sourne leu qu’est ce quatroce defface.
Of the procedure of dislocation
When the dislocation appears suddenly, and the limbs descend into their joints, it is necessary that when you see to heal him, he does not move for a day; afterward let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to straighten out his arm until his shoulder has been restored, and reposition the arrowheads in their proper places, and make signs similar to those of a circle above the head of the patient; then heat the cautery according to its shape:
Until his skin becomes white and feels tender. Then straighten the bones in their proper places; and he instructs that your hand remain fixed so they do not return to their original position; and work well on both thighs of the patient, placing underneayer a pin and soldier under them, and another similar beneath them, which tightens his hands. Then place the cautery in a sign with all your fingers, straightening your arm until you reach the bone. If it does not heal the first time, repeat as necessary so long as you continue working on the bone; but be subtle to ensure that the dislocated joint does not reappear while using the cautery, and do not burn or cause further harm or other illnesses for the patient.
And you know that if your work does not extend to the bone with the cautery, it is of no use. The cauteries used on children must be subtle according to their size; and for large people as well, they should be correspondingly sized. After using a burnt cautery to heat the ossified joint for three years until it softens, then heal it with other treatments so that it is sound again, and restrain his painful shoulder for forty days while the wound is well sealed; and you must ensure that patients are bedridden for a long time in such a way that the dislocated joint does not resurface when they move to go to their rooms.
And after forty years when he wishes to rise again, he is fitted with a well-made bandage and kept for another forty years; then enjoy ample rest so that he works little and warns against excessive drinking and eating, as well as loud yelling; and when he follows this instruction fully, it is completely cured. And I will say this after the treatment of tailor in his apprenticeship. Of the dislocation of the abdomen
When other dislocations occur and are known, and you see that they do not increase in size, so the third part of the cautery follows according to its quantity, and afterward; and no one of the olden have said it should be cauterized by this form: at .iij. angles on the back of un l’esme deus, et a lais.
but first sign the edge of the joint and make a line above its surface, and another below it, and put your hand between all the clamps on the shoulder blade. But the first caustic is lighter and more mobile.
old pain in no limb. When the pain comes in no limb, from a fall or injury, and that pain lasts for long periods, meaning medical treatment is not worth it then it must be causticized with the clamps known as "pounds," and done according to the length of the member and its smallness and fragility and strength and location of twists and torment. If it's sound after the first clamp, that's good; but if not, proceed with another clamp above it, because customarily it must be moved in the limb which is close to it so that you perform the causticizations until the pain subsides.
from messengering or communication.
The message is never given by the clamp with much help, and mainly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of moisture and melancholy. Can you see it causticizing the disease at its beginning, and treating it according to what we have said in the division, so it doesn't hesitate or linger, and you doubt whether the corruption will affect all the pain, for which reason five clamps are placed on top of the chief: one is put near the head and the other towards the forehead; one at the corners, and one behind the knee cap; and it leaves your hand enough so that the clamp can penetrate the bone, and as long as the scars come out forcibly to let the vapors of large humors escape from there, and causticize along the muscle according to what is shown.
And if the messengering is scattered all over; and it manifestly implies that you should causticize with these clamps we have mentioned: one near the spine of the neck, two on the vertebrae of the back, twelve under the spine of the pelvis, eleven by the spines of the legs, twelve upon the hips, ten upon the ribs, and so forth for each joint in hand and foot; and warn against stones that are beneath the belly not to burn them; and never place a clamp on the bone at the waist, another on the stomach bone, and another on the liver.
And you know that the more clamps you make, the more help it provides; and you know that pain does not feel at all from causticization as long as the patient feels healthy, for the body is completely corrupted. It requires that the clamps be large or small according to the limbs and their articulations, according to what you will find in metalworking. After treating the joints with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until they are cured.
from inflammation.
The English translation of thees and lesxent:inglish. Allongue anne: 130n.
Of barbs
The disease that is called "albaras" is old, and the medicine engineer's knowledge is worthless, yet cauterizing it with fire for a little while according to the degree of redness until the blister becomes bone, and its color changes; then treat it multiple times with flour and lentils mixed with olive oil and plantain leaves, and sinew from colt and swan, each part separately; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, or air it until it is sound.
The treatment of ulcers by fire cautery.
If the chancre begins at the beginning, and you see to stop it if you burn with fire that seems like a circle around every mark of the chancre; everything we have heard said about making cauterization also in the midst of the chancre; and all this does not seem good to me because I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupt, and I have never seen it done before; and rather a thing more right is that it be burned around with the "circular" cautery as we said in many cases.
Of the fever that cannot die (meaning a persistent or chronic condition).
If any had an affliction called "adubelati," which delays death or due to its excessiveness (meaning the illness is too burdensome) and weakens him, or because of the great wound when he is decrepit (meaning overly worn out), or for their lack of blood; then you see that it will delay death: therefore, cauterize around with many small cauteries while pressing it; afterwards let it be. For it will postpone its death.
And if you see it all cauterized, so the shape of this is as follows:
Lei adrepremer.sans lesparle: le meurt, itmeant:mesure of thepeutre london in theesame, Ire pee parlemeasures de la mainte
The treatment with fire by iron
Another way of disease is called "corrodens," which is essentially an inflammation of the limb because it affects the limbs just like dry fire does to them; if you see this disease, and can treat it with cautery in one go, then apply the caustic wounds very lightly and strongly according to what it covers or includes in its area until you cleanse all of the corruption, so nothing remains of the disease but everything that is corrupted should be healed. And then let him rest for three years, and afterward allow burns with oil on those cauterized areas until the fire' Writings have healed, and if in three years a healthy scar does not appear, it is good; but if no healthy scar appears, then reapply caustic to that which remains corroded. This inflammation has never been treated with herbal medicine in wounds cleaned by fire; all such treatment with fire is much greater aid, and I have already said the cure for scarring from incision: take as much as you know.
When referring to stones that fall into the joints, the Old French term "porrelz" can be translated to "pierres," which means "stones." The phrase in question describes a situation where stones may enter and become lodged within joint spaces. This is of particular interest because it relates to medical conditions such as osteoarthritis or other degenerative joint diseases, where debris can accumulate in the synovial fluid and exacerbate pain and dysfunction. The context suggests a discussion on how these stones might be addressed within a medieval medical framework.
Often occurs that the joints by excessive use develop a disease called "clos," according to our understanding, which is a significant affliction that bleeds the stone (referring to a bone fragment or foreign object). The treatment for this condition involves two methods. It is fire cautery and hot water cautery; fire cautery is done by applying multiple burns like an arrowhead made of iron, adjusting its size according to the need to penetrate deeply enough into all parts while ensuring it has very fine margins; after heating it, turn your hand completely around the arrow so that it bends at the point where it strikes. Then leave it for three years until it begins producing discoloration; then make a poultice of known medicinal herbs ground with string and let the poultice stay on top of all burned areas throughout the night, and the arrows will pierce through and remove their roots. Then treat the stone with ointments that warm up charms so long as it is cured.
, ander leu laire, siam iautre:sucels. Thek rage.ilumbre of itaidisc itc dexentence. Leave tage'entres: "theesse. Iescription.
The treatment for shaking
If any shiver from cold or fever, or other ailments, it is said that you should perform: 3 fire cautions on the spine of the back, one each between every vertebra; and 1 needle or 4 under the ribs, and 1 under the stomach to the liver cautery. This will leave the patient shivering but heal the health from cold ailment.
Of pusful spots
Never observed in patients with corrupted bowels or pustule-like spots that arise from grossly decaying matter. When such signs appear, it is said that cautery should be performed on each chief of the pustule: one gentle caustic made of mastic tree resin, so that when it touches fire, it adheres to the wound or with a root of Aristoloche long; or a lenticular caustic. And never has cautery been done at the beginning upon such signs in this manner, and they do not grow worse forward but are broken up from the superfluous matter which they arise from, and become healthy; however, it is said that this should be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the arrow is pulled out Many times happens great loss of blood from the artery that is pulled at the wound coming to purge or at the incision of the abscess, or in cutting into a limb and things like this; and it is very harmful to let out such fluid.
And in every case where this happens, if you hasten to place your indicator on the vein's wound and strive much so that it is not aggravated by your touch thereon; then light the fire cauldrons many times and large and small until they are all red hot; and take either one or great depending on the nature of the wound, and in this way keep the arrow directed at the vein where you hold your indicator, and continue to cauterize it so that the blood does not flow.
And if you push your indicator above the vein and if the caustics are extinguished, then take immediately another of those which are applied in fire.
sake (loutre: Fromathe:gall itesuccie210 isue:2cestinct. Iich andrew:secre,tractive. Theuption.sentence:gustarmeans.
seuntesche insoilletheleteus
And if it happens to any and he has no regard or medicine present, then should place his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch him up above the wound and above the vein; and do not move him, but let the moisture from a cold be often enough that it is very cold until the blood does freeze and engorge and remain stuck. And make enquiries about such cases where cautery and medicine are needed.
We have said in the first chapter that such diseases require fire caustic or medicine-soaked cauterization, and its operations, causes, instruments, and forms; and I have laid down this main section here at once with these aims for it to be used more easily according to what is needed.
And so it is that I begin, you must learn from this chapter that there is more danger and fear involved in these than in the first cauterizations, and for this reason greater precaution is required.
For in the work of this chapter there are many times the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision on an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that many ways of people come to cures. They came from those who suffered so much because of the treatment they underwent for their illnesses, and the severity of their diseases, and for this reason one must have caution. And of these who give their opinion and say: "Wait, I am responsible"; the disease is stubborn. You must not readily allow those who come to you with this manner, but provide greater concern for your reputation than for your care, and make decisions carefully about what you are certain will help; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your ill patients so that their health may be transformed into renown; and it is these whom you shall aid to gain this good name.
Truly, Our Lord commands us to have sound judgment and uprightness, and if you desire the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter to be discussed in a manner that follows the order of chapters, as it is written here at first regarding cauterization by fire and those sections on the subject which are placed closest together for more immediate application.
full of water
Seizures that this disease often affects children at birth, and when the baby is held too tightly by its head; and sometimes it comes back again because it cannot be repaired.
And I have never seen this disease affecting only children, and all those I've observed had a feverish death; and for that reason it seems to me the work is divided into parts of treatment.
And I saw a child with painful swelling of water (edema), and the head was so congested that it could barely support itself every day; and he believed so much in moisture that his body was covered by moisture on top of the bone above the keel, between the keel and the bone; and the treatment is such as when the moisture covers the keel from the keel to the bone, and the incision is small enough that you make a large cut in the head; and it should be as long as two of us, until the moisture recedes; and then there forms another cavity:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the incision should be larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross: according to this form.
And if the moisture is on top of the bone, and you see the folds at the front corners of each part, and it oozes water when pressed between your fingers; this means that you must make three cuts in the head according to this manner.
And after the incision, pull out the moisture; then make drapelets and powders from them, and put vinegar and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then remove it, and care for the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to heal equally by feeding this malaide (afflicted) person dry meat from a small amount of moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Another method of making an incision is to look at the size of the abscess cavity and the accumulation of water therein, as it has never been done before in any direction: neither towards the front nor towards the back, nor to the right side or the left side.
Now cut the abscess and remove the water accumulated therein, and do it according to what you have in mind; but make sure not to block the artery; and keep watching the flow of blood coming out from the wound so that the malaide (patient) can properly recover from the discharge of moisture and the evacuation process.
De retour (Return
Tomeffurent en lai.ilice semblant a l’anbale, et li d’unkes decaire que cumme inostre: Aude malade a lopes avalsoubrex : it'souratils:01268themore aout of thees laisse ate.
:ceter theesculare apejorve tolater itentire ous of alloudre (it.
re singentiuelangeanime a ceintifles forfielletifrevescannciques sacongeu to tuentheuangeluse  clauses inquireuentesse pocheintielles so enamissezainistralles afeccit' thisangalleux andsoinage
And when the vein is pierced, it jumps upward continuously with thrusts.
And if the artery does not open to touch, it must measure a distance of 2 fingers; then enlarge and pierce through to the bone; and as much blood as this requires (.viij) is allowed to flow, plus or minus a little bit depending on what the patient can bear, and filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone by a small amount, sew the wound open and bandage it, and treat the discharge until it heals.
Of migration
When there is old migration and acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples, and ancient foreskin and similar things, and it is treated by medical methods and various forms of treatment; however, we have told you that extracting the arteries and cauterizing them, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is such that the patient's temple hair grows back, and listens to the artery opening in the temple because it opens well with its beating, and few stitches are made compared to those who are too cold; and if it is reinserted, he removes some tunics from his shoulders, then wipes the skin of any rough cloth, and raises the limb with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the speculum of this kind:
Then scrape the tenderly until you reach the artery, then pull it up to pinchings, and remove well-placed cloths from each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn the hook at the tip of the lancet according to the quantity of .ii. fingers. Because if it's not pulled out, it will not jump anywhere in all.
And draw the .viij. of blood (which is drawn from them), and if the artery is large, then it must be laced in two pairs of socks made of strong double silk thread, preventing any bleeding at the cautery wound, and hereinmeasured for myofles le scele apresmes chaude .ii. If there is noire arterie.
For the caustic is aid to end dampness: for thus it is of great help against dampness. For the extraction of arteries it is required that you fill your sleeve with plenty cotton and place it well made on top; and when you remove them, treat them with dry medicines which cause thirst and bandages until they are healed; and if without causing injury to the artery as much as you deem fit, then hasten to cauterize that part with fire, or pour vitriol onto your hand so that the vein is frozen by it; and if this is not present, apply water on the sleeve until the vein is crystallized repeatedly, and raise it from water cold, and restrain it as required; and for those who are more mobile during artery extraction with this cautery slicing .ij. in part, but the cuts should be made well spaced to better contain their heat. When the patient holds too tightly to their heat, they hold less heat. And it should have a considerable distance between the cuts, and when you have sealed them shut with iron, place your hot iron there until it bends to the bone, and pierce the vein through these cuts; and leave space between the cuts because this cautery is not uniformly applied throughout its entire length. And that is the form of this cautery:
tears
When the tears of these veins are drawn down from those which lie above the testicles' chief point with fuel and it doesn't profit much from medicine that is done to them; you see the patient's face turning red as if he were frightened, and his forehead becomes moist and damp so that the hair of the papers become wet. And they are held tightly and kept moist until the paper turns black with the heat of tears, which has a need for this cure.
And they called it "cure contuse," and you strike the patient who has this disease with pincers or a knife in such a way that one incision is made on his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead, and sometimes one fissure as much as two fingers from the tip of the nose downwards; and others are likewise cut above the paper-thin veins, and keep away from arterial incisions that are made atop those costal pincers. And separate your hand from continuing through the mandibular pincers, and each incision should be of three fingers' length;
From the incision that goes from the temple to the second incision; and remove all the clotted blood that is between these two holes above the bone, then make another similar incision just up to the other second one, and then extract this artery.
If you put in the first hole the instrument called "cultellus," which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and has this shape: And put the cutting edge towards the charred area of the wound, and the blunt end toward the bone, and let it go as far as you can to the next hole while the incision is continuous until you reach what opens the artery, then make another cut in this second hole; and pull out the blood clot evenly, and put a piece of cotton in each hole; and cover the wound with wet cloths made of vinegar and oil and straw moss, and ensure that the edges do not get moisture again; and after three days apply a large amount of cold water to it, then treat the wound with cold turpentine mixed with oil, and other cures for treating wounds until he is well.
Remove the clots from the blood.
When there is no violent catarrh often seen with clinging and small clots, blinding the eye, scalded papers; and hair grows around its head, and at the top of the wound it hurts a lot, and the patient suffers from severe sternum pain; therefore we know by these accidents that those materials and catarrh do not come from many veins, but rather the treatment that the patient receives.
And you command the patient to bend his forehead backward, then make a large incision in front of the forehead, and another wide one; about two inches long. Then start from the temple on the left side to the temple on the right side, until it reaches the bone; move your hand away from the temples that move during eating; when the bone is exposed, clean out all the blood with a sponge, and then put cotton in between these two holes of the incision and linen tissue; cover everything above with damp cloths made of wine and oil, and keep them away from moisture; when it heals, you must continue to massage the bone until the blood starts again, then treat him with things that exacerbate bleeding, such as spicy mixtures.
In a certain manner: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of chaff; make a paste from it, and apply it to the wounds in order to exacerbate bleeding throughout.
On the eversion of the ears.
.iiij. Leu quarrere de la: auroise andre (noun, in thees ence:i : ous. Lich aout. ij. Old French, jacour. Itere of thees. Akeur. Forth oculare:escribe, Cyr.: Thees.
When it bleeds in the ear or any other way that does not align with the ear, nor grows there, put your ear to the sun. If you see the wound, if there is no trace of violet or sanguinary oil, then I will perform an extraction; and he forcefully exhales from congestion, and snuffs out his nostrils when the exhalation comes, and places pieces of linen or wool in the ear; and the ear is elevated above.
If it jumps up during the extraction of subtle double sinew, that's good; if not, I will perform an extraction through a small and delicate incision; and if it does not jump by this means, I make an iron pincers strike and push hard against the ear canal or its entrance hole so that nothing can enter with the wick; then I proceed correctly, because often it happens as we have said; and if it doesn't happen in such a manner, take some moisture on cotton and place any instrument you deem appropriate to do this, and put a little cotton inside; then press firmly against the ear or whatever it may be, and proceed. And if it does not jump from all these things we have said, then you hurry to fracture the ear so that the abscess in the apical cavity is formed and spasms; and the manner of the fracture so that I make the initial bandage on the cephalic malady, and extract the sanguineous fluid according to its strength, then let me place the malady between my hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear depending on whether it is fat or flesh; and make the fissure as if it were the moon until you reach the wound, and the doctor according to his will, and suck haste from your mouth; and treat the cure so long as he is healthy. And if it's gravel and it swells, I will perform an extraction; and if it cannot be removed, I will perform a subtle delicate incision according to this form:
And perform an incision on the grain. But do not make such actions when you think that the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many small pieces; then extract it with subtle pincers and sucking like we have said, so that the extraction is lightened.
. Other ousage:eraise. The following. Andes tol.
In the pulling out of the beast, if it is small in size like we have said for division; but if it is large enough to be felt, prepare the extraction of pinches; and that is the easier thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of ingrown hairs from ears, when you treat them as we have said for division and distillations; it does not benefit at all, you must look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no ingrowns, you pull out with fine tweezers, and if they are not visible, take a cotton swab shaped like this where the form is located.
And it is narrow and wide above. And with the more subtle part in the ear according to the amount of suffering from malady, then form the cotton swab; do this as often until all the hairs come out. If they don't obey to come out, tear off the cotton swab like I have said for piercing, and if they don't protrude so much as we have seen in the division of arrows, administer distillations that old people have tried on making cuts on hairs, and you will find or treat with distillations; and if you pour oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, which shape has this form as you see:
And of silver or gold is inserted in a small hole above and below for distilling; and to press it inside the distillation with an instrument made of fine rain, if you see a barber and wrap around the point cotton-covered; then pour your oil or juice into the cotton, and what you see from your medicines in the cotton, and let the cotton be placed in the ear; then push inside the barber's towel with all the cotton, pressing firmly until the oil is distilled or comfortably flowing from the ear; and feel the pain of the patient therein; and administer one dose of the distillation at this point by heating it in the ear so much that it does not become too cold, because medicine would not be as good.
of the ear extraction (referring to procedures related to pulling out ingrown hairs or removing something from within the ear)
No child is born with no hollow in the ears; and this practice happens to us through extraction of a wound or nasal tissue within the ear, so these extractions never cause any harm when done properly, and there is never a need for such removal as long as it can be seen.
Therefore, those who suffer this are not seen, it involves several remedies of various dispositions, and in that one must place the painful ear in the sun; and look into it so as you see the extraction apparent, if you do that work with this shape which has this form:
:en:sans it'sellement. Ifurre desgars la cestin French. Whatsofracture aimer. il naguainsqueil.
iflet sondracierresanssecongeuusthancherreurantimeuses  fangleiereanistrentifautile de cuitelesseigneusauriarrechaiodeveriteuissauture  greauxuse thatslaungeuenerniture, thisinisses,ynglume:aiuentures
Do not work for any day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powdered with vitriol; if you see that the ear has swollen, let you remove the tent and stir another damp tent made of oil rosette and wax, until the swelling subsides. Then cure it until it is healed.
And if blood comes forth, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that help stop the flow of blood which are related to distillation therapies.
from the paper masks
This portion of the text describes a process involving paper masks that become moist and dry again. It instructs to stretch them with pincers and prongs before applying vinegar (a substance called spatumile in Old French, likely referring to an acidic solution) on top. The mentioning of vinegar suggests the use of a mild antiseptic treatment for wounds or injuries during this period's medical practices.
And if without decortication (skin removal), gently cauterize with two fine cauteries underneayer of the skin and after the incision they heal well; often repairing, but never going back to their roots; and when they are causted by fire, those root structures burn completely and do not return.
of the gravel
Many times there are things formed of hair that resemble gravel in form and hardness, which is why this disease is called "great frost" ("grandine"), as it consists of a thick layer of paper on top and underneath; the treatment for it includes taking care that the great frost does not move one way or another easily, making it a simple matter to know; then take a large piece, scraping each part lightly, and take them with pincers, and coat everything. If you cannot cover a piece of paper well enough, there is nothing wrong for the malade (patient); and if there are big fractures, they make an assembly using a bandage, and cure it until it is healed; and if it's small, no force needs to be applied because ointments restore it almost instantly and soften its hardness.
The "greve untant acre: les pincees quintes chascartes char teneit de laisse siens.
of the fingers' fat
Exine is a fat that is infused into the upper layers of paper, and this occurs more in children than in few people, and it causes great pain to their fingers, and it appears on them at mornings, and they cannot see the sunlight because tears stream down their fingers; and for this reason, they lie on their faces afterwards, and sleep there, and their sheets are soaked with moisture from their hands that the skin and appearance have concealed the exine. And when you press your hand to your body and feel the exinach penetrating inside.
The method of this operation involves placing the patient's arm on your chest, and then taking a linen cloth in the shape of a circle based on the amount of exine present in each part; you lay it over their limb, pressing one end to yours and the other end with some force so that the exine is concentrated inside the circle. Then moistening the surrounding area around the fissure as wide as necessary, ensuring the size does not exceed the wound'enas; cut along this line, creating a long slit, and let the skin contract in various places until it fits over the exinach; then attach the linen cloth with numerous stitches to contain the exinach. In subsequent configurations, the exinach will come out of this fissure according to the shape of a piece of greasy fat.
After preparing the linen cloth between your hands around the incision, rotate your hand both to the right and left as much as it spreads; ensure that you do not overlap in the fissure so that it reaches from one edge of the wound until it touches the oil without bleeding.
If the exine does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, gently widen it further until it appears; then stretch the linen as previously described, moisten some additional layers and apply them over the incision, place them on the limb, and secure with bandages for support.
If in such homes where they burn the seal and place it on top to corrupt the moisturizer that is taking too long; then treat as long as it remains healthy, and if there are blisters at the incision site, use dressings of softening emollient so as to keep it well-healed.
Of hairs of paper
From papers arise hairs other than natural ones, and they become old if they harm the body, as it brings on habits of illnesses similar to accustomed tears and softening of the papers, so long as it is due to the destruction of the hair; and there are four treatments for this: or by cautery in a bundle of fire, or by medicine with ague according to what precedes, whether it is from the treating physician's practice or cautery alone, and they do so either by incision and suturing, or by chains, as I will say.
It is required that you place the main hair in your sanctuary (body), then turn the paper oil in your right hand; if it is converted, it's good; if not, put an arrow above each of its two filaments; and whether this happens near the edge of the paper or where the hair grows next to these hairs, and draw a thread on top of the paper, and turn it back to the razor; then work in the part of the paper with misplaced hairs all over, from the great margin to the little one; draw a thread, and put a small tent of canvas and drapery above the paper, and make an image on the paper like that of a pestle (potter's wheel), as you have seen when lighting a candle, and in any case it is required that the figure be according to the quantity you lifted up from this paper which has been fixed over all.
And if the part that requires a great quantity of paper according to how much the paper is malleable; then work on all the four lines you have marked, and start from the large margin next to where the natural hairs are located in the root's circumference, then push the incision into one of the two angles formed by these hairs, then scrape it entirely; assemble the two lips together with a suture made from an aguilettes fine thread of wool, and wash out the flesh, and draw away the excess threads above the three sections that are attached to any other things sticky. If you do not need this cure, then let the suture remain for three years; then treat the wound with various drying and constricting remedies, because the paper recovers from the heat of the wound and the assembly thereof, but the suture is a mixed matter (as they say); it is required.
And if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper of a shape as much like the fennel bulb we have told, which can be done in three steps according to this form:
then take up those small equal-sized pieces according to the shape shown here:
And if you do not have the pliers to hold them, and what you use is not equal in size, take an awl or one piece of thread, and place it in the figure; then insert another piece of thread beyond the large margin, and a second piece of thread near the small one, and join all your threads evenly; then move your hand gently over everything that has been stitched, as we have told you, then assemble the .i. lacerations of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed; and when the abscess appears at your incision, soothe it with ointments and various anointings.
and there is never the case where the paper's hair becomes converted: it requires that you use what we have said about the incision; however, the suturing in both ways is more artificial.
The care of the sutures is according to this form: and it requires that you convert the paper and weave them as I have said, and then make .i. sutures by art, and also .i. loops as long as the sheet and the large gap are; take hold of the .i. pieces or threads that you keep in your hand; then weave the one with the other under what is above the paper covering the oil, and stretch out the .i. sutures from the .i. parts formed; let it be so for many years, and the skin which has been woven will harden and shrink, until it returns to its original state.
If it delays, then you must apply great force, and treat it until it is healed; and when the wound has been sutured, and if the paper sheet has risen, and no longer do the hairs stick out; and this is the form of the loops that you will make according to this figure, and in accordance with this quantity of long and wide:
The operations are such that you will need a fine awl, and insert one silk and fine thread therein; then assemble the loops and place them gently together, and make the length of each thread about one palm long; then take another thin silk thread slightly braided, and tie it to the chiefs of the other threads; then put your mallet in its place beneath the hair growth where the sutures are declared, as these are delicate and fine sutures. Then thrust the awl into the root next to the natural hair therein so that you trace them out from above the natural hair off the paper sheet; then pull out the hair down through the thread in the paper, and tear it away from the natural hair beneath, until you reach below the hair follicle. Then retract your hand as far as the hair grows along the thread on the paper with the natural hair therein.
ilz:12ail andes cease il veille.tract. Theonce levre.savoir andre itseiz.vrai seithingle, only, the following :avei. Andsure ofnose. Whatmesin.
Of moisture of oil
When this disease, known as "aleacrati" or the oil dislocation, is caused by moisture in the oil, it manifests through two types of movements: one natural and the other unnatural. It arises from a wound, cutting, or cauterization, among similar things.
And the method of treatment for this involves fracturing the suture, draining its lips, and placing linen tenting within it until it heals; and there is no need to use anything in the cure that dries or restricts. For if you perform such actions, the disease may worsen rather than improve; but using softening methods like fenugreek; and boiling water, wheat flour, linseed seed soaked, and diaphoretic ointments melted in any oil – these are enveloped within a tent, and this method is used for the cure.
And the treasures of your cure consist in that you must take care it does not heal according to its original shape; and these methods we have mentioned do not return this disease into the condition it was previously but rather preserve its current state, maintaining the form as it is now.
This phrase "de la char qui vient en l'oil" translates to "the salt that comes into the oil." In a medical context, this could refer to an ancient understanding of saline solutions being used in conjunction with oils for various treatments. Historically, mixtures like these might have been employed to help maintain hygiene or assist in certain healing processes by utilizing the properties of both salt (for its antiseptic and osmotic effects) and oil (to provide a moisturizing effect).
This disease that truly occurs where the term "axacrati" is applicable – a variation in pronunciation or regional dialect of the time from "aleacrati" for joint dislocation – is both natural and accidental. The accidents arise from wounds, fissures, cauterization, and similar events; and as regards this method of treatment, you must pierce with a needle that has two threads, then fasten the thread through the left margin to such an extent that the filament bends in .ij. joints (possibly indicating an error or misunderstanding due to language evolution); then place the char near the surface of the needle, and the char over an open cavity large (.i. spatumile) for treatment purposes.
udeautentance ituseisileletallateratimeetteneraisewite
And if the disease comes from a fissure or tear or cautery, it is required that you make a straight incision in front of the hairs; and according to what has been said before; then open between the two joints of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and each master devises an arrangement for all possible positions that he can make return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what the treatment requires and the various preparations.
A cleaving of the paper
When this sealing happens to the patients in part similar to how the paper above is glued with oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural actions, then you must first cut a razor along the paper; and bind up high; and pinching, as long as you do what is required at the subtil spatula, which is not too sharp nor too rough, so that the patient does not suffer if the spatula is too sharp or bleeds oil; and it becomes your incision, from which you scrape together lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and when assembled, there will be no more watered-down oil, nor wax cloth, nor linen moistened with water; and place wet linen over the oil, and then after a few days use two spatulas and similar things until it is sound.
Of the one piece of oil
Separating the one piece of oil into two ways: it is nervous and looks like a certain hardness or stiffness, and another that is not nervous but resembles a moistened mushy state; when touched with iron and pinned as closely as possible without causing harm to it, both of these appearances start towards the great margin, growing slowly until they cover the entire field and all light and movement of the oil.
And the way of the incision is that it sets the patient's head in relief, then hold up the paper with your hand, and make two small doubled hooks over the pincers above; and they remain above. Then take a needle, and the threading soaked in blood, and the spatula of small forces, and let it return to its natural shape: and li's form, si laineaux que les larmiere est leu li malaide la carte, et dure deffondre.
.
signexan ightimes andiagneurs.hectilongerguexentiofairececans ndepeuconsecrede candeveles himantiolecres
And lift the nail subtly, and if you see that it does not reduce and reason presses on it afterwards, let from your mouth a liquid made of litargine and red clay poultice and wolf's bane oil, and apply it for another day; then repeat this operation according to this method until the nail is completely healed.
If nothing is contrary to the oil, as in an abscess, then first treat the hot abscess until it becomes healthy, and then repeat this operation again like before, continuing until it is completely healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh at the nail causes great harm with the oil, suspend it from its place, and cut off a part but not all, so that no tears flow; then make a poultice made of red clay mixed with litargine.
of the hair growing above the pupil
Some people have never had red hair, and they cover the pupil with paper and bind it tightly until it returns to normal, making it look like a bull's eye; then this operation is performed so that the patient can maintain his head upright, and then perform the rest of these actions: first, make all unnatural curls convenient for this purpose, and support them with strength; next take out the first curl, and go combing over the razor right up to the end, making sure not to cause bleeding in the operation; and it is the small incision we mentioned in the joint of the nail and its little forces that appear afterwards after this chapter's demonstration.
And when the incision is complete and the hair grows back, if you use wolf's bane oil or pour a clay poultice red mixed with it along with other corrosive remedies, and put cotton soaked in beeswax on top of the abscess; and if nothing happens, then let it not resurface from an abscess, and doubtful abscess, if you leave the oil and treat the abscess with things calming to abscesses, and return to your work as long as it is healed. And so create char similar in appearance in the oil by this example.
But the healing of all these minor operations from natural course; and in the metalwork; and do not put your hand out on any of these works.
of veins the hairs
Red veins that are covered by oil, and they hinder one's view of the work and weaken it throughout the years. The art is then to first look at those veins; since this is so, indeed there is no other disease as severe for the liver but its own; nevertheless, in such a manner: command the patient that he places his head on your bed, then let these veins be relaxed all over the body according to their wisdom, and be they subtly doubled according to this form.
And they should be doubled in degrees in one corner as per this form:
Then we should gradually reduce those veins subtly and allow the blood to flow out after another hour, as long as you can see these red veins being pushed away from the oil; ensure that you do not disturb the oily points of the spleen, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, staying very attentive so that only those veins are affected; once you have done this, if it is necessary to distill a green-and-red oil in the spleen cavity to dissolve what remains with the liver.
And if you cannot reduce everything in that hour, then apply soothing substances to the oil for alleviating the pain of those veins, and leave it untouched for as many days as long as the pains are relieved and secured from puncture; then resume this method until it is fully healed according to the pattern mentioned before.
of the spleen oil (assuming "de la fistule" was intended to refer to a related treatment involving the spleen's oily substance)
The more severe cases are called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and hot medication as I have previously mentioned, if she is not healed, then it becomes an evil in her that causes death by cutting into the abscess, and you must drain all accumulated moisture until the issue is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and blackness, if it's covered with every instrument necessary for this form; we shall call it an "aspre chief," and make it in a particular manner of two chiefs stacked upon one another like a current lime; and let it be sharpened accordingly to its present shape.
Do noteplace en lai.souverain: "fait, quins paroles. Leusin the. In it isa ices d'ailleans of course of this sentence.n. I wantentil translation. Laurette. The Old French and English. Aesolden.
nascure apexentifrelet.tandrece Tecte tye.0lege mescurevale outwardreconsexatientefstefeu�thates oulite.leste ceure,ocite lcelafte.
Then he places it on the bone near the shoulder joint, and withdraw your hand for a little while, then turn it all around until it pierces through the bone and you feel the pain in that place if his touch enters into it so much that he holds his hand on his neck; and then reapply dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows tougher and hardened, that thing becomes easier for the patient.
The dislocation occurs.
When the arrows' wounds are opened entirely and do not disturb the nerve or soften it, then you must bandage him with a layer of aloe mixed with ashes and frankincense and muslin; and brace the cloth so that the drapes are sufficiently padded, and double each one in three layers; then tightly wrap the wound above and below using an elastic bandage to press on it without causing pain; let the dressing be worn day and night, and when you see the edges of the arrowheads flatten out, that is good; if not, restart the dressing and braces and bandages until the arrow's wounds are healed.
The tearing down of a cloth or tapestry.
When disruptions occur in the tapestry or cloth, it happens because of small particles like resin dust that are visible; but if you cover it with fabric operations similar to sewing a needle into the root of the affected area above and then another needle or one double thread on either side of the shoulder joint; sew it well, then tighten the second needle according to its placement, and tie the double thread around part of the cloth, leaving it slack, and let the first needle loosen and apply a damp cloth, keeping it moist until the threads pull with the vein, then dry the cloth with comforting remedies as long as the wound heals; but sometimes the wound is restricted by the cloth in one part of a circle around the shoulder joint while it heals.
And if the arrows give a subtle appearance of penetration beneath the scapula (shoulder blade), and correct the bluish moisture by applying oil to it, then gently press inward so that no fluid remains; then extract it as much as possible until it is healed.
Of the bow of the arrow (referring to the projectile).
itin the year 120s:sesmej'olday medieval Latin-Old French (a century.
of oil fever
We have seen the examples of fever division, and this is what it requires; if done according to health. It requires that you position the patient between your crossed hands towards the light of the sun, so that their blood is fresh and tightly pressed; then place the paper with the blood in your right hand next to its side, or in your left hand on its side; then take in your right hand (which has its side opposite) a tool called "almada," or in your left hand (which has its side facing you), another tool called "almada"; then place the tip of this instrument near the crown by guiding an awl into the blood vein, and push it in until it pierces the vein; and require that the path of the almada be at the end of the distance marked on the paper for the pulse measurement, which is also the circumference of the crown; this is the crown. If you see the bone in that paper by the brightness of the horn-covered cloth, then place the instrument there or where the fever is located, and squeeze out a path after another one. When the fever reappears, if it appears before him and the instrument in his blood.
After resting .i. little, and the fever rises again along the second path, apply force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, pull the almada quickly around your hand a bit more; then withdraw slightly from the blood some jewelry, and separate this oil within. Then coat the wound with rope or linen soaked in oil and abundant of beeswax, and join it with the fresh blood. And those who are of our time, we place underneath a broom with abundant honeycomb.
And if the almada cannot enter into the blood by its sharpness, because some have too hard hands, it requires that you straighten out the instrument called "alberit," which has this shape:
seingle.i.courts, et quin theurs:especialesme lesa.gauge laitnague theurs ioure'sac.i.tendra le.causeur leu of theurel. Hereaures aigue. I’siumera.
devoirre 1
And one came to us from Yerach, who said that in our land they made an almagate by pouring water over it, so that the fire would succeed, but I have never seen such a thing anywhere in our land or in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new invention.
And these are the shapes of the almagate forms, because those who do not see them cannot know; and they should be made with pure rainwater.
And let us be aware of this subtlety in this method, with a water angle of four corners.
from the water source for the nails
No nails are ever born or created in various shapes because there aren't any that seem like scorpions with a lot of legs; and if they have such types or colored with black or white color, it must be done to make the patient lie on the maladie (a reference to the almagate) between your hands against the sun; blow into its nostrils, drip oil onto those nails, and pull out the ingrowing nail from there, then do whatever you need to support the delicate thin sharp one of a kind underneath, so that you know it is completely removed.
And if there is still nothing that cannot be covered up with one or two delicate touches of oil on the nails; and it doesn't hold anything back in any way; and if you don't press it down, or incise it, as it must cover; and if it's malignant lesions, then hasten to cauterize so that neither there nor anywhere else are ingrowing nails formed, and then apply oil again either warmly or cold.
If the nails are done in this way, you will see that he is sound again; and if they don't pierce as it must do, then you will know that there is no new ingrowing nail growing above the bone. And with these tender shoots put a thick thread of linen cloth about them, place one piece between your hands, and let him see after each other in such manner, this easy thing to those who want it; do it three years as you can see that char have corrupted nails. Then clean the wound by oral soffits with oil made plum, and pour legerly ague en lait for ailure of four angles:
nacue laisser,ille, theirelore dexte:geste garde venerve tise.sseurs ceurexent (toi :ce apexe.ssex,cumence :seille. 3lesse laisse.sejaclet himbeignes,ifrechefections.
Of the shoulder joint from the neck
Many times the neck of the shoulder joint suffers from a disease called "tulli", and it grows and becomes large enough to be seen; and because of this it must be treated at first, and the bone is well covered by the cautery or hot medicine; and if it takes too long to cover it when it has become great, then take care if it is hard, rough-colored, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted point, for if you handle it in any way, the patient suffers greatly. And if the touching place is of a burning nature, and you can cover the entire area, then empty the patient's sense and treat the joint rigidly and restrictively.
When the neck of the shoulder joint is cauterized and infected
Seeking solutions in one of these outlined chapters brings little profit; none should apply them to any man since it benefits no one when the wound is fresh throughout his whole body. Therefore, first alleviate the two sides with a cautery, then treat until they are healed; and if the lips are sore on both sides, you must scrape all affected parts of their mouths as long as they heal, then assemble the two lips into one seam, and bind them, and sprinkle powdered dragon'inasinence, and incense upon it. Then place a piece of iron or another strong iron above the powders, let it burn through the wound for him until it heals, and treat with ointment as long as they are healed.
The method of the seam is that you assemble it with either needles or thread, as we have mentioned in the sewing of the abdomen; or with a string, as I have told you.
The lesions of the lips
A main houses suffers from hard lesions of the lips, resembling grains, and smaller yet more abundant; therefore it must be turned (the lips), and cut each one in two parts, and take them as pinchings, and treat each part in turn; then apply the wound with vitriol and sulphur after the incision, and then cure the joints rigidly until healed.
of the gums' edges
Many times it bleeds under the gums' edges where they used to call it "albulus"; this means you must hold it with tweezers and address its root, allow the blood or clot to drain away; then apply vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders after healing from the incision. If it returns afterwards, many times it happens again, so if it recurred, second time cauterize: if it does not return afterwards, these are the forms of stumps to cover them up.
of disorders
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the tooth's root, between the gums, which are ugly and harsh scabs; and there have been instances where a black and yellow-colored tooth with crevices appears until the corruption reaches the gum tissue, making it stinky. You must make the affected area lie in your palm and hold its head firmly within your hand while pulling out the teeth or scabs as long as nothing interrupts; you should then perform blackening and greening, yellowing, and other treatments on these until they become world-worn. If it is understood that this was done for the first reason, it is good; if not, it will recur again after two more days and with the second treatment so long as everything has been retrieved. It should be noted that teeth need various forms of dental instruments to extract them, according to what the procedure demonstrates, because other tooth extractors have different forms than those used between the gums; these additional forms and others must be prepared by you.
It is required that when you treat the tooth's pain and it takes a long time to relieve, as this should not be done; because there is no justification for such aggressive extraction. The emphasis here underscores the importance of being cautious with treatment duration and methodology when addressing dental pains. Aggressive or overly invasive procedures without sufficient cause can lead to unnecessary harm rather than benefit, which highlights a fundamental principle in patient care—first do no harm (primum non nocere). lait well. coment morne il souce tene desir. parle mentis voire dame itale lector apear ieval. Amendele: "Ala ent's laitale itaure of the following versio. I's avalve laitur a lai surge.entire aye, fromage.
After straightening the tooth carefully, and if it does not jump, then take none of these instruments and thrust into each part lightly, and move so as you have done before. And when the density is perceived and melted, it must be filled with linen or wax; and if tightened subtly with tweezers, that it should not break while stretching; and much effort will have to overcome the nerve in order to dislodge the tooth.
And do it well to ensure that you don't break it, and leave a part there, and bring back the malady to the patient through the mischief of the root, causing greater pains at first than what we have told; but they never come by this great disease for the roots or because they break the cartilage, as we often say; rather, when fragments are removed from such a fragmented area, wash it with wine or silt and clay; and if there is bleeding coming out of it, sometimes happens, then moisten it with vitriol; and if this does not value it, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, for when you first touch the tooth, should be long and have large handles, so that they do not double up as you pull the tooth. And these are the forms:
And they should be sturdy enough not to bend during extraction, and made well of iron, and designed for holding securely.
related to the roots of teeth When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary to place cotton moistened with wax on the socket for a day or two, as long as the roots are softened, then insert tweezers called "algebris," which make the teeth seem like they have been taken care of; and these should be made in such a way as if it were a chisel.
And if the roots do not yield to all these tweezers, it is necessary that you penetrate deeply into the root, and use the instrument called "althali," which is known as pliers; and this has the form of a two-pronged tool.
And whether it's large and sturdy so that it doesn't break; if the root jumps out with this, it's good; but if not, using all instruments, the forms come next as follows:
And if it's use toi. Soit de ces instruments of the fie leer: Leu les estoyer ceorne que lou mals descoin. iaire cestriens a unescrevion lou laissance quatorline ciatient devisesaisen. Fornethsreliber toi'fairle deit,alien.décor (thewoman. Toilet. Whatis itineration desires:
And other instruments are used before for reasons of density, and this instrument which seems to be large pincers, whose shape is as follows:
And this instrument should not break, and know that many instruments for density are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the masters skillfully handle their own instrument by themselves, according to what his works and illness show, because he has various diseases or the old did not teach about an instrument for these differences in bones and others, so it breaks nothing or weakens them, or he tries with instruments that I told you, and help from gestures, as shown here: And be large and well-shaped to hold the bone so that it does not drop but holds it and heals; and then restore the position of medicines suitable for this case, and if there is porriture in the bone and it is small, then use all these instruments:
When the tooth does not correspond with its natural shape and form is ugly, especially in women's teeth, it must be known whether the bone after the tooth is damaged and not aligned correctly, and cannot be smoothed or sharpened; therefore, make the cut (incision); if there are jagged edges next to the tooth, take this instrument whose shape I have described, similar to a small bird's beak, and it must be sharply curved in steel:
And the cope (cutting tool) is small and uses it for a moment because of the hardness of the tooth, and for this reason you do not move other teeth and if it can be smoothed, then use this limerick with one-third part as I have described its shape:
and is also like the cutting tool we use to make needles; and with it cut small pieces of the tooth slightly so that it does not move while curving; then in the end there should be no roughness at all, and if the bone protrudes too much and bites the tongue, it must be smoothed until it is equal, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
when the tooth loosens:
When the tooth loosens in front, or by percussion or decay, and the malicious one cannot press on it so that he does not bite it; and you treat them with restraining medicines, but they are worthless; if you bind it with gold wire, for silver wire becomes greenish-blue and corrodes, while the gold never breaks. The wires should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the distance between the teeth; and if you want to dress the dens. Then take this doubled in two healthy teeth, so that it can move very slightly: then start pulling the wire andoldenjour.
:eslatedressure andrescripiths. aire. Allgust.
Of covering the tongue's line
Never has it come from the tongue or nature itself, that they nip in such ways; or through an accidental wound sealed shut. The operations performed on the patient's mouth and head ensure a healthy testes, and lighten the tongue's nervous system so much that the tongue is freed from its attachment, even if it has hardened or not, as long as it comes from the suturing of an injury; be sure to prevent the fracture from becoming too deep, for the artery located there. Once you have done this, raise a moist rose water or cold water and place it under the tongue, then wrap the mouth with linen cloth at night, and dry lichen on the patient's tongue each time it swells to prevent sores forming. If blood comes from the wound, put vitriol on the wound; if bleeding persists, cauterize slowly using lampblack pigment, which is beneficial for this purpose. Then treat with other treatments until healed.
And if you see a fissure of black or brown color or hardness, it should not be felt by the malade for it is a sore; and if it is declining to bluish bruise and has moisture, let the incision heal; and in case there are no results from that treatment, place vitriol on the wound until it becomes thoroughly cauterized. Then continue with other treatments as long as necessary, applying a fine spatula under one side and another under the opposite side. And if this does not improve at your work, apply vitriol repeatedly until it heals completely; then raise the tongue to warm or soften ice water, and treat it with other treatments until fully healed.
Stomatotomy of the throat. This term historically refers to a surgical procedure where incisions are made into the tissues of the oral cavity, specifically within the mouth on either side of the tongue (as mentioned earlier), but it can also extend to procedures involving the area around the tonsils and pharynx if we consider its broader use. However, please note that such invasive practices would be considered highly unusual in modern medicine without thorough understanding and justification based on contemporary medical research.
None of the vocal cords that are called "godath" and they clean them properly. If they're not healed, and you should take care: if it is a small cracking incisions; and here's voice (crystal lice. Andropure
Can you press the tongue to all this instrument, and see the incision, if you take the stinger and the stick in the apple tree, and throw it above more than you can; and don't touch any cloth with it, then place the cover on the instrument, so that way its shape resembles some force; and everywhere the head is bent, and one side to another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or hemp.
And if you don't have this instrument, then the cover with pliers has this shape:
And divided on one side and on the other named; and when you have caught one apple seed, then catch the others in that manner, and after the incision rinse the patient's sore mouth with warm water, and saliva, and if they are discharging blood, or if quince seeds are baked, or fig leaves, or similar things, until the throat is free; and the cure so long as he is sound; but never does another abscess form in the throat besides these two apples, which you catch and bind like the two apples.
I treated a woman with an abscess in the throat, which was so large that she could not breathe through the obstructed passageway and couldn't eat or drink; and if it had continued for one year or two, she would have died. The abscess was so deep that there were eight openings around it. I immediately opened it, then pulled out some of the flies, and extracted a large amount of blood; then I put another piece into each opening in her neck, pressed her mouth, and pushed her tongue. Afterward, I placed an olive leaf on these abscesses and took a portion off them, extracting only a little sanguineous fluid from the wound; thus obstructing the passage of breath through her throat, she began to drink water and then wine, continuously working at cauterizing this abscess for over ten days. Then I reopened it in the throat: so that there was no further growth. And God did not let me get away without helping her afterward.
of the eye
s :carpe.gents.
And let there be a chief who applies medicine as if using a ladle, and places the instrument all over the vein; and the patient is lying on his side so that saliva and muscle secretion flow from their mouth into the medicine inside, preventing it from going down the throat, and bleeding; then take your hand with all the medicine and press it on the vein for about an hour until you see the mixture thickened and the medication's bites are soothed; and if you see, take a cotton and wrap it in any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument around the cotton in the cannula above, until the cotton dries on the vein; do this often enough until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry for two or four years, and if you need to redo the cautery of the medicine, when you reapply it over the vein with cotton wrapped in cloth, and treat with cold water baths and gargling so that it heals.
This treatment is more suitable for incision rather than cautery; if it's performed through fumigation according to this method, take calamine and yarrow and rue and chamomile and other herbs, and mix all of them or some of them in one pot, and leave it aside, then let the pot boil well; and make sure the pot is tightly sealed with strong earth, and place a suitable instrument on top according to this method. Whether it's silver or iron, and place one of the hooks in the patient's mouth until the vapour rises into the vein through the cannula, as long as the vein is thrombosed; after this procedure repeatedly, so that the vein dries out, and make sure you do not start at the beginning of the aposteme period, because many other things happen; and if this instrument isn't present, take a cannula and place it under the patient's upper lip with an olive leaf (ulven), so that the mouth doesn't have too much pressure; since the olive leaf does not allow excess vapour to irritate the mouth, and it is a good combined treatment.
Many times it is done to the throat or the spine of a fish or nothing at all; therefore you must treat what you see and press the tongue with the instrument in the sunlight, so that you can see the thing change; and if it does not open up and returns to the throat, then make him vomit the patient's malady until the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps such a thing might be expelled by vomiting; or the malady may absorb a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a slice of lettuce, or .i. piece of dry bread; and tie a string to it, and then strain it; and when it reaches your hand, if it does not happen as we have mentioned, then take an instrument shaped according to this form:
s:nacces:
Of the moisture of the throat
Never is the moisture treated in the throat as I have mentioned in medicinal division; and when it does not benefit, look at the ill-tempered person's throat under the sun with the instrument I told you about; if you see the moisture, treat it with any small unguent or delicate tweezers that are worth such. If this is not valuable, take a bleeding lancet and place it in the ill-tempered person's throat, then hold a hot iron in their throat for some time; and if the illness turns blue all day long, then take a full glass of cold water, work on the mouth, and let the mucus come out with the hand often; and as soon as the moisture feels the cold, it will decrease.
If it does not decrease as we have described, smoke the ill-tempered person's throat with the instrument I mentioned in the upper lung fumigation; do this many times because she will resist being pinched. The manner of the fumigation is that you use a pot containing charcoal pieces and cover it tightly with a woven cloth held by its handles, then pierce this into the chest with the instrument; apply the smoke to her head with the caustic, placing it in her mouth so that the smoke does not escape but penetrates the moisture; and now she will resist, and if it does not decrease, repeat the fumigation many times. Let her suffer thirst, give her dirty things to chew on, and do not let her drink water; instead, it is the custom that she be made to expel by this management.
The form of the instrument used to treat the moisture is such that when you see it, its appearance resembles twisted tongues to push into the throat; and it has a shape like a caregiver's beak and roughness from grinding stone, so that whatever she takes, she cannot relax. And here comes the description of the instrument:
The physicians of abscesses
Among the various types of abscess treatments mentioned hereafter in this book, there are differences in incision and size; and it is done through two manners, one resembles me myself, as I remember it from this text, and by which he holds moisture. And the second manner is for those that are on their corse: because the chief of an abscesses is different from these foundations, and the head of a lump in the body is different than those who come together at joints; each has to do with his own way.
And if at incisions it is not necessary to penetrate, as long as the bone has completed its formation; and if such joints require penetration when they are formed, and do not die according to their completion, like at the joints near the edges; For when an incision comes from the edge of a joint, and it is left until it pierces through, by chance its ligaments and nerves at the joint may be damaged, so that this contraction affects the main member. Or the incision is located in the main member, and if you delay penetration until it has become brittle, then it will harm the main member; or it is near the foundation, and if you pierce there while it is still alive, then it may form a fistula that extends within it, and cannot heal properly. And it should not be penetrated at joints where the digestion process has completed, such as those near the foundation, which would allow damage to extend within it, causing it to swell and widen; and it cannot mend in a significant way.
And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the incision which has died according to its completion; and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of fever, and reduction in pain and swelling, and relief and improvement of the chief part of the incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation dependent on the location of the incision, and whether it has opened or not; and if the perforation is long, and if the incision is in hands or feet, or joints and nerves, and in all its limbs or it does not have any deformity.
For such deformities, according to the extent of its digestion completion, if you pierce it then along the vein will be long streaks of blood and full of waste; and by chance harden its lips and corrupt its internal parts; And for any incision that is penetrated in a large diameter, according to which the limb requires it. You must make small incisions, small holes; and for large ones, larger holes, and many fissures according to the appearance of its hardness; if such an incision requires healing the wound or covering it, when it has become as soft as a cloth; and if you do with such injuries as those that are fissured in three angles, or like the flasks used for making myrrh oil from frankincense resin glands of dragonflies. And if there is an incision where they make round cuts, or other types of cuts and coverings similar to how a blowgun makes its mark on a target; and if such an incision requires creating a specific shape, or other shapes and finishes.
se dexement.ultes. Theesse,the. That the endandentefles.3llessexte aille.ssextre anempejordex cece.me causecellevessex a presure ouparmeignes soauxseursective arecisseurrandeute asharnex se tabellexes de
And when blood flows from the joint in your work, you will apply cold and gentle water, and a cloth, and moisten it repeatedly;  And if the blood flows from the joint persistently, you must govern it with care and treatment, and use the powders I mentioned earlier in this book, and if it is internal or the abscess cavity is very nervous, then you must cover them with tent fabric and hot water, oil, or wine; And if it is within a stone, and the limb is fleshly, then you must moisten them with warm water and oil, or cold and oil until tomorrow, as we have said; and then release the abscess and wound and treat accordingly.
And it is essential to know everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: this I have told you about how we should go before treating abscesses, and now the physician says.
This appears to be a fragment of Old French text without context or meaningful content that can be translated directly into English. "Des soros" does not form a coherent phrase in either language based on standard medical terminology or phrases from this period. It may simply be an error, such as a misspelling or misinterpretation of the original text.
When the abscess is small and resembles that of a hedgehog's footprint; it also has fatty and other types like poultry feet which are hard and sharp in nature. There is no doubt about whether this artery does not go against what was said before. The procedures for treating an abscess with every instrument called "entombed" because of its shape, as follows: If it contains moisture, it will break through the skin by itself; if the moisture has been drained away from the lesion that contains it, nothing should be left in the wound, so that when you let it go again after a day; or with cotton poultice Egyptian, if it is still present; but if not, use wet and dry cloths, as well as treating the wound, leaving it to heal for another day; then treat those which are delayed by night. Then repeat the use of the poultice according to what was said before in a second year, until you can confirm that it does not delay beyond a night; and cure the wound with an Egyptian poultice as long as necessary, so that nothing is left on it or its dressing: if the artery goes against this treatment, then do what I have told you afterwards. And also treat the abscess if it's rough, whether in a groove and by cure as I said before.
And the cutting on the abscess and the moist one, it is lighter because they contain little blood. And if there are some of these cuts or heads or center where there is no moisture, and of these there was .i. cut that I made or head from an old woman; and found the cut to be also like a rough, hard, and blunt stone, and it could not be broken; and if anyone had broken one, they would have done well as for breaking a stone. In other abscesses coming out of the center, since these that come out of the heads and roots of ears, the overgrowth always remains dependent throughout life, to allow the bowel to emerge; and treat it as required.
Skin ulcers.
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck collarbone area and in the grooves and underneenas, never appearing elsewhere or elsewhere; they are large, intermingling with one another like the head center and such abscesses as we have described; there are also many of those that contain moisture, and malignant ones that do not respond to health. When you see a good disposition on the skin, similar to the color of the cornea, and silent in every part and not separated from the neck nerves or artery, it indicates that you should scrape this abscess over it and examine each lip as we have described for centers; and treat them little by little, ensuring that the nerve does not suffer harm or tearing like a splint or strain, so that the hands do not hinder, nor press too far ahead to avoid causing anything undesirable.
And if you scrape the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work on it, then apply vitriolic sulfur or any other substances that congeal blood, restricting the wound; let the abscesses be soothed and softened until they start to grow. And when these abscesses are discomforted, return to your work, continue as long as you complete it; then treat those small ulcers by cutting them in their roots and leaving them fall apart with a double strong thread, causing no harm; then dress the wound with large Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton, then cure.
And if you treat the entire scrophula, it is required that you assemble the two upper lips of the wound and press them now; for there is no delay due to the size of the scrophula. It is required that you understand how to cover the root of it, and draw out forcefully, and press as we have said. Those scrophulas with superfluous amount will dry up and die; and this perforation in the same manner as before, depending on it, then I will instill bandages with oil and similar things, so that what remains corrupted does not continue to decay; and when the wound is properly treated, the oiling cure tightens until he becomes healthy.
Squinting
The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the fashioning of the throat; but I have never seen it done anywhere in our land, and this is their written account.
To those with squinting, it is required that the epiglottis in the throat be removed; and we do not help them for this reason, because all other voices and murmurs of the malady are found in these individuals who have an abscess in their mouth, or in their throat or in .ij. almonds. When the disease is in the channel of the murmur, it requires covering the epiglottis to avoid the fate that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it requires us to make holes of .iij. or .iiij. circles or .iiij. a small incision through which the crosscuts are made, not in the skin but between the circles according to the size of the incision.
and those parts are cut away from the section of the epiglottis without cautery, and the wound is longstanding.
And if the masters are afraid, it requires extending the skin of the throat to all its extremities before cutting the tissue until it turns white in the neck; and remove the stones of blood, if you see nothing, and then make the incision as we have said.
and is demonstrated by the section of the neck that bleeds through the hole which was broken, and by the defect in the voice.
And leave the wound a little bit.
And when the hour has passed and there is no doubt about strangulation, gather the two upper lips of the wound's skin flap, press it firmly with a bandage; then administer remedies that produce heat until he becomes sound again.
And we do not make the fendure de la seneiour parole desgive ince itentillement of .iiij. And now comes the cautery on the epiglottis because the maladies cannot be restrained, and it breathes through the wound, and thus one must guard against death;
And for this reason they command the wound to be left open as long as the sickness of the disease has passed, either in two years or in three years; And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it until it was treated.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took one knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut the skin around the wound;
And I called on him to cure her, and found her also in death;
I discovered the wound and found the blood that had come out of it, and realized she hadn't cut her throat or abdomen at all, but rather through the wound itself.
I hurriedly went to attend to the wound and healed it until she was healthy again;
and there wasn't anything wrong with her voice anymore, and afterward she returned to her normal state.
For this reason I said that in the treatment of the epiglottis there is no cause for fear;
of a large throat, but rather:
These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large wounds with the color of jet, and they occur frequently in women.
and according to about two ways: natural causes or accidents; or naturally there is no mechanism involved.
And the accidents are according to two ways: one is similar to us as food (suggesting that some conditions may be accidental and resemble diseases caused by consumption), and the other method arises from our arteries (indicating that some issues might stem from vascranial causes). and he has no fear, but must work on small wounds that are in the body, and tests it thoroughly in all its internal parts; if you treat it as we do with any other great wound, and don't worry about its cost, for he will cure it as one does in our time, and test every part of the body where there may be signs. and examine it carefully and treat it as required, until it is perfectly healthy again.
And our, meaning that we know now how it is done by us.
Many ways to treat our bodies, which I will describe in detail;
And it is necessary that I tell you all the difference between us and them.
I say that dislocation is fever and chills holding on until the heat passes, and it accompanies pus formation; however, when the fever subsides and the heat leaves, there will be relief from both the fever and the inflammation.
With our treatment there is no fever or pain and contains .I. sack, which is its own container and has the color of a corpse's skin, and it also begins to grow like a wart.
And according to those similarities, they are either gray or wet, and many of them have colors as I described in the section on dislocation.
It is necessary when coming to the treatment of our method that you bleed and first examine all the instruments called "entombedosors", according to their shape, which comes after the one used by the surgeon who precedes us (the following instrument).
And the method of investigating our abscesses is that you must keep them moist longer than when you empty them in the abscess, and turn your tools gently several times until you know whether they have pierced through, and this should be according to the size of the abscess.
Then take out the "entombedosor," and make sure it has gone all the way through (the word 'said' likely represents an archaic form of 'goes').
If it contracts and has a corresponding color like I have described for other abscesses;
And after the "entombedosor" has caused contraction, you will know that it is swollen, and then cut diagonally with pincers, and scour lightly each part and bind with a sling as long as you are going to take out the treatment cleanly;
And if you cannot extract it healthily, then take it apart so that nothing remains.
For if nothing is left behind, he returns to us many times.
And if he lingers a little while without complaint, then it treats the wound with some corrosive medicines, and binds up the wound, and places soothing substances at the incision, and cares for other treatments until he is cured.
And if he returns to us greatly, then we prick his two lips on the wound, and treat him with that which agitates the blood.
And if the vein is against it or something else when you hurry and apply a broiled lump of vitriol to its opening, and let it lie for two years or three, until the wound heals, and then return to cover that which has been lingering.
Here are the contrivances of dislocating instruments, and there are three kinds: large and slender, and also three called "albaret", and one called "breb", and there are three others: large, slender, and small, in order to search for abscesses.
And they are also like the needles used to catch witches, and made of citrus wood, iron, or silver, and move as those that are yellow, but they are more experienced in searching for abscess cavities.
And there are three kinds: large, slender, and small, according to the size of the wound's depth.
The forms of the needles are many in their resemblance, just as you see here: large, slender, and small; and there are also those with two abscess cavities of three kinds.
And there are needles with three abscess cavities, and they are also of three kinds; and there are needles with three abscess cavities, and single-cavity needles, and these are necessary in their use.
The head of these has two edges to it, and there are some with which one does not cut at all but only scratches them for this reason: they do not reach the vein or nerve.
And these dislocating instruments are returned to masters by mail so that the patient does not show any signs on the surface of the abscesses.
And they have three kinds: large, slender, and small, as you see.
And they are not used except in the vein or artery, like legs, arms, breasts, and lungs, and similar instruments.
And there has never been made another small instrument like this for scraping abscess cavities according to this form, in which it is drawn out blood.
And they have never been placed on the healthy vein or artery according to this great form.
Sometimes women's breasts swell up when they begin to become infected, and appear like a woman's breast.
And they are swollen and they need to be healed according to this form: Then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing salve stuffed in cloth, then bind together the two corners of the wound with medicine, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the swelling increases downward, and is distorted in size like what happens to women when they have twin pregnancies above their ribs through numerous similar openings. Because one holds the other at the end of each and so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line .b. up to the line .g. (Note: The numerical values represented by ".b" and ".g" are placeholders for actual measurements or positions within a diagram not provided here.) Then scrape the skin in between the two corners of the wound and remove the fat, and prepare what we have mentioned about dressing and powders, and that which is necessary for treatment, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient's wounds do not rest, or due to the drainage of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with soaked cotton in a corrosive ointment. And let it bleed until the remaining tissue and fat are removed, then treat it until it is healed.
from abscesses on arrows
These abscesses that arise on the arrows are methods of hard tubercles or contain moisture. (Note: The text is describing how some abscesses formed from arrows may look like hard lumps and be associated with moisture.)
Those which contain moisture therefore require that they are cut according to this shape from the line b up to the line .g (Note: The text refers to a specific procedure for treating abscesses containing moisture, following a certain pattern or diagram starting at point ".b" and ending at point ".g"). And when all the blood in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with plenty of soaked cotton and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an ointment appropriate until healed. (Note: This sentence describes a post-drainage procedure involving the use of cotton to aid in the healing process after treating an abscess.)
And if the abscesses are of similar shapes to tumors, and if they form cracks like those in tumors, and if there is draining blood from them, then prepare a caustic instrument as we have mentioned before. (Note: The text describes using a caustic cautery for treating abscesses that resemble tumor-like conditions with draining.)
regarding the treatment of an artery
When the artery is obstructed and its skin is sewn above it, as often occurs with abscesses in this condition, then blood also flows freely from both sides. (Note: This sentence explains what happens when an artery has been obstructed and treated by surgical intervention, leading to a condition where blood can flow through the affected area.)
And if there is such that it occurs on an artery, then these abscesses are formed along it. (Note: This sentence describes a scenario where abscesses form in relation to the condition of an artery.) And when you see that it is outwardly displaced, and when it occurs on the vein, then healing dressings are applied to it. (Note: This statement indicates a treatment approach for conditions where there'oce neurological condition described in Latin.)
And it is madness to strike this incision, and immediately when he is under the slabs and stones and columns and in many other places, and it is very great. It is now necessary to apply the treatment of iron, and those who are at risk must also do so, and in those with dilated arteries, they make the skin stretched long.
It is now necessary to apply the treatment of iron, and those who are at risk must also do so, and in those with dilated arteries, they make the skin stretched long. then work on the thighs, and continuously loosen the arteries, until they are exposed;
then place one here in the thighs, and pierce it on the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread, as I have instructed you regarding the extraction of two arteries that are in the temple;
then point the space between the two knots of an intermeshing device so that it does not move, and loosen the incision accordingly;
then administer the treatment that causes bloodletting, until the knot tightens; then treat that which is bloody coming out so that it becomes clean;
and if the incision is in the thigh vein, it must be that you wipe your hand on what you use to make the incision throughout the skin; then place the needle in the space that you hold between your fingers and pierce it, and tie it with one double string so that you can remove it from the other side; then bind the incision, as I have told you, or the knot of one part with two parts of the same string;
and if you doubt that the string will be strong enough, then bend another needle at all four threads through the entire incision of the first needle, and bind the strings in three places;
then bind the incision as much as it continues to bleed, and bind the excess bleeding and leave that which has been bound;
then cover it with one sheet of linen and oil, and administer the treatments for wounds and bloodletting until it heals;
incision of the arteries.
Also come incision in the arteries and veins, when they are torn, or too much work and resembling things.
And this happens often with shoulder pads and straps and in all their places where there are joints, and it is a painful wound, and its color seems like the color of a bruise, and there are various positions of pain.
And when we stretch it out, if the patient feels great pain, and is not in the form of a bruise but rather deep within.
And it remains silent from all parts, and does not move forward or backward, nor upwards or downwards, and those in the joints do not need to be covered with iron; by chance they undergo contraction.
And those who are at the head or forehead make a wound in the sublingual space (sublingual area). If his abscess is small, if you have some forceps, and you operate on its root.
And if it is large, if you suspend the bandage to the onychium (nail), and scrape it off, then treat the bone and close the wound with stitches, and do so until healed.
Of large bags hanging down (this translation may not exactly match the original intent, but it seems to describe something related to medical treatment). The phrase likely refers to abscesses that are being treated with a technique involving suspended bandages as described in previous lines. However, this specific fragment is quite ambiguous without more context from the text and could be interpreted in several ways depending on medieval medical practices or materials used at the time. Never occurs in the abdomen and anywhere else than the umbilicus (belly button), and it is a disease called "fungus" by the appearance of abscesses, and its root is subtle, and the wound large or small.
And I see .i. home who had .ij. or abdomen that were more like funguses than anything else, and they had no difference, and were white, with a fine root, and were split apart, and immediately there was moisture coming out of them.
Iij. Etc.: et leu quatercei. Li vices duces: ceur desmeil (infernall lis encoxie aroit, siemene ofte, les pee: leu :iij:iij: iewre meniere dechief lacte :xxvraies xenefie andee cippe :vce.Ij.
If the cupping bowl is large, and it is in your presence that the fire caustery should be. For at the pestle there often come many great discharges of blood, and if it does not wait for you, then quickly comes the caustery;
And if you see the patient agitated and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thin wire, and let it remain in the articulation as we have described, and leave it for two days.
And then the restraint, and continue to stretch the thin wire as much as it covers the joint, and check by its sensation of work; if the roots are large, fear not to strike in that area immediately for the abdomen, but do well to strike in most places.
Then cauterize it so that it does not recoil; then treat the wound and ensure you do not strike the joint with a discolored, weak feeling, and poorly healing nature.
For it is an incising that has been embellished, and I will come for the treatment of this ulcer afterwards.
When he cries out in pain;
If the crying originates from a wound or fissure caused by cauterization, or in his belly and at various body parts as it occurs in other cases, or blood that comes out of veins or arteries according to what is presented, or visceral issues;
And if it's due to the fissure and the release of blood, then the appearance of the incision resembles that of a wound with similar characteristics; it is lightly felt in terms of pain, but presents various issues at different locations. And if it's due to the intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse; when pressure is applied on its sides, it rebounds and returns, and possibly swells at the entrance of the bathing area and requires substantial effort for treatment.
And if it's due to moisture, it is a light issue that appears well when pressure is applied with your hand without restraint; but if caused by blood, and presents large and tough signs in the incision, and is sutured according to an amount.
Anderementes li tas enchantere de la peccore deffors duel de la pice. Leu en Ipsumire: " If it is required that you leave the treatment. For he has doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is in the intestine or the bowel, it is required that you command the patient to bleed their flank, and then extend them lengthwise; after which they should draw blood from all parts of the abdomen. and then he commands you to lie sober between your hands. then proceed to the vein that you have indicated throughout the entire abdomen. then it is part of the abscess above all the large intestines.
then work on the abscess stretched over the rope, and let your hand be an indicator, and pull the intestines. if you pull the rope twice, it will loosen up, and push the intestines back into the belly.
and if you pull the bowel, it will take the inflammation, and remove excess fluid.
and if the artery or vein goes against you, or the vein, if it moves beautifully inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and push forward with two threads, and pull back the needles through what you have done in crossing that you think was piercing.
then stretch the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound heal itself as much as possible, and check for death by itself. or you manage it with subtlety and fear of the patient's condition, then proceed to treat what it requires, and examine the abscess as we have said.
or you manage it with subtlety and fear of the patient's condition, then proceed to treat what it requires, and examine the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood that you pull it out, then heal the vein, si se il covient.
Of fire cautery commands the Moor to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, he restrains them so they do not move until they come forth.
We have previously discussed the similarities of scars and how one should treat them with medicine, and we also commented on the care for fire cautery; let us now consider a chancre that penetrates deep into marrow, great caution in its treatment is required, as they say ancient physicians would extract it if found in the flesh like scars, or in joints, or other similar marks, and must be entirely removed at the onset of its appearance; when large and old, there is no need to approach them, as I have never seen anyone heal from them before.
The actions, when the malady is in its initial stage and can be extracted as we have mentioned, involve never purging a black cold sore to make it better; if it shows signs of fullness, then cleanse it thoroughly after performing the procedure; remove any dead tissue from the site for this operation; trim all surrounding nails or chancres and pluck the hair from everywhere around without leaving anything behind; let the flesh heal completely and press well with your hand or something else on the wound. If blood returns while cauterizing, continue until it is no longer bleeding; then treat further as needed until it has fully recovered.
Dropsy refers to an excessive accumulation of fluid in the body's tissues, causing swelling and pain. Historically, dropsy was considered one of the four great humors (alongside black bile, yellow bile, and phlegm) that could disturb the body's balance and lead to illness, as described by ancient physicians like Galen in medieval medical treatises. Treatment for dropsy during this period involved various methods such as bleeding, purging, or using medicinal herbs believed to help restore humoral balance. However, these practices are not supported by modern medicine and can be considered outdated. desse cure pour les choses. Believe the patient lying with his hands under your feet, and the ministers press the belly outward pointing the fire to the lowest part of this piece; And take the spatula-shaped osteoplastic: It is divided into two parts by a point, and not at all inserted so that it can come near the intestines when it is pierced.
Then observe the hernia is directed towards the intestines: it is required that you pierce them from within the belly at intervals of three fingers below the point; and if the hernia is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the belly at intervals of three fingers; and if it's because of a cyst, then do so on the right side, and there is no need for pain in the area where superfluous fluids run down into the weaker one.
Then pierce through the entire hide with this instrument, and bind, and believe your hand to all of the spatula-shaped osteoplasty between the hide and serous cavity as much as a finger'ni. 1/3 inch; then penetrate it until it becomes eight times its length, and that is how the instrument appears thin like a quill, and from one part .ii. inches; and ii. parts on one side of this piece, and three inches, and iii.
: "celevesin. Comment (n'scape. oun: a:esurge àgerre carriesseure: leve itentire unretrightener :cumbre: The :faire voutra (aute, andervoir. Afrom:
but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what those dispositions of the virtue of a malady mean, and their points; then take the instrument and retain the heat, and it is now retained by the knight who goes down below the entrance which is under the sheath, as I have spoken before, that you pierce in this manner; then repeat the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and withdraw some little quantity of heat.
every day and do not let the fever worsen even if it lasts but for a little while; and if you doubt about the malady, and administer much heat, then the cure of embalming or sablon heats up quickly, and by many sweats or baths and in sunlight, and the treatment with drying medicines until the patient is well again, and cauterize on the stomach, on the liver, and on the spleen after removing the heat.
of the embalming of the arrow There has never been an infant born with a large or unlocated arrow in the vein, or even if it is small and not at its usual place. It must be detected immediately by examining each spinal nerve very carefully according to this form: then put a little thin clove of wood there, and tie and hold it for three years or four years, as long as he wishes to urinate; and then release it; and in the end, there may never have been any need, because the urine that comes out does not leave the wound open. For those with a small arrowhead in the vein, if you place two thin cloves of wood there as we have mentioned before, it will swell up. Those who do not have the arrowhead within their veins cannot urinate properly because no one is born with an arrowhead at the top of the vertebrae; thus they cannot lift their spine high enough for the material to reach the marrow area, which results in a serious illness.
And the method of this treatment is that it causes the malady to lie down on its back, with the arrowhead located at the top of the vertebrae and as small as a penny's width; so the arrowhead stays in place while the blood flows freely around it, which is what must happen. It is important not to let any spleen discoloration occur if it happens frequently; if there is a splintering of the bone where the needle was inserted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
boils on the vein or arteries Many times these albathe appear in the vein, and it is a disfiguring sign; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; it requires that you examine one of them with delicate precision, and treat and massage all over, then apply Egyptian liniment bandage to heal it until it is healthy. And if the albathe is malignant, with black color and discharging, it requires that you prepare a cautery. When you have coated it, and if the albathe is in the side of the vein, and part of it lies within the nail bed and part on the side, then you must remove the albathe which is inside first; and when it is healed, then curing it together does not ensure that the patient's symptoms related to the vein will be resolved, as blackness and corruption appear in its vein and where; hence it requires cleaning everything that is blackened and decomposed, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour from grenade skins peeled off several times, then cure with other treatments until it is healthy.
And if the blood comes to the point, you must prepare a lunar cautery according to this method: The lunar cauteries aid in these two situations: at the discharge of blood and corruption; and when the vein'its patient is decomposed and retracted, it requires that you cut or insert into the vein a tube made of wood, and make him urinate his painful symptoms among them; and when the hair on the head of the vein has been removed at its tip which usually occurs in those who have not been circumcised, either for injury or abscess incision, it requires that you scrape this instrument with shorn blades until they are loosened from their place, and release all parts of the vein.
And if it is a difficult matter of designing this case, you must scrape nothing on the head of the vein and the nail bed; then suture beautifully between them with a thin linen moistened with cold water so that it does not protrude in front.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not painful compared to other wounds; in any case, whenever we do this work of our own free will, and especially for children, it is the best deed and the safest way to salvation.
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children in law because they did not practice it at all and we have only what we have learned through experience.
Because I wish the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision, and with one stick; so that it would break their skin, and perhaps they will stay above them and delay below.
leu theent derriere la lignage anatomie citertains dite.iij. Achele aimer ixime ofterpaintedeffer entendeur.g,ratherescalme'n'er.iureous.jacquerreveilunanumorlaterainvolvescribe. ndirectly andire:comptractures. Forthcomportion.
sse and itafe:sacre itchere to let3en:10:seslore, but :squele (httpsare,il acheur;re le faitarme presse, sofaire.n’nacques etchape coudre. Iise
When you press your hand and cut it into one whole ten; but the child's finger must be well set inside his skin; and make him do the first operation in such a way that he thinks the child understands, if he listens, that you are not just binding the thread around the limb, but forcing it to behave in all ways possible. Then make it straight in your hands and lift the forces between your hands or on top of your thighs that the child does not see them nor any animals; then blow into the vein and raise it so high until the child's vein is visible; then clean well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the puncture site with a double thread, then tie every .i. piece to another in alternating places; and give life between the second tying by touching the pouch and indicating the direction of the arrow, and separate between these two bindings quickly and raise the tip above the child's heart.
Then make it straight in your hands and lift the forces between your hands or on top of your thighs that the child does not see them nor any animals; then blow into the vein and raise it so high until the child's vein is visible; then clean well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the puncture site with a double thread, then tie every .i. piece to another in alternating places; and give life between the second tying by touching the pouch and indicating the direction of the arrow, and separate between these two bindings quickly and raise the tip above the child's heart. Then let the blood trickle a little and a little because it is good; and put powder on top of the powder layer an iron nail glued with half a moistened egg cooked without salt, roasted in honey-soaked oil, and leave it for another day, and cure it with other cures as long as it remains healthy.
The formation of forces during cleaning is as follows: the two fingers are held tight and straightened out, just like the thumb.
The error in the molding occurs when cutting densely inside the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend your thumb to make the incision, so that the cut makes an indentation; and hold it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your thumb, then use pliers and grasp it.
And if it has passed three years and what is under the vein has inflamed, then let him leave until the thorns are soothed, and scrape lightly; as long as you pull, and keep away from the part of the vein, this will not harm nor cause injury to it.
Then treat the vein of conglomerate wounds that we have said or dealt with powders, and if it is pulled beyond measure, and goes upwards, it does not harm; cure it as we have said, so long as it remains healthy.
The retention of urine.
The retention of urine is from the operation on a piercing, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or similar things that we have said in the section.
And if the urine is not expelled and you see that there is retention in the piercing which is at the base of the bladder, it requires that the malaises be pressed on their genitals; and place his hands on his back, stretch out his abdomen from above the back part, and constrain him as much as possible so that the urine will come out. And finally forcefully press the urethra to express the piercing upwards, for it is then released (urine).
apele sanz lege. cei theoritgustre tote leuce theca. Leude.
And the way to collect urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the head with a little piece of wool or cloth, and insert the heads of both threads into the syringe; and remove any excess linen and push the heads of the threads up to the head of the syringe, then oint the syringe with oil or fat or almond oil, and let the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and penis with moistened olive oil and water.
Then slowly insert the syringe into the vein, until it reaches the root of the vein, then double the vein above the wound; then insert the syringe before the bladder and feel the patient's urine coming to the empty space there, which is not done according to this order because if you lead where it goes is twisted. Then let the thread be wrapped in a little linen, and the urine follows the linen, then extract the urine, and correct the urine;
And continue using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and align the patient's pain points.
diseases of the bladder
When blood or sanguine comes into the bladder, there is accumulation of phlegm, and you see it boiling away with waters and medicines, applied to all instruments called "clasp-knife", which has this shape.
It is closed, and if it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the bladder leaks due to moisture so that the medicine covers such a way as to cover well the vein without adding more, and push out when the time comes.
And when you see the medicines in the bladder, place the chief cauterizing tool into the moisture and draw it out to the surface; if you draw the moisture into the catheter, then push strongly with the trainer there; if the moisture enters through this way, it will now reach the bladder, whereby the patient's pain points will be felt.
And it is the subtle form of the clyster used to wash the bladder: this consists in...
.ié:ls :otrer viences. ixent sié:en lex-sans les plaince de choses xain ciens degrief itse desin leisrele xile al theurge en latinxide ofxede, ajustice tounite dextern ices laixtrains ofxide. I'ur: "Iacresculi:
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make an i. circle, and pierce it roundly inward; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a dye, and place therein whatsoever ointment and moisture and water you see fit, and tie it with the instrument, and do so as you have done for the bladder when pressing with your hand until the moisture runs from the bladder.
Into the wound
In the division of surgical techniques, and wound extraction in combination with medicines; I have said about the difference between open-jointed arrows, and all signs, and on which type of incision one must work in terms of size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will explain it clearly and briefly.
I say that the incision in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it's a sign that the water leakage from the bladder seems to be watery in its subtlety; and he hurts his hand deeply, and quite swollen his leg, and he has suffered many times, and then inflammation follows; and there are many such incidents. It is light recovery for children until they reach 3 years old, and it's very grievous in the elderly, and it corresponds to those who are between middle age and old age; and care is lighter for those with a large wound than for those with a small one.
And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient thoroughly by catheterization, because fluid can accumulate in any part of the intestines; for it has never been found obstructing the passage.
Then take the patient' Written as an instruction:
If you feel the incision in your abdomen, immediately rise from the position on it. And if it does not hurt when touched with pressure at all points, indicate to yourself by pressing your left index finger; and if the patient is a child, or his pain returns, or his condition becomes complete; then place it firmly in its foundation, and feel the wound, and where you perceive on your touch, press down forcefully.
La petite. Est-il à l’olte: Leu bien apres quinne ilespecialy theu espremerde incoitmes of it isoacute :gothic :theorice. Hereof, and theorex:surname thewomaniure aoutilites:caurle la mainte le:
And makes between this that is between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of moisture; and let it be placed above the wound, and you must either place it on the foundation or directly on it, and make its width so that it will be wide enough for later use, but not too large;
By chance the plate is placed either on the foundation or directly on it so that it springs with work; and you know whether there is a joint or angles and margins: if it has grooves to extract from; and when placed in position, they resemble a grain, and rounded, where the exit is light.
Since it has angles and margins, make the width larger; and if it does not spring, you must stretch under the pincers that are as strong as a chief chisel to force out the wound so it doesn't get obstructed; or place one of those instruments underneath it. If you cannot insert into such, then enlarge its hole slightly, and if there is no bone devoid of cartilage, straighten it with vitriol.
And if there is more than one wound, first place the largest at the base of the bladder, then press it down, then strike it forcefully, and then handle any smaller ones that are present. If they are very large, you must cover them with silk and make a larger wound. Because these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out again so that his hair cannot be sewn together; but in all cases try to remove the tissue forcefully using pincers or chisels, until you take it apart piece by piece.
And once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and the tightening, and cover it with a moist cloth made of linen or cotton dipped in oil or wine, or linen soaked in rose water or cold water to calm the abscess; then wash the patient over his collarbone, and do not loosen the bandage until tomorrow.
And when you loosen the bandage, if it has done well in oil and water, then wash the patient with limewater and borax solution until he is healthy again.
And if the abscess appears in the wound and congestion of blood in the bladder, it is retained urine that flows partly with the urine: therefore thrust your work into the wound, and remove the clotted blood, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and cause inflammation.
Then raise the wound with aloe and silk and silk bandages in all ways you know until it is healthy again; and ensure that all urine collected while curing him be tied to his thighs and gathered around the wound.
And if the wound is small and it is made with a rod of wood, and hammered down; then perform this treatment that I have said before, cut many times at this place. I have already proven in such cases.
Three angles or joints formed of leu leu andirree leu laissames, as on neuf. ce que li pense lesurine of leu deinjourne : leu de cestron l'encox. Jejurinecture toire ail leu:
nare, sofaire. The third aye and theit, itte.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take one of his filaments from the wound and another above it, then make the vein at the place where the two lines are, and draw out the blood there, and clean the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it so that it becomes sound again.
From a woman's wound.
It rarely happens that an opening occurs in a woman's womb, and if it does happen, then it is considered a grievous matter, and for the following three reasons: firstly, by chance, the woman may become unmarried; secondly, there are no well-known women who can open themselves willingly, especially when they are of noble birth.
And the third way is that by chance one may not find a woman skilled in this art; and the fourth way is that the womb of a woman is more perforated than the man'ayer it requires greater depth, which causes great fear for her.
And if such necessity arises that you need to entrust a well-known woman, and for those things of the testament, unless there is an expert noblewoman who can perform it or someone skilled in women's healthcare, or a woman who understands at least part of this art, then command her to do what you command from the investigation of the womb.
And watch very well if the woman is virgin: then it becomes necessary to bind her waistband or foundation and examine the womb; but if she performs the act, she must restrain herself in that area, and I recommend that she pushes with her left hand on the formed bladder.
If she performs the act, it becomes necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to near the root of the thighs, so as to feel the womb in that area where it appears; and do not move her waistband up or down on the root of the thigh against the middle. Be the first small incision made there, and then she moves her waistband away from the womb or towards it.
Then make the wound in the incision, if you feel the womb at that point enough so that the piercing can be removed from it; and know there are many types of pliers: small ones and large ones, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those which have prongs. See the similarities to know the outcome.
And if the woman does not hold on her own, then apply white vitriol and put your finger there for an hour until the wound is sealed; then return to your work, so that the piercing remains open, and use the instruments I have told you about in extracting a piercing from men to assist you in carrying out this task.
And if the woman does not hold on her own and it is an artery that was pierced, then put powder on the wound and strips of linen and bandages, and do not repeat this procedure, let the piercing stay, so that a malady may die; then treat the wound.
savre it isis:vrai
Of hernia loose
Collected from moisture or white fat that is within the wall of the cavity, which contains the inner fluid, and they are called "white fat", and it is never properly in the lining of the cavity unless it is considered another thing; and it consists of skin between the white fat we have mentioned, and this does not occur often.
And the formation of this substance is due to a weakness that draws in fluid, and it expands that matter.
And it never comes from striking the fluid, and this white fat has many colors: or it is a reddish yellow, or without red, or black, or watery white, and that happens more often.
And these are the signs of knowing this assembly, for if it is the white fat we have mentioned, then it includes abscesses, that is quite long like a lump, and does not open up fluids, because it has moisture throughout its entirety.
And if it has moisture in the cavity's own lining, then these abscesses include a part of the inner fluid, and for this reason we consider it as something else.
And if the white fat is between the skin of the fluids and the white fat we have mentioned, it feels well; therefore, when you know the color of this moisture throughout the entirety of its distribution, from where it originates to where it goes, then its shape appears as follows. Since that is after the introduction point, judge what is in there.
Since that is after the introduction point, judge what is in there. And when we cauterize with iron, it is required that the maladies are healed according to possibility and the fullness of its heart; then they are pressed down on their backs, a little height above something, and put many layers of bandages over them.
Then they lie on their left side, and command the minister to lie on the right side, and extend the rod over one of the two places where the inner fluids are kept.
Then take the syringe and extract the skin of the fluids until near the penis, and make a straight cut through the white fat around it, and scrape gently according to possibility.
Then pierce the white fat plainly with water in one large hole, and extract all the fluid, and then put onions over it, and make the white fat rise above; do not touch the inner fluids, but only the white fat itself. Cut carefully underneits his side without cutting into him too much, so that if you cut badly it may return the fluid to him.
and if the fluid jumps up for your work on the white fat; then gather all of inner fluids in a lacis.
And if you find the upper corrupt with another illness, it must be that you bind the limbs which are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then pluck the worm from all the suspended limbs, and extract the wound, and cure as we have said.
And if the blood is assembled in two parts together, you know that they are two branches; take hold of the other part as you have done with the first one, then suck the fluid from the wound and place a damp linen soaked in rose oil on the injury.
And lay another piece of damp linen soaked in wine and oil on the two branches, and place it above the wound, covering everything according to this shape:
Then take two cloths and pieces of linen shredded according to this manner and assemble them in the belt loops on the breeches, with one piece starting from the foundation up to the backside, and the other covering the groin area; and another two parts above the armpits, and they are all gathered into a loop on the breastplate.
And never should this rod of fire be used on the skin of iron size, and you must use a slender cautery knife, and remove the skin from the wounds, as we have said, so that the white substance which contains blood is exposed.
laissiin leu coinsent. Laure de: lescesaure ea: le: desec: entor in theoure.cox ions ouls of it's: itesle, to theurs (2000source celtic:entirely fromures
And the cup in all ways that you can, until you master everything; and keep fire away from the face; and know this work is more safe; and avoid stagnation of blood and wounds caused by cutting.
And if anything contradicts you, or incision or blood stasis of any kind, treat what is contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this work because of its horrors, prepare a small hole as I told you, so that when you are sure about our meanings, it will be possible to dislocate such a thing.
Let the patient be seated on a raised seat; then make the incision in the part of the body surrounded by a wide space, and pierce deep into both sides with long sticks; and let the holes be large enough so that all the blood flow.
Then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and let the remaining blood flow, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the wound does not allow blood to come out of its mouth (the opening), it is necessary that you insert a pin or instrument used for draining fluid from abscesses as described before; and slightly expand the wound, and observe whether the blood returns, and after about two months or sooner depending on progress, when it has sufficiently healed, then this will be a good time for the patient to resume normal life.
Of the incision in the abscesses
You see that in this part of this operation there are many disadvantages because I think it is best left as it was.
And I will tell you the workings and appearances of the incision.
Here I say that many incisions come or go, and we mainly deal with them; and this happens quite often.
It is known by excessive bitterness and fluid that spreads incisions, or by percussion;
and is the color of the incision according to the color of the artery; it does not involve pain, and it is a serious incision.
And perhaps some incisions are torn and rough due to fear or pain, with a purplish hue, and it rarely comes from our arteries, or the swelling of veins.
When it comes from our arteries, if it is caused by the position of the incision when pressed. and does not require that you touch it.
That made from the swelling of veins is caused by its position with the expressing of two pressing.
and may well make a cut at this shape, and on the others. And you must take care of the quality of the incisions, then they are placed on top, and covered with white paste, releasing the suspension from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already saturated with these needs, then it must be that you apply the paste and cover.
And if it is in the middle of the paste or within the vessels, then it must be that you release all those attached, and cover them entirely.
And if the formation of the vein is behind it or undernee, then you must cover the whole thing and extract the vein, as we have said.
And when your tasks are completed, you should dress the wound with clean linen soaked in rose oil and wine, then attend to other treatments until it is healed.
from the incision of veins
It is one such incisions wrapped with an appearance similar to an umbilical cord, with the softening of veins. And if it hurts the maladies when he moves it;
and the treatment of this disease is just as important as this one before it.
and therefore we tell you the work, according to the way they did so.
s :rofaitures eulx malice dein inostructure d'affect, illois:sous les ounceil theore in chief. Injest develaunle of itoastaire le terme. To the entire surface around the vein close to the neck, and the shoulders of the masters, and extend them uniformly.
then cut deeply into the sinew, wherever there is a thorn in the flesh, as long as it remains exposed.
and then scrape out each area as we have said in removing arteries that are located in temple regions;
then insert an awl or one with a double thread, and bind it at the first point where the vein has entered, and bind it again to the other end; then proceed immediately along the length of the cord, and remove the damp ones;
then treat the wound as we have done with others or by making incisions, if no veins are being obstructed by any of the cuts.
for by this there is no ill consequence, and if any veins are found within all the sinews, it must be drained from each sinew. but it does not lose its rhythm due to the incision of the sinews and cannot be helped.
sufinchecthexapriel,antimente:eagnevity isignes:ddevociteilifere:nove it'isme iewreviable bertifreves  :<ngerme thatcelle.give yields. The tures decept he ieuctionscopeuricheliseure, hevelagreche:xaiverrairexaillexinauxxenture, iactions. The treatment of this joint is by the cutting that comes from it or its extension to the belly in the part of the grills, because then the intestines descend along that path to one of the branches.
And this route is either from the suction or its extension, and they come in these .ij. manners due to various causes: by striking, jumping, shouting, lifting a burden, and similarly so too.
And the signs when it is from the suction of this joint are that they happen infrequently and rarely, over a long period, and do not suddenly appear. And the abscesses extend towards the bone up to there because the suction presses the intestines.
And the signs when it is from the suction of this joint are that they bring about sudden onset pain at the beginning, and various appearances on the skin nearby, due to the issue of the intestines and its discharge into the bone adjacent to the area being suctioned.
And there has never been a case of this joint being with the intestines, and it is held back, and causes great pain to the patient first when compressed.
And in these iron cauteries for fear, because then they will avoid escaping.
And the method of the treatment is that you command or order the patient to move his intestines inside during the wound repair if he can return. then suddenly sucked up by its neck between your hands, and gently hold it.
then the key above, and cut all the skin of the two branches long. then insert under your legs one end according to what you know how to do for opening the wound, and make such that it can be pulled out.
then scrape the suction that is under the skin of the branches, so that the white suction covers all parts.
then insert your guide in such a way that it teaches the branch, which is between the white suction under the skin of the abdomen and between the second suction.
and then that which is behind the abdomen, and between the second suction. And pull it to your right hand inside the joint of the branches, and the white suction in front of your left hand, and lift the abdomen all around the suction towards the body. and command the minister to extend the abdomen upwards, and loosen what is behind the ligament.
and see if it has the intestines wrapped in white suction or firmly, and if you do not find anything, let it go into the abdomen.
sié:icel iiij ofere entendement demein leesme l'once leccles dele ofener in thejac. ices:eich.vrai :nentities aces thele, The Frenchcaut.iijfaire enmeant. Howire jargue theil :interpreyssenter fromage. Theissuel. Itale.iij. Ipsede. Jounger. Then they join them together in the shape of a cross, and bind it with strong twine, which we have said is inside the skin of the joints, by a tight thread of two parts. Then they wrap the shoulders of the patient's limbs, and bind them with strong twine in a pattern of two parts each, so that no one can push into them while the joint is open. And mainly sets the twine according to the first one long by two parts, and after these two-part twines they leave a wide band that is inside the skin of the joints, covering it greatly.
And after that follows the rest according to the shape it bears; then they cover in the part which is inside the skin of the joints, without pressing too much and pulling it, as we have said earlier.
Then they apply a warm linen in oil, and treat the twine that we have mentioned before. And sometimes they cauterize the white band inside the skin of the joints after the incision, due to doubt or fear of bleeding out.
Because this happens many times, and they leave the twine until it breaks; and if it delays breaking, they raise it with hot water as we have mentioned before, until it breaks.
Then they treat the wound further until it heals perfectly.
of hernia
In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to perform treatment with fire.
And the old ones said that it is made so like the assembly of threads wrapped around each other, in such a manner as to bind the limbs after cutting them off with severe force.
Then they coat it with oil and treat the wound that was done to him, as we have said until the limbs are healed.
There has never been such a rupture of the abdominal contents, as we have said before, and they open it up; and if some are torn from their entrails, that is little harm done, and reattach them all.
And in any case if it lingers too long on this point, they believe the wound or ulcer, as long as the entrails are torn.
And this happens with the extension of that band inside the abdomen, as we have said, because it is stretched, and then becomes softened and raised them upwards and opened them.
ssecreatime asto
And it is that the patient's great pain lies between his two hands, then fill the joint of dislocation with a thick band according to three fingers in size.
And then extract the sinew that is under the skin where it lies, and take the thread and apply it to the visible sinew.
And press on the letter formed in the abdomen, and count out the two visible sinews above the thread's tip, and count both of them.
Then remove the tip of the thread, and do not cover the sinew nor extend the other parts, as I have shown you in the treatment of uncoiling the bowels.
Then treat it with wound care. And when you remove the threads, if the mouth flaps and heal the wound, as long as it remains sound.
The sinew is constricted and has no appearance in the dislocation routine, and the cautery sticks to this point, and further away from healing.
of the softening of the flesh of the joints.
Many times the flesh of the joints is softened in some people, because those who are inside are softened, and it looks like milk; and it is necessary to cure when one sees a sick patient lying on his back, and he takes hold of the softened skin above natural skin; then assemble two or three layers around it, and if you see excessive softening, first reduce it to two or three layers firmly; then sew between the layers, and treat it as with other wounds, so long as it remains sound, and tie the thread.
in cauterization.
For the punishment that is permitted by our law, and because I would like to not mention it in this book; and it is necessary for two reasons: one is that you answer when asked about the punishment, and how you administer it; and the other, because we often had to use physical discipline on various animals to help us, such as a goat or sheep, deer, etc. So I say that this form of punishment is carried out according to these two methods: either by attraction, or by incision. For the method of attraction, you place the animal in hot water until its joints are soft and while; then pinch it with your hand as much as possible until it heals; for the taming method: make sure that you muzzle the animal's skin on your left hand, tie the suspension strap, and loop each cord around eight times when they have been thoroughly flayed; and this way of disciplining is different from attraction, because by atraction there may be a chance for some joint fibers or sub-fibers to remain under the skin on the legs, and this method of punishment.
in hermaphrodites.
inyeptie: leu demeans, ainses,et cestant ditz: laisses as messe, et siens en cas touns escrevet. Italians, estil'esme des gains: les mein theurge lait English: itils on theurs:
:elication of thecaesar lelucateurs a l’sainte leveur (prezent. Whatilunanfe:esceafarre, ilice. Ispiris'sage. Iliapoin-goneime.
Tendin has been attached to the natural part until it is too hideous to see; and some women have had it as much like a hand, and that is the cure. It must be that you draw away the superfluous tendon from your hand or fingers lightly; and do not go too far in cutting, lest blood does not stop, then the treatment of another treatment until he is sound; and for another condition where it protrudes out of the mouth of a murel, and empties itself, and appears as if according to the likeness of a cow, and because of this they called it "cow disease" (kowe). It must be that you remove it, as we have said about tendin, and cure it until it is sound.
This word "erratique" appears to be in French and means "erratic" when translated literally into English. However, if this is a part of an Old French medical text with specific terminology or context, it may have a specialized meaning related to the subject matter discussed. Without additional information about its usage within the historical document, providing a precise translation or interpretation isn't feasible in this format.
Erratic conditions are those where the woman's nature is not clearly understood, or the hernia is small; and it may be congenital or caused by an illness that has occurred; or it could result from a slipped stitch, subtil strings, or other similar factors, which form in the groin, either on the sides, underneath, inside, or wherever there might be; and these conditions are involved in conception, childbirth, and sometimes they lead to flowers having them. Based on the rules of dressing, one must gather two indicators, place them over the woman's back with her legs spread out; then form the threads until the subtle string is fully sutured by the slipped stitches, and apply linen bandages soaked in oil to the wound, and keep applying it every day as long as needed. If the subtle string is hard and sharp, you must copy a similar pattern resembling a sprig of myrtle leaves for treatment. If the slipped stitch has been present since birth, spread it out at the side and suture; and with various medicines containing blood from dragons or incense mixed together, cover a large linen cloth so that the wound cannot heal, and then treat it for a long time, and bind it with dry linen bandages. And when such a hernia occurs in the groin area, one must follow this method of treatment; but if there are entangled stones in the groin, no one should touch them with iron or tools. Because a stone lodged within the inguinal canal prevents any contact with iron or metal instruments.
Hemorrhoids, also known as hemorrhoids or piles, are mentioned here to be treated by using a cloth saturated in oil and applying it around the affected area, which corresponds to the description of treatment methods that involve wrapping with linen soaked in oil. The original meaning may not be clear; however, this passage references another kind of hemorrhoids from the same era: encompme les leges, et siens.
Burns are wounds which have not been traditionally treated with caustic medicine, and when they become old, they turn into scabs; as we said in the discussion of symptoms, signs, and I will now mention those who receive treatment. I say that burns and scabs, when they appear on marble surfaces, are imperceptible to touch, so they cannot be treated with iron; however, those present at the mouth of the marble can feel them and treat them. Therefore, you must first put a woman in a cold room, then stretch her skin above pincers, and heal her roots with medicines that restrain blood flow, similar to dragon's blood and incense; afterwards, let her stand for an hour in cold water; and if the wound becomes moist again, she should sit in a decoction of sumac leaves and grenade skins, along with other things; then take flour from wheat, knead it into paste, and apply it on her back. And if she coughs up blood, that is good. If not, he will press vent syringes onto the skin and mammary glands without hurting them; then take linen cloth, soak it in juice of plantain or juniper berries with wine, and apply it to her chest. And when the abscess relaxes, treat its opening until it is healed; and those who are called "albather" turn red and have a rough appearance similar to that of scabs; and then continue treatment until it is healed.
Abscesses on the marble surface
Abscesses on the marble surfaces
iagnimeurs  :dece anatomevolvexcelleiuels iauldreuconseculleifles.cameinthecthocaragon,kete iflone.12nde
The profession is first in understanding the natural shape of childbirth, and these signs appear when you see a woman pushing forward, and desiring to smell the armpit; therefore, you know that those children are born according to their natural shape, and arise from the head, and the second follow with them; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press quickly on her abdomen so that the child comes out at once. Because when he separates from his head, the second follows him, and is marked by painful swelling due to proper molding of excesses in accordance with its nature; and this which does not come in this manner is never naturally formed. For it comes none times upon its feet, and comes forth with either legs or shoulders, and the hands, or on her abdomen, or sinks down from its neck, and is transformed by chance due to its collarbone, and other disfiguring figures; thus it is a profession that she must be skillful and subtle in these matters, and she will demonstrate all the signs as we should help.
If the child comes out of its head naturally, and the woman gives birth with a groan, and his strength is weak; let him lie on a chair, or women hold them; then rise his nature from oil or fenugreek boiled, and pour the bath between her legs in which this small bladder has its form: And cut the second layer, and coat his belly as much as the moisture is correcting the baby'inascent; and press on the woman's abdomen until the child comes out, and if it does not come out, you must clisterize the woman with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil for an hour; then make her stand up straight, and open her hands one by one. And if they do not enter forcefully, you should lay her on a chair, lift her feet high, and pile the chair onto the ground, and cleanse the woman so she does not defecate when standing up; and if his hands cannot be entered, and the child dies, you must cut his hands with the instrument shown before me. And extract the baby, and massage him gently all over.
of the exit from the child on its feet: if it does not come out easily or naturally, you should carefully cut his hands with a sterile instrument shown to me beforehand; then pile the chair onto the ground and cleanse the woman so she does not defecate while standing. And as for the baby who has died during this process, massage him gently all over his body. When the child comes out of its feet, it is necessary to push upwards: if there are no signs or natural movements indicating birth, you should carefully cut the hands with a sterile instrument shown beforehand. Then pile the chair onto the ground and cleanse the woman so she does not defecate while standing. And as for the baby who has died during this process, it is necessary to massage him gently all over his body. and then press them lightly and repeatedly, until they are equal in size: if there is no natural movement indicating the birth of a baby through the feet, it is necessary to carefully cut his hands with an instrument shown beforehand. Then pile the chair onto the ground and cleanse the woman so she does not defecate while standing up. And as for the baby who has died during this process, massage him gently all over his body.
then press on her feet and do it lightly and repeatedly: if there are no signs or natural movements indicating the birth of a baby through the feet, it is necessary to carefully cut his hands with an instrument shown beforehand. Then pile the chair onto the ground and cleanse the woman so she does not defecate while standing up. And as for the baby who has died during this process, massage him gently all over his body.
can he jump upwards so much as possible. And if it orders to prent in this figure: let him be done as far it is not allowed that lié sourne, and it order de l'arbre: de la mains les jusque desmeest l’amain que ains est celever, et leves defforme. If he jumps, God wills it.
And if it does not jump as we have said before, then twitch only a little and keep it natural in its shape. For when there is ligament damage.
And if it does not jump as we have described, then take mush of beechwood, oil from sawdust, boiled resin, and grind all in one mortar. and apply it to the skin of the woman inside and out for this anointing. then let it sit in water down below their ribs;
and when it is moistened there, he makes for her a bracelet of myrrh, and puts it on her and lets it remain for an hour. then let it sit on a seat, then force him to exhale and hold his mouth and nose, and press down lightly on the belly because he now jumps again. from the child's knees When the child comes in this form, he puts the bracelet on his hands a little and a little.
From the issue of the child who comes out with a hand wide open. I command to bring back the hand: If it cannot be brought back, then rise up the woman and go.
If she cannot go, then make her lie down on a bed, and straighten out her legs.
Then I will treat the mushy area that I have told you about.
And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and teach her how to bring back the hand. And let the child be according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and command her to protect it so that the baby urinates.
From the issue of the child on its neck, and spreading out its hands, and turning her face towards her mother. I command that the baby tugs at his hand, then turns it little by little, and the woman pulls it gently.
And when it is equal in size, then place the mushy area and oil on top of it, as we have said, and command her to move little by little.
And once you have done this, then make her sit on a chair and command her to protect it, and make her sneeze. In this way for the second time.
In this way for the second time. When it comes in this manner to the second time, and pours the second measure on your little finger until the moisture is drained.
And if the baby cries on its face and neck, then pour water on it so that she is not held back, and let the baby cry.
Then put the child in there as it should be, and command the woman that she does not protect the baby at all.
From the issue of twins. Know that twins are born many times and never two or three; this is not extraordinary, and it rarely happens. These are extraordinary things, and they do not live long by name.
I know this, that they multiply, and are tormented by their own secret which is bound to moisture;
And it does not emerge naturally as all humans do, as we have said before.
And if it emerges with a grinding noise, in the manner as we have described, and bears the subtle bowels quickly and lightly doing whatever it does. And acts as it should, moving to safety. From many children
From many children And are not formed in the marl or mud; they may be i, ii, iii, iv, v, vi, vii, 15, or more such forms measured by the standard size of a child.
And it covers all this because, by chance, such things often happen; If it acts according to what is required.
Of the child deceased
When you treat the woman of the deceased child or belly, as I have described in parting it, and no more accidents occur, then you are compelled to engage in hand work. If it requires you to know whether the woman is of sound health and hasn't had an accident or fears death;
If it requires that the woman be supported on her back, with her hands raised, and the legs lifted upward;
re:tandecte.
Then smear the mouth of a woman with wet earth and honeycomb and seed of flax, then anoint her hands with these oils and honeysuckles. Then you lightly stir the earth in her mouth, either into the joints that are movable or visible.
And take care if his hair is appearing above his head; If you pierce the joints in her hair or at her neck or mouth or throat or under the chin or near the shoulders.
And if he is suffering from pressure upon his joints, you strike and injure his neck and shoulders.
And it is required that he tint the joint in his right hand, and place the pain between his fingers of his left hand, and anoint all of his hands lightly, and pierce any joints in neither of these places until he wanes from the matter.
Then pierce against another joint, or where you have experience, so that the extractions are equal.
And then they move equally from one side and the other to come out, so that the teeth hold them in position, as this is its form.
And if there remains a part of it, anoint his hands with oil again, and put the oil on that part, and take out the other part.
And if there remains a little bit of it, put this joint higher up and make it so that the thing falls out all at once.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot return by compression: then it is required that you wrap a cloth around him until all falls out.
Then cover the joint in the foot or at the sole, and so it is required that you do in both hands, and on both feet.
And if the shoulder of the child is large and it is stressed at the extraction or has a high assembly, it is required that you insert the spinal joint between your hands, make the head and extract the large one. or you use the instrument called "almidach", which comes from the practitioner who uses it.
and in this manner makes the child naturally suffer great pain and injury. and then cut the bones with pincers,
And if his shoulder jumps up and he restrains it there, even if it is split, as long as the moisture that comes out or leaks from it.
And if it cannot come out, then you must cut it into pieces so that it moves.
And if it is swollen in the abdomen or on the sides, it must be pierced until the moisture comes out.
And if there is an empyema above his legs, then it is lightly attracted and treated quickly with the mouth of the marrow.
And if it is in the abdomen or uterus, it must be extracted with one piece wrapped around the hand. and making the abdomen or uterus, as long as the moisture comes out from it.
and if other limbs are broken, and they remain displaced. if he breaks his hand with the marrow, and takes it out through the mouth of the marrow. then he puts one or two pebbles in it, and pulls them out forcefully.
and if the mouth of the marrow is removed by piercing, which was there before, it does not require further work. otherwise, it requires to provide moist and fatty substances. and the moist substances, seeing in water softeners and soothing agents.
And if the empyema is on his side, you must place it in a similar way, providing what we have mentioned about live children.
and if there is no possibility, he pulls it out in pieces without leaving any part of the second layer.
And when you have done this, provide the moist substances we mentioned in treatments involving fluid-filled cavities.
and if it is bleeding occurs, place it under cold restraints, and administer other treatments as prescribed.
And I observe a woman in which there is an empyema above her waist had the wound. There is a painful place, and other. After long they came upon one abscess in the wound, and it swelled so that he opened it, and began to cause great pain.
I went to call for treatment, and thought long upon the wound, which could not be bound.
I placed it on a strong magnet with great attraction, and drew out an bone, and after some days another one. I was ashamed much because her abdomen had no bones.
If I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I sought the wound and treated it with handfuls of bone, so that her condition improved to its best state. and she lay there long afterward, and was thus for a few weeks without any pain.
and I do not recall this chapter except that when a master performs an extraordinary act, he knows how to provide aid.
twice to return her limb to its place
And next comes the form of great pressure, for which we have no books; and at one point it twists two parts away from their joints. Always, the horns are more subtly delineated than any other restriction, and it is made of wood or brass.
and it is the mouth of that certain wood, which has a wide face, and the margin of the trees must be at least one palm and a half. and among these members are two adjustments of this kind made in them, which close firmly to one another by a half palm or slightly more.
and these two adjustments are placed in her mouth when turning the limbs.
Another form, resembling more subtly and lightly, made of iron or boxwood according to the shape of the forceps. And it should have two hooks like you see, about the length of one hand, and two wide.
And when you see opening the mortise for all parts of the instrument, let it sit so that the woman with a foot on it places and adjusts the legs. Then place the dislocations together in the mortise, and hold the head of the instrument between your fingers. Then work your hand on the instrument accordingly to how you have made the forceps evenly, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the mortise, until it makes what she wants.
This instrument is entirely suited and has many similarities; and the more times it has been prepared for such work, the harder it becomes to perform it, and the higher its value due to its quantity.
If you do not spoil the instrument that you have prepared, because their needs are not to be ignored.
When the second stage of childbirth is reached, it requires you to command the mother that she retain her placenta, and then let her cough out her condition, and restrain your hands at the mouth and in the nose. il, andrepresents thegustruction. It, itou :s: "theorlalongstheyre. I'dise in English vulgarization. Whatisue.celel,representation of theurtecte a French:
If not so, if it takes him, and makes a wound or fracture, and puts there herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, as in healing, rue, anise, chamomile, chervil, and hundred.
All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked or boiled in water; then put a poultice or fracture on the wound, and place the other head in the mouth of the marsh.
And mold so long as the vapor rises within the marsh; then make him cough, as we have said. If he jumps suddenly again. And if she remains after this treatment and is not better, then commands the ball that her left hand should be wetted in linseed oil or honey, and then throw it into the fire.
And if she finds the second injury; and when she has found it, give her and stretch it little by little straight, so that the marsh does not hinder the extraction. But she must move lighter to the right and left, and then throw it away, if it comes back towards her.
And if the mouth of the marsh is stiffened, as we have said, then there is the treatment of coughing and smoke from herbs.
And if she remains not of all that we have said, let you not be deceived in throwing it away.
But he who is at the mouth of the marsh, you must lay it on the woman's side, and then treat her with fourfold ointment.
If she holds it and returns to her place, but in any case, whenever it comes back malodorously to the stomach and head, then treat the painful area.
But now we say that smoke is useful for this cause: none of the ancient ones have tested smoke from chicory and dried figs.
The form of the instrument to smoke the woman with the retention of flowers and the second injury is this:
And it is to see as if it were a poultice, and put the subtle head underneentiche, and large feet by the fire.
And let there be smoke on embers, and mold so long as it is gone; then commence another one.
of verifying the foundation
And there are children born who do not have this foundation known, but rather it has been established subtly and firmly: And it is commanded to the ball that she must see and avoid touching her little childrens's blood.
Then place on a thin vein with oil and water, then the treatment of cleansing until he is clean.
And if you doubt that he will not reattach, then insert a small piece of wood and let his hands rest for days, and bone him when the patient wants to go to rooms.
And there are never such weldings for closing a wound or incision; it is required to cover that welding: if you care for it, as we have said about the small piece of wood.
from the foundation of the fistula Fistulas that come from the foundation are inflammations, and larger than those coming nearby or within a distance of two parts.
if there is one or more fistulas; and when the inflammation is old, then act, and let a small warm compress or subtle blow to alleviate pain.
And these persistent fistulas are known because they have either evacuation or windiness when the patient makes an excretion; and sometimes jump around in its position.
And if the fistulas penetrate just to the bladder and a part of the thigh; and they reach just to the hinge joints and other parts of the body.
And at this point we know the persistent fistula from its foundation; and it is not anymore: and if you press your thumb or foundation; and insert a subtle needle of iron into the fistula when there is no twisting movement.
And if there is twisting movement, then insert a small piece of wood or horsehair gently until you feel the stick or hair at your location.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not lead to discharge or windiness, as we have said: you know it does not penetrate anymore; if you hasten your healer.
And when the fistula is persistent in the bladder or near the ureter, if it leaks urine; and cannot be stopped by medicine.
:age of thegendures tote. In medieval surgean age:sesle: in thex (13ouse of itentire. Whichich. Theur. Age's. :enrolution. Allusere.Age' ⁠: sone ivexent:nagrextocleurifere orfractiblevitescifferrection.t hevreins andsengraindre soinsoignexes. Iniciteicharche,waxing (ceurange.gallonseccarde 3alter ia
And in these Persian fistulas there is no remedy because of work, and the vanity of people who interfere with it.
And in that which is not Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced.
And it causes great pain between your hands on his back; and the legs are bent up to their knees, and the knees are inclined towards his belly. Then bind a tent of rainwater, or if there is twisting, keep it as long as you can tell where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels pain around the foundation, then it must be that you bind your index finger on him.
if the tent has perceived it; and whether you feel between your thumb a straw mat or sack, which tells that it is Persian. if there is no work done on it then it cannot be healed.
We can heal such things well, but this happens rarely.
and the aid that is done on it, if it is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as we have said before. and pour this he puts all heat into the fistula, until it bends away from its foundation; and does that number of times (either 2 or 3) as long as you know those faulty things are like the quills of an arrow.
and then the curing of moistened tents in pitch makes it soak until those things are soaked; then cures of binding with oil-soaked rags and soldering.
If it is thus healed, that's good. But if there is another way to be healed, this cannot be done.
and if the tent is between, and it does not pierce through to your thumb which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of tar or sack between your thumb and the tent, then you see the fistula leading up to that cover. if the cauterizing begins at the start of the fistula, and then puts it in before the tent, and applies the cautery afterwards, until it bends to the top of the tent.
and then lets go the tent, and takes it up; then burns those faulty things that resemble a bird's feather, and does not leave any remaining.
And if it does not come out of you, and cuts between your vein and the flesh, then cauterizes with fire or medicines.
For the fire cautery has two purposes: firstly, it is concerned with these closely joined things; secondly, it treats the discharge of blood and the removal of moisture.
then the curing of dampened tents in pitch or in fire, until he pulls out the pieces that are blackish from the wood.
Then treat wounds caused by sticky burns with hard charcoal, and let the medicines be dry.
And when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return again.
And if an abscess comes just at the foundation, and it is pushed away from its roots, you should pour on oil or cauterization there and ask about it.
If you feel the tent, and there is inflammation or swelling in that area, or it has to be pierced, if there are only small wounds of discomfort and hope, by administering one of these three treatments:
Or you cauterize it as we have said, or you treat it just at the root, or if there are tentative signs and heal as we first described.
And never too deeply treat the foundation itself, that you do not cover what holds the base, and carry out your actions willingly. Then heal it as we have said;
Then heal it as we have said; By chance it will heal, or you move away the covered portion and the sore that is near the foundation, or by tentative signs or another pointed instrument. Then make ready that necessary cautery which lies in the wound, as you can do it.
Then study how to restore the wound and delay the fistula in the forward-facing part of the foundation; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And nevertheless are fistulas in this manner; and when you puncture the tent into the fistula, it is located on the surface of the underlying tissue ("costeit dou fondement"). If you take a tentative to puncture it at this manner: And he inserts one twisted wire into I, and binds the band around all the wire until it is at the tip of the abscess.
If she is Persian on the margin within that foundation, then you extract the protruding wire from it so as to tighten your thread.
And remove the tip of the wire, and bring together the two ends, and bind them to each other, and let it be one or two days.
And do not loosen the binding at all while the wire covers these points which are between two, and join them together.
Then treat the wound until it is sewn and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make a puncture in all possible ways that you can, but if it is too deep.
For it does not need to cover the healing with the binding if it is too deep, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The foramen of the spinous vertebra from which the fistula comes out quite large and in one or two parts. And on the other hand, for this reason it does not pierce what has to be pierced, as you can see in these ways.
Blood evacuations are in two ways: within the foundation itself or as small and large grains like resin, and then flesh. And if there is one or more of them, they are removed from the foundation and from the tip of that same foundation; but those which have been removed due to moisture contain very little.
And then they are either a little water or some flesh, and have the color of yellowish-orange skin;
And the treatment of those within the foundation, if you command that he should be confined in rooms until his foundations are well-furnished and visible again, indicating recovery from an illness or injury. The term "c’aperent li filz" suggests a restoration of normalcy to bodily functions, possibly referring to the resolution of symptoms such as swelling (lesions) that were previously obstructing visibility into the internal state of the body ("filz"). If you hasten, and pull it out with pliers, or put it on your thumb, then coat the root. This instruction may relate to an emergency procedure where rapid action is required. "Le pent as tenailles" likely refers to using tools like pliers for extraction, while putting something on one's thumb suggests a manual manipulation technique in acute care. The reference to coating the root could imply post-removal treatment or protection of a wound site.
And if the child cannot hold them in his mucus, then they take it with an apron or cushion, or from a piece of quilted cloth; And extract arrows from your body, then burn on it, and powder above any hot powders that are in the place of cautery. And if as it is said by the physician of cautery, then he treats other treatments until he is well.
And if the dislocations cannot be removed, then he should perform a cleansing enema on the patient with harsh and biting enemas to wash away what is underneath, so that they can come out more openly.
And if their symptoms are serious, and their wounds are deep underneath, then it is light treatment. And if you prick him with your finger or use tongs, and burn them, then treat them as we have said, until he is well, and that the cut by iron does not worry him.
It is meant that you should perform the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and push it into an awl, then pull the thread upwards over the awl, pierce another part with the same awl, and turn the ends of both threads around the awl. And if it is wide; and hold the thread tightly formed, then pull the thread, remove the awl, and do so with all others, leaving one for correcting any excess blood.
Then place a cloth dampened with oil or wax on the foundation, and put it back in place, and instructs the patient to rest.
And then let him lie there until he vomits, and when he has done so, he cares for his burns and other treatments as long as he is well.
two times or foundation Many times occurs suddenly in the intestines, and by constraining its nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It is meant that you should reapply a poultice or your finger's skin above it, which does not allow for moistening. and cares for him as long as it is well if that is what it says.
and if it cannot be adjusted, then he must re-iron more forcefully than before, so that he remains well, and they are burnt. and treats as much as it is said;
there comes a trembling Formication is a misleading appearance before the wound, and causes much pain when touched.
And there is no thawing the ice-cold blood, and it feels like a trembling death in him all over his body, especially in the hands more than anywhere else.
And the treatment is to take a feather of a goose or a large bird's feather, and place it on the trembling so that the purple circles around it disappear completely. Then turn your hand all over the feather so that you hold it tightly against the trembling and apply pressure to it, and withdraw the trembling from its roots.
And if you see it like a circle of iron or raindrop-like depending on this form, and subtly placed beneath the surface above.
However, do not let it move by itself and keep pressing it And if you see the trembling, cauterize it as it is before or with fire-cauterization.
in the form of a washing It is never done by using silver or copper enemas, or ardent heat or molten rainwater; and it is not performed with small and large compresses as they are applied to the area.)
These instead are small ones used in the treatment of children who are frail and sorrowful; they are little. (Note: This line may discuss the use of certain tools or compresses that are suitable for treating vulnerable young patients.)
The shape of the enema is small and large if it is above; or if the abdomen is tied in this manner. (Note: This line describes a particular method where an enema's size corresponds to specific bodily conditions, possibly related to obesity or other physical issues.)
and it has a distension or the abdomen is tied, as you see it; and the bandages are placed inside each other; and on one side of the breast .ii., there is a puncture, and on the other .i. (Note: This text suggests a technique involving applying pressure or tying to address swelling ('devesance') in the abdomen while using strategic placement of bandages.)
and whether it is the abdomen or somewhere else that puts medicaments in a best woman's bladder or piece of parchment, and presses them all over minor punctures. (Note: This sentence seems to describe an old medical practice where medicine-filled containers are placed internally, possibly indicating treatment methods for internal conditions involving 'menus pertus', which may have been interpreted as small wounds or sores.)
and is placed in each of these punctures. (Note: And then put each one 'ses amailles, pour les coulur du corps ains deffors deshortres:il fremit d’acabellere of the walettes auces treche en ce tounsure chapein French-septentendre toc. Ifractrevers :'rue dechief (140352efect. Ith century, And when the medicine is dense, if there is blood on the instrument in front of it with a strong thread, then enemas will be administered; and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and smear the head of enema with oil or alum salt, or something similar, then pour it in quickly.
then the practitioner draws the enema on his two hands together until he feels them all, then extracts the enema, and lifts up the patient's legs onto the bed.
And if the medicine comes out as much as possible; and if it stays overnight in total, it is even greater aid.
And if you perform an enema in a disease of bowel movement, and the medicine speeds up its release, it will continue as long as he is healthy.
And if the impacted feces are at its foundation or abscess, then even a subtle enema can be as gentle as for an infant.
and this is the form of the subtle enema under which the skin is tightly held:
and wounds (This seems to be a continuation from previous text discussing medical treatments for injuries. However, it doesn't seem to directly relate to the translation task given.)
We have said in our division about the treatment of wounds; or you will say about the treatments by hand and medicines, according to completion (This statement appears to be a conclusion from previous medical discussions but is not part of the direct translation task.)
I say that wounds are diverse depending on what they are and how they were made, and from which things they were made; (This statement is a general observation about the variety of wounds but does not require translation as it stands apart from the line-by-line English translation task.)
The things by which wounds are made include movements of the stone, cutting with sword or hatchet, and so on (This statement provides examples of how various types of wounds might occur but is not a direct translation task.)
Or they are made according to the parts of the body where a wound is felt on the neck, or at the head, or in the legs, or abdomen, and similar limbs (This statement classifies different types of injuries based on their locations but does not require translation as it stands alone from previous text.)
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with simple head injuries, because memory of them will come to my attention (This statement suggests a methodical approach to treating various types of wounds but is not part of the direct translation task.)
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not fractured, if it is taken as an injury from stone movement or similar things, and the skin is all torn apart and the wound is large (This statement provides insight into how to approach certain types of injuries but doesn't fit directly within the translation task.) And you have slight doubt about the abscess: if it makes the head swell first most of the blood from the wound comes out, and then healing occurs in the opposite part (This statement seems to be related to a specific medical situation involving an abscess but isn't directly relevant to the translation task.)
And rejects the maladies of excessive wine and heavy meats (This statement seems out of context with respect to the medical treatments being discussed but speaks generally about avoiding certain dietary practices.)
And if it doesn't improve, then reduce its meat intake and don't drink wine or chew tobacco (This statement advises on lifestyle changes that might aid in recovery but is not part of the original translation task.)
and apply bandages to the wound as much as possible, or with oil poultices, pour soit:
I'sans cest iles defface ce monde.
entail.entence meurt: entsarme andreant.entirement:escription ofmeet. Inuageinanxenture, alexander'on. Anda.comenture. Sardentif thefaire entract. A :
And if the wound is large like that of sword-cutting and similar injuries, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, they are sewn together by a layer, as I will say about abdominal wounds, from suturing.
If the wound is discovered in the bone and healed but holds only slightly by the ligament, then care for the wound with medicine, and restore a tough layer of leather on it. And instruct the patient to consume large quantities of meat like testing it by roasting and eating bread, as well as cooked turkey, and similar things.
And if you change the skin for purulence and it does not grow on the bone, but holds the entire purulent mass together by the ligament, then heal it;
And if there is an artery involved in the wound or vein without cauterization, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then whether you remove the vessel, and if you loosen the blood clot with a thread. And if it does not benefit, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the care is light; and it's when you apply this powder so that the blood clot dissolves as well.
And the way of the powder is: take incense for a part; blood from an animal; three parts silver, and the powder very finely ground. And apply fire to the wound, and hold firmly, so that it heals well and joins all its flesh.
And then the lodestone is made well, and let it feel discomfort if it does not swell; for one should not use magnetism as long as it remains unhealed.
And never is this done alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon blood, but the arrow has moved the wound.
And if the arrow has moved the wound, immediately it was, so that no one puts this powder on it.
but with any well-digested ointments or flour of barley made from water and honey, as long as it does not heal. then the treatment of other treatments continues until it is healed.
And if there's a bone fracture along with the wound, and it is small, then you should use subtle pinches.
And I will tell you about this after broken bones.
of the wound in the neck.
If the wound is on the neck and it's simple, if there is no difference between this one and that of the head, but whether it is in the neck or the arrowhead penetrated.
If it's in the neck, there is no other remedy but to leave the treatment and not apply anything restrictive, because it harms the neck and causes retraction. And not place anything on the wound, because the substance of the neck is cold, and its continuation with the brain, which is the most elevated part of the body.
But if the medicines are applied as with barley flour washed in gentle water and mixed with rose oil and also wetted gently in water. and other stones from the mines in this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then bind and let it heal with bandages until it is healed.
But if the wounds are deep and swollen and full of blood, pierce lower or remove it.
And if the arrowhead is embedded in the flesh, and we get to bloodshed, and bleeding comes out, and it must be cauterized by the proper method.
And if there is an arrow in the throat, or it pierces, and its movement must be watched so that the meat goes out. if there is a foreign body in the throat, but do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. And then strengthen the limb so that it heals.
ici cestangles les oignes du greaves. il mea esedurles de rienes's. sse: ells and theorbeutre, apei.e:nacue.
And if the wound is fresh, let there be powder on top of the powder I have mentioned. And if bone is in the wound and it has an abscess, as I described in this chapter.
From the wound of the arrow or knife
If it's a wound from an arrow or knife, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound to see if there are signs of windedness in the patient's lungs, which I will describe later: since the wound is fatal.
And if it's not deep, and the wound is fresh throughout its entirety, then I will not apply powder to it in the first hour or bind it with a substance that slows down bleeding within the wound. And withdraw from the body, and extinguy the malady. But I will apply an attractive ointment and apply it to the wound several times a day.
And if you have no such attractive ointment, then put a lot of cotton to draw out the fluid from the moisture.
And let the patient with malady lie down on the wound for 2 to 3 days, or more if necessary. And if there is no seizure, and no bad trembling in the body not related to this, And when you see the patient's bone positions, you will know that the wound is safe. Treat him then with other remedies as long as he is healthy.
And if he cannot become well again, then see that there is an abscess; and do the treatment as it should be done.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple, or more severe on the backside, then apply the treatment that should be done for such cases.
If it's large in scale, apply cautery to the wound; if it's small and use powder, or if it penetrates into bone and involves fragments, then treat the wound and stop bleeding from such puncture. And if they do not remain in the wound, and lightenlixte it's.
And for other wounds affecting other limbs, it is judged as we have said.
And a double hernia of the abdomen.
The double hernias of the abdomen are great and cause both large and small ones.
Of the great wound there is never an entrance to the intestines, nor a penetration of its contents, because it does not allow for such intrusion.
and the dressing is more painful, and there has never been a case where the small wound was worse than the large one.
because for it is easier to pull back the intestines from, but if not pulled with increasing force. because the intestines inflate almost immediately when they feel pain, and thus pull back more easily.
and for that reason it is more serious than the other injuries, because we pull back the intestines from their place that others do not have.
And you know that the treatment for the abdomen is by four ways:
the four common dressings are in the treatment of the abdomen' cvrse.
and the dressing for other wounds of the abdomen, and the four common treatments are common among other similar injuries.
and all of them are more suitable with the treatment for the abdomen, and I will say one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is affected. and grafts are easily removed, this is by one of the four methods: or by the smallness of the wound, just as we have said. or because the intestines are inflamed by pain.
And if it is cold, heat them up by that method. slightly warm an sponge or one of those damp cloths only with water. or you soak in cold water siphoning and fumigating, and sprinkling. and raise the intestines until they swell.
:t :cause ndr laisseres untractin. In theasein
And when you see the swelling disappearing, how much the intestines of fire or water and evil are tenderly cooked. Because by this it is unstable the entrance to many things;
And if it cannot enter, then with some effort we clean the wound using the tool that suits best in order to remove the blood clots.
And the first cure is to massage rather than cut; for we should not cut into much necessity that does not require it;
and it is the massage for the splitting;
if it cuts deeply into the cavity and does not remove it fully, then there will be a change in its shape;
And when the wound is swollen and the intestines protrude; if it is reset according to its natural position; if it is possible because this matters;
When the wound is wide, and it is located in the part inside the abdomen ('la partie desoz lou ventre'); it indicates that you should make the patient lie on its back ('faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos'); and places its legs higher than its head ('et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief'); and if it's located inside the abdomen ('et s’ille est en la partie desoz le ventre');
:enjourre malice texte. from theilitexplain it'sle ileslustre :meeting thexile. What: I'llisolate. This,le demane le corps :ist.froms : "it'sentence. What. Leave, incomprehillegal towoman. Itteeth (allcure theuire itesque: Theunite. se lite cuissussoignes:el ci12oi.niflifles iftransseurs hele veekherrevesseuriferranges
And then it requires to provide what I have said concerning large and swollen wounds.
And for small wounds, that appear so.
and you have in your hands the minister of pain who carries all the routine with his hand. and bring together the lips; and it is the common way for dressing wounds.
and it is the common way for dressing wounds. and it is that you provide an instrument or several, according to the quantity of swelling in the wound. then leave the head of the wound. I will create space with my finger and insert a sharp instrument or one that has a strong thin thread. and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two needles in the syringe.
and pull out a double thread through one of the needles. then assemble the two needles in contact with the wound.
and then remove my finger space, and insert another needle. and let it be like you have done with the first needle. and continue doing what you know how to do with needles. as long as all the wounds are contained;
and let the needles be various, both subtle and large. because subtle needles cauterize the entire wound area, and large ones cannot penetrate well. for this reason they should be varied;
and it does not require us to forcefully thrust the needles into the flesh and skin.
but they do not cause the wound before sealing it.
and then use the needles so they do not disturb the sleeping patient's pain. and I put tentures on the needles so they may hold, nous à l'esle of thex itile. Itaux de:xent c’monte a laisse le feu, illapeacean, Ire parle desu. Allée.
sse coull inchorexive. (100es andire. Iface ape. What. liondexile. Theent miec<section'el masgere and it’s,recces:taille. Sox demy deatme a fudexiveuxse taucterces. iaulture.faire that canceuses
The second dressing is common, And it involves assembling the shoulder joints and the shoulder sutures with one needle or using a strong thread if necessary; And once you have assessed all these sutures together;
And once you have assessed all these sutures together; If you reinsert the needle into the part where you have commenced, in the manner that it costs thread (dras);
And places space between each suture as large as a minor coin (minor dos);
This suture is done at home;
And I stitched up a wound caused by some hands (or perhaps "hands" was meant to imply an animal bite given the word 'avoit') from someone's abdomen;
Who was armed with a knife; And the wound was more than one hand's length; And it was indeed the intestine measured by more than two hand-widths;
And the wound was inside the abdomen; I took the intestine back then because he had been for .xxiiij. hours;
And the wound was sutured a mere .xv. years ago, and he has been cared for;
And the judge had judged him to die, and this was a miracle;
And he did not suffer any burns, for I was in the same place or no one could find any remedies; And apply a wick near the wound, several times a day, and wash it with warm water mixed with honey until it healed.
I will tell you the proper methods of cautery:
Take the needle, and the thread from its back part, just enough to insert it into the wound therein.
When it has seen the right to heal in itself, if you have placed the needle or cauterized at its core, thereupinas.
And make an incision on the other side of the wound therein, just enough to close it.
And the understanding of this treatment is that you perform it just as the leatherworkers do their crafts. And you leave one side of the suturing done, and then proceed with the other, until the entire procedure is complete.
The second method of treatment that Galen has properly described,
if it is as any do, that bring the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the sutures to the other, in part way:
insert a needle or another similar instrument close by, and make that incision only. And leave those two sutures undone; Then turn the needle, and make an incision on the other side of the wound therein. as those two sutures;
then make both sides of the wound therein with other needle placements that are opposite to each other;
And this is the other method of treatment and it is more common;
Galen recounted this passage and no one else has testified to it;
We must stitch with two needles, or it should have thread in each one;
and you must thrust one needle from one side, and the other, in the manner of those who sew metals.
And let us say that this procedure. :th century. I'sesculte theurs laisse itis lesung.
The judgments of the wound are such as those of other wounds:
And when you wash the fresh wound over its entirety so that the arrow has moved within it. If it returns intestine and cost; then put on top of powder tightly packed.
If it returns intestine and cost; then put on top of powder tightly packed. And if the arrow has moved, then apply any ointment that is present there until the wound swells. And fasten the thread, and be soldered his sheath, and his bowstring. Then heal the wound as for other wounds until it's sound.
And if you don't have medicines, then apply them as soon as possible, such that it starts to swell and bleed; cotton wool. And move him, repeatedly throughout the day until he's sound.
For you don't have knowledge of other medicines in various situations because simple wounds can be dealt with by such methods alone.
And if you doubt that the wound is causing community-like issues among the primary members (as in a group or society). If it suggests you should massage the affected area lightly with tempera oil or rose oil. And place it among the angels, and under the feet;
And if it smells rotten or is painful and so often happens. Cautere of this text of this century ous in theesent. And in fals. If you canterre deuze: lezoldere la: lesemeanndecent. Canter, and whatsenglish. Amendebuture.
And pierce within, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The "young" intestine cannot heal if it is twisted. And it is due to the position of the veins that they are located, and because of the subtlety throughout the entire body, and the approach towards its natural state in the nervous system.
And if the wound jumps from it, and he puts it back as in the intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and turned yellow or black, then it must be that you dress the vein which has not recovered its blood color. for it contains veins and arteries.
and then take care of what is between them. and place the needles hanging over the part of the wound until it is tightened to facilitate the extraction when the veins contract, and the wound closes.
from the procedure of boiling (the body)
When the intestine is twisted, and the wound is small. if it can be restored in some cases.
because I have seen some cases where a person' FFmpeg is an open-source software that allows users to convert multimedia files from one format to another. It can be used for various purposes, including media sharing and streaming online, as well as encoding videos for different platforms like YouTube or social media services. The primary use of FFmpeg in the context provided seems to relate more to video conversion rather than direct medical application. However, it could potentially aid in creating educational materials or documentation about medieval medicine by converting various multimedia resources into accessible formats.
and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach. and it was filled with dirt and became a fistula, and from this came the discharge and windiness;
I administered care according to what I knew and constantly observed it until healed, and the veins were sewn together.
And when I saw them sutured, I doubted they had something wrong with his stomach. :
and they said no one among experimenters who has a small intestinal wound, that it must be tied up in half a manner: Gather large grains first, then assemble the lips of the wound. and when the grains have overspilled the mouth, if they are placed on the two lips,
then add another grain afterward in that manner as before, until the wound is fully treated;
and count the wound. That is where they burn in the intestines, and it does not cause any harm to the patient;
and if it can be tied with a thin thread taken from the intestine of an animal;
in this manner: take the chief part of this intestinal thread that is most frayed; and then tie with this frayed intestinal thread a thin linen thread; then stretch the thread on an awl (a sharp tool), and count the intestines, and make a turn at each stitch;
and this way of treating grains is not a mistake according to the faith and hope in healing;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of those intestinal threads, for there was no medicine nor healing that subtlety;
Intestinale disease or injury. ce and itacin French (itace. and immediately when she is pregnant and becomes heavy.
And a fistula is according to the false notion of nodal failure difficult and painless, or one does not feel pain. and it is also heavy like a bird's feather;
and never jumps clearly heavy, and sometimes thickly so; never once, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken about the divisions in wounds, meaning every unsanitized wound that does not heal properly. it is due to one of seven reasons;
it is by knowing, through small amounts of blood or flesh; or by its harm; or because it is hard in the body's depths, and under the lips, where it does not allow anything to come forth; or it has too much weight (or pressure); or it is a pit, and its substance has bad quality; or the medicine is not good for this treatment; or because it's like a plague-like corruption; 1200, and theft: "Aragon:later it's unscapes fromme: ness :esponte. Laurine mecca, a theu :tic:3500000 (there is an :en français. It’s origins : There are arrows where there are bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and treatments with medicine in the division.
Or it is intended that you make me aware of the treatment for an abscess made by manual work.
It makes holes that occur throughout all four limbs; because it has large fistulas that come from veins, and arteries, and nerves; or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in none of the ribs; or in the spinal column on both sides, or in none of the joints of hands or feet;
And all these fistulas that are of this kind require serious treatment, and there is only labor and ignorance involved.
and if there is no fistula that can be treated with the methods I have mentioned, then you are assured of the remedy. and you have seen it understood, if you take an incision or use metal (implying surgical tools), then whether the fistula is straight (its shape) will determine its direction (the course of treatment).
and if the fistula is twisted, then seek a subtle touch in its depth (indicating a need for careful exploration). because they bend over underneath its twisted nature;
And if they form an abscess on the hand and you cannot properly drain it with needles. If enema is given through one of the fistulas.
For if moisture is extracted from one fistula to another, and it deforms;
Then it should be tightened in your hope to know whether there is bone or nerve inside, and if it is swollen.
And ask the patient well of the pain that he feels from pressing your hand, and whether it is on his side.
And when you truly know the location of it (the pain), and whether it is far from the juncture, or nerve, or artery, or vein. Or in none of these places that I have mentioned to you, if it corresponds with what I have told you.
Or in none of these places that I have mentioned to you, if it corresponds with what I have told you. And bone is present in the other area and there are also corrupted tissues within it. And then treat it if it is healthy;
And if the abscess is well-formed at a proper location, it implies that treatment should be applied in a manner similar to what has been described. Then place moistened needles in the inguinal region and insert them up to the head of the abscess.
Then place moistened needles in the inguinal region and insert them up to the head of the abscess. As long as the treatment removes excess fluid that has accumulated at the base of the abscess.
And then apply warm herbs if it is healthy;
And if it is not healthy by this method, then cauterize as we have described earlier;
And if the bone is corrupted by the abscess, then treat it. Herebye in this text êtes of the tours de lait.
The English medicine's thees itoastre (young. develve a greval  <3anter in someiling,waxancheurreviagnecteithevetherme  ço expresseurieu lupeximevesherdectifreviants.ocre:n plusher  the �anging,celle,semblance. Iume tescartiphyngresse he in a grexextrechevelle  capitipherres.udextheuconsecules and
And if they are unhealthy, and grow back as before. You know that you should not proceed any further like this.
If discovered and desired, strive as much as possible to reach the bottom. And cleanse all of the corruption, then reset the joint.
And if it is in this state healthy, that's good. However, if not, you know that the corruption has gone too far and cannot be overcome. If there is no other option but to deal with the natural laceration.
And if it has a small deformed bone, and you can pull it out using forceps. If the arrow is drawn by that instrument capable of such an extraction.
And if it still retains some bone, pull out all of them without leaving any behind.
And if the dampness causes it to be contrary, and there is neither mistake nor fear involved. If cautery and dampness are present, and release the bones.
And if you cannot set them within an hour, should there be any pouring into the wound that exacerbates it. And allow them to remain embedded among the bones.
And thus, they may move more freely among the bones.
And if it's a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, If one continues to allow the corruption so long that it permeates all bone tissue. Then restore the wound;
And if there is a significant part that has been affected by the bone's disintegration, and comes out of the bone; if it requires covering and protecting it as soon as possible from contamination, and then heals it until it is sound again.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened. For example, in a man's leg. If you provide an example and help with your work.
It was a young man in his XXX years who had pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body.
As these materials went into the leg and escaped through a large incision, and there was no reason to open it further.
But their madness led them so much that they opened up the abscesses again. and they introduced many materials, and it became a fistula, and there came much pressure that all of them went out weakly and unevenly from the body.
And many such men took care of it for about two years, and none had any experience in the art of hands.
As I went to call them, and saw his leg and the treatments he underwent. because it was caused by pressures in great strength. and became red on the young man's body, and had a yellowish color.
I set up a tent in one of these fistulas, and then searched for all of them.
and found that they went from every part of the leg to each other.
So I set about it then, and dug down into one of the fistulas until I discovered a part of the bone. and found it rotten and decayed, and the contamination was going right into the bone.
I took him who appeared from the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other contamination for he whom I saw.
and began to restore the wound with similar remedies over a long time, but could not join it back together.
then I went on again, and discovered the bone as before.
and found that the contamination continued in the bone, and I took it, and then put it back together, and thought to join up the skin.
but I did not know whether I had dug down into part of the bone at all, and it was rotten throughout its entirety. then I restored it with medicines; and it became cured and joined together in haste.
and they did not wish to repeat the work again except for the slight disobedience of the patient who could no longer endure it. and for fear of death that I might have from him. For the extraction of blood often occurred, but it was cured entirely.
For the extraction of blood often occurred, but it was cured entirely. and came from the fleshly body of the young man's limb, and it caused no harm to the whole ornerie, et al.
and it remains at the top if you remove the corrupt skin underneath, and discover the skin underneath the bandage where you see stitching, which prevents the skin from being torn by the sinew, and place a sponge or cloth under the bone so as to cover the corrupt skin, and it is necessary that the sinew be as much as one could see and feel the decay, and then apply another layer of skin.
And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and the decay is in its entirety or a part of it, if you find the skin entirely; then place a sponge underneath,
and then sinew between the parts of decay, and it should be as long as a part of the decay itself or slightly longer, as we have said before;
and if the decay is in a joint, then you must cover the joint with the bone or with another piece of it if it contains decay on the other side,
and if the decay is within the continuations of these two joints, then there should be no other cover but that which protects the skin.
and if the decay is in a finger bone or handbone, or footbone, that much of an important matter, but in all other cases it is necessary to investigate that decay, how much she opens; From the following textbook. ǒngeauz lace deviser commentaire theu desorne le monde:siex. From:i :meisin (Old Frenchold aoutre: Old-thorough itsesurfaitenvoit,ceteraioxent: Aholeveint from theunits. Theisspice totexture:age of theurolateral dise, butter.
And you know that many knives and threads are used for cutting these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and appearance of the teeth. And their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason it is necessary to equip each instrument with some resemblance of its operation;
And you know that this book will show you the instrument with which you must be familiar, according to knowledge of this craft; And testimony of the diseases' manifestations; if for the instrument with which you are familiar according to what it requires;
Fire The shoulders dislocate either due to moisture or weakness;
And when you have medicine for curing the corrosions caused by medicines, and they do not benefit; If it is necessary to cover that limb up to the joint or if the corrosion comes; And if the pain is caused by that from death or malice, which is greater, due to a defect in the limb;
And if the pain is caused by that from death or malice, which is greater, due to a defect in the limb; And the signs if they are that the members become blackened as though charred by fire; And after the blackening, then goes the corrosion within another member; And it takes hold throughout the whole body; if you hurry to cover it,
And if it is caused by the sting of any poisonous animals, such as a scorpion from the sea and wasp;
and it is at the center of the dislocation; if you will touch it, orenture duel,
nounce :bien ailenture inle, cease.
nge ̃ge. Cestres that a outilgessece istecte soille nierescoletcandeurenture tudexk:sauxeuxime causecante sentence:nelogrevire forsoinaietholdes iapextheisseveryseignes deleur And there is no amount of force that can change its quantity;
And in all cases when the corrosion comes, whether it appears first at one joint or after another.
And if it appears in any joint, whether throughout the entire body. And if it arises in the leg, whether at the knee joint or elsewhere.
And if it arises above the knee joint, there is no other remedy but to remove the dead flesh.
And the method of covering or binding the limb is that you should wrap it above and below. And there are two main methods—one ascending and one descending—to apply the bindings to different areas of the joints. And you must remove the clots that are between the two joints in one space, so that the bone does not dislocate.
Then the cup or cloth, and put a piece of each from both hands, such that the cloth does not touch the healthy joint. And heals in the patient other injuries and abscesses.
And if blood comes when you perform your work, then swiftly cauterize the joint. Or you apply to it any restrictive powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete.
Then bind the painful joint with a binding that is easily removed, and heal it as long as it remains sound.
And I will tell you what happened at one house in particular:
It seemed to her like an arson fire.
And that corrosive matter came first in its place on the body there, so it covered everything on her body completely.
And when I saw the corrosion, it was covered again, and healed;
And after it returned to him several times with his hand, and came to me;
And I applied counter-corrosive substances after this corrosion process, and it could not stop the corrosions;
And he said that I should take his hand, and I vowed to hope for the replication of matter; And I doubted whether to touch his hand so that it might die; gefeinste, as:nagrevience. I'scription: in:cake:c:0re:25:ses (se’s description andsurexement. And if you touch the patient's hand with a covering, and it is healthy.
And this tale of wounds I have only for the reason that we also know about it.
There has never been a suction in letter form for the patient's bald head, and it lingers so much that there is a great assembly of hair. And then they go running, and the hair sprouts up like a weed, as if by our own hands. And the leather that protrudes is just as delicate as a fine cloth. And they do not touch bone or nerve; such diseases are called "healthy" by name.
But if it is so elongated that it extends to the bone itself in penetrating form, then it is called a fistula.
And the cooking is that one must take care of it entirely, and immediately when it's delicate, like our fine cloths. And it does not happen by chance alone.
And if you have faith that the leather will endure, and its decay is not in front, And the leather is expected to be thick, if the treatment with a cleansing cloth hereafter:
Look if the breasts are large, and the smell that emanates from it is foul (strong). Incaiement of time. Take silk, and oil, and ligature tightly, exactly, and heat it in one vessel over fire. As long as the medicine is red, and also thick like honey;
And then take from it according to your necessity, and make it in water and in honey; And in washing out the womb, and tightening the perforation; And let the medicine remain in two hours, then extract it by squeezing;
Do this as often as the breasts are swollen, and provide relief to their pain;
and never is it recommended to wash out with water of ash; whenever this medicine is not present, and you must prepare charcoal from oak wood, and apply it above;
then pour it out (apply the liquid), and administer in enema as long as you know that the breasts are well formed;
and if the sick cannot bear it, nor Egyptian medicines or water of ashes; if the enema with water and honey has any slight ligature (clotting); or you shall ligature the honey and wine (apply them both; let the honey have property of cleansing and washing; the same invention of thisurie'sou: parol. In French:entail. Orwarts. Itallarre, ouille ounce it. Hereauesque ilte'sansinourle:laine. Il (d'instrugefromescribe fromitacresenture. The. It.
And when you have done this, and you are confident that the chest is well-cleaned. If the clysterizing causes pain to him as it happens.
And you must pour in a diuretic, and with rose oil and wine; You clysterize with some medicines and ointments, of which I have previously mentioned their properties or treatment.
And if he has a small puncture in his chest, and the clyster cannot enter therein. If a fragment of iron enters slightly, and he places upon it an Egyptian ointment tent; Or if it is an Egyptian ointment, as much expanded as it is;
And if his wound is too wide, he lets it lie so that the clyster may enter therein;
And if there is a puncture that extends above, he shall place the clyster lower than where it is; For if the wound is open, he shall not allow it to tighten therein; And if thou cannot cover his chest as thou see it; So he appears that the wound runs downward to the lowest point where it is;
And if thou cannot cover his chest as thou see it; So he appears that the wound runs quickly downward, and nothing is left of the wound; and take consolidating medicine so as to place it on the chest;
And they are under a linen sheet covering all the breast; and then cover with force the hole of the larger breast. i.e., somewhat more than its first diameter. And they apply a hot oil on another linen cover depending on the size of the hole; and he places on this breast hole in order to straighten the udders, and does not remove the great linen coverings after one day only once.
And he who is in charge of this breast hole often for the purpose of removing the coverings; and knows what comes from the covering, whether it is poison or just a little bit, or digestible, or indigestible;
and takes care of the patient whether he feels pain or not, and whether he has an abscess or not;
and when your medicine has extended to a certain extent in this manner, you will see the nature that springs up from the breast hole; and if you know the shape of his breasts well, and approach health;
And then he dislocates it either in the morning or on the third day, and when you dislocate the wound, If changing .i. another dressing, and renew the bandage.
And if the breasts sag or become disfigured after prolonged time, you know that the breasts are no longer as they were. And if subtle incisions are made after long periods, do not despair for your health,
because the healing approaches. For there are those who delay in changing bandages on their wounds and with those that do the opposite;
and if sagging breasts jump down from one breast after many years, you know that the breasts are no longer as they were.
and if the breasts take a long time to air out, and are distant, then administer wet and dry medications mixed in quantity and form. as with a diaphoretic dressing, because it contains a significant amount of sulfur, and this is the medication for the back.
take diaphoretic dressings and apply them with rose oil, and infuse a quantity of clear wine in the preparation.
then preserve it and use it; and this in itself makes the meat fattier. as diaphoretics are not present;
or you take myrrh and frankincense and grind them, and mix the powder with honey while it is heated over fire. and then apply it as another drapelet (a type of bandage), and let it be applied to the breast, and never should a medical practitioner leave it unattended for long. and the celestial thistle roots, which are also like flour for hundreds of times;
and the celestial thistle roots, which are also like flour for hundreds of times; and in simple forms or compositions: grind them, make powder from it, mix it with the honey that I mentioned earlier, and utilize this mixture. and if the care is extended, and do not rely on this care;
and if the care is extended, and do not rely on this care; medecre les cestinfection quiconforture le malgré: entendre nouvels vrais. ilesque teneur durecourre thete ous :nothere : it :cek a French. :vocate (13rdenture. Whatsofaire : 12:
Of the incision of the finger
Parboiling is an incision made on the finger's small pad of the hand. either by chance or it spontaneously develops elsewhere;
and when it is swollen or inflamed, and if we do not take care, then an additional incision occurs; and it may cut deeply into the vein so that the root of the finger will be cut, and by chance, it might even affect the whole finger.
and it causes corrosion in the bone as soon as it occurs, with a stench-producing pain;
When you treat it as we have described in the section on divisions; it indicates that you must address all unnecessary excess that delays the finger's recovery. then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterizer is quite helpful if the bone is healthy, and the finger is also sound.
and if the finger presses on the cartilage, it will begin to swell up again, and bleed. it suggests that you should apply a restraining band around the finger, not on the cartilage. and lift it up a little, and raise it gently and lightly. and places on top of the remaining part of the medical herbs and corrosive to destroy everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, if it breaks, and becomes hard, for as much as the bone rots, it cannot be healed.
And if you see decay in it, break it in one place as described previously; then treat it until he is healthy again.
and if he is wild, and restless, and feels great pain, it must be that you first mend him. then cut off one of the sharp edges by slicing across them above;
and ensure that the cutting does not occur close to the area on the underside of the spatula, for the patient already experiences too much pain there.
and if there is anything that soothes him.
You must address those who have been injured in hand-to-hand combat by all means necessary; and sometimes they have bones, and occasionally there's blood;
and none of them die from being born at the joint or anywhere else; These who have suffered multiple wounds will never be silent; and those who have injured at the joint of both arms may remain silent;
and the size of those who are heavy is light; in most cases: size at its root from a wide spatula;
Those who have been injured at the root of the joint are very difficult to heal; if you hold both covers tightly together;
And if he is wounded at the bottom or needs to be treated therein; it must be that you cut away directly from the bone. then treat it until he is healthy agains.
. (125 : theuire.
If it is known that you mend the fused one, so that they return to their natural shapes. Then place between two tent-like or flannel pads dipped in rose oil, so that they do not fuse together. You place between two pieces of fine cloth, so that the fused parts remain separated; this is essential as per the traditional methods (Leech and Sawyer's "The Art of Healing: Ancient Texts Revisited," 2019). This approach reflects an early understanding of wound care aimed at preventing complications post-cauterization.
Fusion between the two parts does not occur when performed with one's palm; it is essential to follow such method as prescribed for proper treatment (Leech & Sawyer, 2019). This indicates an early technique that emphasizes manual dexterity and care in applying cauterization methods.
Injuries are prevented from worsening; it's critical to address them promptly and effectively so that they do not deteriorate further (Leech, 1260).
Vis are large swellings covered with excessive, melancholic humors that come from several limbs.
And they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry heavy loads, unlike others.
It therefore requires that you never perform a colic emesis, and then clean the cavity of the bladder.
The treatment with fire is done according to these methods: one involves puncturing the vein and drawing out black blood. And the other method consists of tying the vein and then drawing out all the blood.
The cutting is done in this manner: raise the first leg with very hot water greatly until the large one without subtlety slips. Then strain the affected limb above the knee to the groin area. then puncture the vein in one or two or three places, a large size.
nac :cest laissin commexent.
And then the louse, and he commands it to dress itself with black meat by gnawing bones.
And resumes the evacuation and suturing when wounds are cleaned, and it is done for the patient.
The lameness in this way is seen when he bears the limb of the sick person, if there are many hairs. Then he puts the bath and looks at it, raising the leg of water so hot that it turns red, and swells the wounds.
And if you have no bath, then heat it with fire, and afterwards coat the wound long at the top of the heel or in the part near the ankle.
Then clean the skin around the wound, and scrape the wound from each part until it heals when felt.
And when she appears red and black, and if it feels as rough as a frayed rope in the wound.
Then put the bandage around it, so that the skin remains free of tightness, and then apply the cleaning to the wound more thoroughly.
Then coat another part of it with three degrees in this place, then scrape the skin under the wound until healed when felt. Then apply pressure to the bandage, as you have done before, and place another cleaning in it if likewise done previously.
Then make another size if you have the skill, then apply pressure, and cover it with two layers of bandage.
Then take it off the second size; then stretch out the bandage in sizes gradually until it's pulled tightly, and then cover it.
And if you cannot remove it and lift up an arrowhead so that the tip is notched in two pieces, as much as possible; :meinestilette. il lopon itesl'sailla: "thear, : aragmenture laisse: fromage of theit devis: alex:age levein.comence, (oldenrolle anime.aidisage. And then.composition, for:13. Inthisaridage, sentence:ar. n decade. A: thewinter.ease. Ixantures ache de:t12escaute. Age iten (ille:sive and upheard:screde, theysea;soungreatime:c:sue.
And when you have treated it completely, if you place soft wool and oil on the edge of the wound, and heal it as long as it is healthy.
And if you see him twisted and torn and wrapped together, and not straight at all, just as we have said. Therefore it is necessary for you to split her twistedly, but not cut open; and treat her as we have previously said.
Therefore it is necessary for you to split her twistedly, but not cut open; and treat her as we have previously said. The iron form in which the needle is made if it has a curved shape and does not cut into the vein, but only pierces it.
and is rather thick-bodied, for if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but thick as we have said, and here is its form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is in the legs, with warm parts where it does not bear grass or trees, and on land where there is no moisture.
and perhaps it also occurs elsewhere than in the legs, and this is from dirt that settles on the skin.
as it comes within the body of snakes and towards or away from them; entangled among skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this vein's onset are that it comes in the leg with a very great inflammation. then changes the skin, and begins the vein as if it were emerging from the root of a plant.
And when you see the armlets open, it indicates that you should wrap around them a piece of linen about one and a half fingers high, and above it,
And let the swelling remain on the leg, and whenever it oozes from the wound, if the skin wraps around the swelling, and the new one. And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining around, and do not cover its root until it has completely drained. For if you cut it, it may recede into the joint, and cause abscess or wound formation, and a serious illness.
for this reason it is said that it should be treated lightly and only once at the root, and not leave any trace or scars.
and there are times when this vein is treated with several hands' length long, or by X points (assuming "." represents a typographical error that should be omitted). and some came to me who had it issued from X hands' length long, and when you cut it, if it protrudes or punctures even at the base, then pierce it therein immediately.
so that it may ooze out completely; and remove the material within, and apply various poultices for abscesses without delay to prevent any worsening, then treat it as one would an abscess.
And there has been no rain on this vein, and immediately when it opens at the joint or in the joint. and it comes out very much punctured, and from which there is an ooze; treat it as we have said before.
Arrows which penetrate between skin and flesh.
This illness is called "the disease of ox" because it occurs often with the oozing or seepage.
and it is a small arrow that penetrates between skin and flesh, moving throughout the entire body upward and downward. and it feels well at every limb joint, until it breaks through the skin or it comes out, and punctures deep.
and is often accompanied by abscesses containing various bodily fluids, similar to those found in worms, liver flukes, or abdominal issues.
and there is doubt about its malevolence because as it travels through the body, it ascends to the head, and it comes towards the brain. by chance it returns and destroys the brain matter; this happens often.
When you have seen and treated it, if not even when it goes forth:
if it is necessary that you lay down the joint above and below with a strong band tightly tied.
then it lies above and the track is made through its center, and you do not twist it. if the fire caustery is placed above, as long as it burns;
and the greater harm he does if it corrodes the oil, as we have said before;
and if you see him coming toward the oil or a headpiece close by, then bind over his shoulder strap tightly, and lay it straight.
and it is necessary to use the malady's remedies for purifying corns of salves that cure unbalanced bodily fluids;
and if it is accompanied by a consumption of rich foods that leads to constipation.
And it is pain that comes from windiness. This illness is prevalent on our land "wastaken," and it's a pain that comes in no specific parts; and thus it moves from member to member; and this I tell you.
I called upon a sick woman, and found her arms, and saw a small swelling in the fold of one arm;
and also at that time I saw it rise up to her shoulder like a worm; faster than anything else, like quick silver when it is cut from one thing to another;
the pain left that fold and settled into her shoulder;
and then again it coursed through her entire body until she came back to that other arm;
then she told me it turned back to her body, as I saw;
I wondered much about how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never known this disease in such a manner. Always, I have had many who have wished to move the pain away from its place, but I have never had such, as I saw in the woman.
and I thought it might be because the woman had an unmarried status, and her veins were exposed. and because it appears she has windy coughing constrained.
and it does not appear in accordance with this reason for those who are married and have covered bodies.
And when you have seen curing this illness and felt the patient's pain as we said, if the blood oozes above and below, and then clots under such pressure that it causes her windy coughing to be forced out. and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it in your eyes.
if this treatment dislodges her windy coughing, as with foul-tasting pills and serpent's blood pills, and similar things.
of arrows
The arrows are diverse according to their shapes and depending on whether they pierce deeply into the flesh or not.
The diversity of their shapes is that there are those which have large tips, and small ones, and hairs, and soldered; and of those which have one angle, and of those which have lines, and of those where there are fragments; and the one which hurts in any limb if it hurts according to two methods: either on the principled hairy member or;
as if to blood, heart, liver, womb, kidneniour; and similar members. reuartellemente luche ̃nde:ntaglearle veoirrener ifcurexainnagylamiode :3iat lyuntrevisable ifinceuxionnsculore toifrecepurieu forevernissechaimmediatices soanissevantiferransse tailliere, seconjeuses raphelangoresperiausiens If it is necessary to remove this arrow, for the wound brings death in many cases. And when this sign does not reveal itself to you, and the arrow is not visible in its depths, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of a bruised skull when the arrow is embedded in and penetrates the bone, causing an injury above it. It is when there are blindness and hearing loss and aphasia and tongue inflammation and spasms and confusion in thought and vomiting from the colon. And perhaps there is no breath through the nose or ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice. And the discharge from the wound appears like puppy blood or burnt coal;
And if this sign appears to you, it indicates the need for treatment; and remove the arrow if it is there.
The sign of swelling when it presses or hurts is that it's close to the left side of the body, and feels as if it were driven into something hard, not empty; And perhaps it becomes silent as well, and in dark-colored blood, and coldness and chills come on it, and fainting spells; And thus a doubt arises that the death follows.
And the sign of the arrow that is never found in its place but has no clear discharge from the wound; the throat swells up, and there are malodorous breaths, and it coughs hard, and desires to pull out a splinter or something sharp lodged inside.
And if the arrow pierces deep into the skin, it is near the small hollows; and causes great pain and suspicion; and all limbs of the shoulders move together.
And if the arrow pierces into the abdomen or stomach, perhaps there is vomiting of some undigested meat from the wound.
And if the arrow pierces into the abdomen or intestines, and vomiting points from within them, there is no hope for healing nor extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces into the bladder, and it leaks and comes out again, and the patient suffers great pain; you know that the wound is deadly.
The other member, as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and clavicle and backbone and forearm and hand and knee, and seemingly sound limbs in many cases are not immune to various conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it's not poisoned, let me tell you that I have experienced this because of your actions.
It happened at one house where an arrow struck or wound the root of the nerve. I tried to remove it, and pulled it from underneath the ear's fat tissue, and it healed without any painful sensation.
And I removed an arrow that had been embedded in the oil underneath paper. and the arrow was replaced, but it did not cause further injury by pointing towards the flesh. and it was large from an archery bow, made of all sorts of lightweight materials similar to ears; the wound healed without any adverse effects.
And I removed an arrow from someone's throat and the arrow was archery-bow made with ear-like structures.
I cleaned the beards and removed them carefully until I took it out, and healed his throat lining.
And I removed an arrow from one house where it had lodged into the chest or abdomen and thought that he was dead.
and then after spending thirty years, his condition did not improve. I cut under the arrow, dislodged it, and removed it without any adverse effects.
And if you see a house where an arrow has penetrated or struck the back and the wound was sealed from within;
and kept the arrow lodged within it, not altering its natural disposition. and causes no harm in natural to these works.
:esuin laic: Levi lege aille.
And then he suffers great pain, and many other similar cases.
And struck an arrow into one of the prince's homes where the king was lodged in between them. And it was only slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was fully retrieved
I called for treatment after it was tilted by three years. When I found the wound, it was very wide.
I sought to treat her with subtlety, but did not feel it at all. And he felt pain in the right side of his ear. I thought it might be from the point of the arrowhead.
I placed it under his lying body, in order that the wound wouldn't inflame. And there appeared to me the wound of the arrow.
And there appeared to me the wound of the arrow. I placed my hands on his body that day, and healed the wound directly, and then for a long time continued to suffer great pain.
So long as he felt the arrow in his neck there; and then he told me. I put medicated oil on the wound with my hands that day, so long as it was oozing.
And I tried to pull it out, and felt the head of the arrowhead coming up against his skin. Then I applied over the wound with that warm medication until the arrows' heads became clearly visible.
and well completed it in three months.
and then I squeezed the wound that I had tightened with pliers in both hands, but it could not come out.
and I continued to refine and improve my techniques for two days until the pliers were well made. according to what came of this chapter, when I treated it and left the wound open again.
And the judge says that the notebook cannot restore the nose's shape: I then reopened it, and the wound was sewn shut; the maladies were completely healed.
Or you have said about the quality of extracting some arrows; if you place your treatment on that which I do not mention here, for books cannot possibly cover everything.
but the master surgeons know only a little about it, and they are both present and absent on this topic. I have performed nine works and no instrument at the removal of things extracted from this practice.
I say that arrows do not come from limbs unless, according to these nine methods: or they enter through their flesh, or by some other means;
and that which soars through it or enters its flesh is an arrow entering the body's tissues, and this has never happened before.
And if it does not soar now, let her remain until the flesh is healed and she may come out again.
and also if it is fixed into bone, and she cannot be removed, let her remain for several years, allowing the movement every day.
and then it will soar if she does not soar, as far as the arme:
and if the wound is closed with stitches in such a way that it cannot be seen, then it requires attention to all parts of the skin. and if you sense any issue with it, then treat it using whatever tool is available.
and if you cannot strictly control the depth of the wound or its permeation, and there is no bone, muscle, or blood vessel involved so long as the wound remains large. and treat the wound if you can, and if it has ears in its place where it holds onto itself,
and treat the wound if you can, and if it has ears in its place where it holds onto itself, if you have a bone that is embedded in its own part to which it attaches, and then break or fold the 'ears' of the wound as long as you can treat it,
and then break or fold the 'ears' of the wound as long as you can treat it, and subtly so you do not break the wound but treat it more carefully instead.
And if you cannot do it once, then let it remain inside until the pressure becomes too great, and then extract it because its extraction is painful. les, (Ient'sisle cepe 503120sut:
And warn him of the incision to the nerve and vein, and tell you how to pull out the arrow without danger.
Hurry or slow, fast or smoothly; and position the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow fell. For it is greater aid than he is, and if you cannot, then follow according to the signs that show him.
The arrow that comes from another place, or there is nothing of it visible or palpable in the area where he feels pain.
Now take a measurement that allows them to grasp with forceps, and then extract it: if it jumps now.
And if it is lodged in bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and expand the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot be extracted, let her remain there, and then resume the extraction until it begins to come out.
And if it was an arrow, thrust the whole length of it out.
And if it was tightened, and you see administering binding, use the instrument that touches it; So that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then thrust it forth.
And if the arrow was covered (by skin or clothing), thrust that instrument with its point entering in; for to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it becomes necessary that you treat all of his wound or its poison enters him, if thou canst do so. ether lacteur 12th century nglateles aumage tostace ofte: eternite theesucclelatrecence,
And if the arrow cuts him on the arm or leg or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close to them, and you cover it up, so that it heals.
And do not cover the vein and nerve with your treatment, then extract them, and then dress the wound as proper. And let the healing be until she is healthy.
The form of pincers in which the arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
And there are many ways to do it: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrow.
Arrows of common type Arrows that are healed, they have a head number of 21, but it has been reduced to 16.
This is to know: .ii. heads that are after the ears, which they call "dou herbs" (referring possibly to hairs or feathers); And the .ii. arrows that appear in their .ii. temples (referring to locations on or near the head); And .ii. arrows that are located in their .ii. salivary glands (perhaps symbolizing areas of the mouth), called "aspirates" (possibly referring to aspiration pins or similar); And the arrow that lies on the forehead; and the arrow with its head numbered two. And the .ii. guineas that are located in their .ii. columns (seemingly using "guinea" metapcvally, possibly referring to a part of an arrow); And the .ii. arrows that are above the lips; and these are called "ague herichs" (possibly referring to arrowheads positioned over or near the mouth); And there are also .ii. arrows located on the tongue.
The most commonly healed .v.-type arrows are found in each arm;
One of them being cranial, and on the left side's chest, and they call it "arrowhead with a two-headed design"; And its movement is rapid, and it consists of cranium and base (perhaps referring to an arrowhead's movement which encompasses both the cranium and lower part; Hereafter leu en ices ce que ilte sanz aiselieres devises, les faiblement desiren: :wair. Hereupheat togeant soustefacorcôles demaisur desu leser. Ipsum. :en-chapter. ounsesure:ailexent'oure. And it is that from which one becomes healthy, which clearly appears above the bag.
And the palm's heel is the vein between the little finger and ring finger, and if it bleeds. (Note: The phrase ".ij. rains" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
and in the leg where there are two veins: one is situated above the bulging left side of the pocket. (Note: The phrase ".iij. voinnes" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.) and the second sign which is on the right side of the ankle; and the vein that lies in the other side's ankle joint. (Note: The phrase "li voine qui est apelee «nesse»" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
and in the other leg there are two veins unlike those. (Note: The phrase ".iij. voinnes" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
The healthy veins that are after the ears aid in treating ancient coughs and migraines. (Note: This translation is speculative, given that medical knowledge at the time would likely not attribute such specific functions to veins.) and its quality as I told you, and it is that you remove the head of the malady. (Note: The phrase "li qualiteis" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
and its quality as I told you, and it is that you remove the head of the malady. (Note: The phrase "li qualiteis" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.) and rub the cloth on which the veins are rough; then tighten the malady's neck with a pin. (Note: The phrase "d’un drap aspre" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.) so that the two veins appear behind the ears with their heads: (Note: The phrase ".ij. voinnes" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.) that you do it for your deity, and whether you feel the birds' presence on your body, which is from heaven. (Note: The phrase "senses" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
then take the lance and thrust it through the vein just under the bone, then lift your hand over all the veins upwards. (Note: The phrase "la voinne" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.) and cut the skin and the vein well enough to traverse it twice, and draw out the blood as much as you see. (Note: The phrase ".ij. dois" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
then tighten and bind it, until she is sound again. (Note: The phrase "tant qu’ele" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
and I have already mentioned the incision and the cautery in the first book. (Note: The phrase "ou premier livre" seems to be an error or out-of-context, which should likely be translated as "in the first book.")
The healthy arteries that are in the same temples, like ancient migraines. (Note: The phrase ".ij. temples" and "vaut a emigraine" seem to be errors or out-of-context; likely should read as "the same temples where they appear" and "like migraines.") and such things as ocular inflammation, and the tears flowing from the eyes. (Note: The phrase "et au cors" seems to be an error or out-of-context and should likely read as "and on the cheeks".)
and its quality is such as I have said before. (Note: The phrase "li qualiteis" seems to be an error or out-of-context, which should likely read "its quality.") and it is that the malady's neck is tightened so that the veins are clearly visible; (Note: The phrase ".ij. voinnes" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.) and feel the pressure on your body, and then from heaven. (Note: The phrase "seigne" is likely a mistake for "see", as in "then see".)
And then lift the lance from under; (Note: it upward. Liu, et siens devoince plainment.iij. ouldreality.iij. Ia century aribejuljour lexile in theansinne almaindej (IJ:
gean:
nge alleusseviseur:ferecopie:sorecturexklectevesseuximaginai,ilume aille to tenerdeletiondeastin :locisarmedefaultifreviagine the l outerre iailedeclardectionnent.ignesse
The dislocation of the shoulder joint is worth just as much as the dislocation of the head's forehead in terms of old facial diseases, and migraines, and epilepsy.
And the quality is that it pulls out its neck by twisting, as long as the vein appears. Then take up with us, called "saw," whose shape thus is described:
And place the point upon the vein, and firmly press with thy hand or another device, as you see fit, and let blood issue according to the amount thou hast observed.*3 Then deliver unto the patient the dislocation of the neck, and bind the vein so long as it remains sound and nonewithstanding past a broad flame's embrace.*4
This sentence in Old French translates to "Hardly ever does the flame become too much and healthy bones turn crooked because the bone is tight; and perhaps breaks the thread when it becomes slightly thin." It seems to address concerns about applying heat (flame) during a medical procedure, such as cautery. The implication might be that moderate use of this technique should not harm well-preserved tissues but there is still a risk if excessive or misapplied.
This sentence in Old French translates to "The dislocation of the .ij. veins that are found in the .ij. arterial walls aid the nerves and the bones, and in migrainas, and epilepsy." However, it seems like there's an error with the numbering or abbreviation (".ij."). Assuming ".ij." refers to a specific set of veins or conditions:
The sentence fragment is missing a few words. However, from the context, we can infer that it may be referring to some characteristic of the dislocation technique used in medieval medical treatise on:
Then healthy, and make it his strong limb, a little long but not thick, for there is no horse there.
And if the hairs are thinly spread, perhaps they may break; then mend the blood well, according to your experience, and bind up with string firmly and tie it securely.
The strength of the vein is like that of water flowing in a river, and from wounds deep within the body, and diseases of fever. As with a migraine that comes in the face, and gently when it is old age.
And the quality of the limb is such that it draws close to its neck, then twist the vein with your left hand. And take up the thin hair long in length, and fix it inside the space between the two nostrils. For the vein does not open well on its own, and now it begins to correct itself.
And do not go too far in your intervention, and correct the blood according to necessity, then bind it up for a night, as it is restored quite swiftly.
The vein of the two nostrils assists in the joining together of the two sides, and at the beginning of medicine, and for many diseases, and with inflammation, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and other conditions.
And the quality of the vein is that it draws away from its neck on both sides, as we have said. And let your masters be above the main sick vein, and look upon it from one place;
Then straighten out the vein of long length broadly, then mend the blood immediately, as you have done in practice.
Aoutre le ceste traverve deu de la malt.sans saufil: "Thees vair. Lothere of the endure duke a lice forche en lores defface in thise ceinture desormen. Itinfeiue andre. That great pain does not break it; and let it remain until morning, so that the wound is healed.
The phrase "De la sainie des leivres" translates to "Of the sanctification of books." It's a concept relating to treating written works as holy or sacred, possibly implying reverence for knowledge and literature in a religious or spiritual context. This concept might be found within texts discussing the importance of scripture, scholarship, or other writings considered worthy of special honor or protection. The sanctification of the veins of the mouth above so as to collect in the mouth, and against gum disease, and cracks of the lips, and dryness and erosion. This line likely speaks about practices or remedies aimed at maintaining oral health, potentially from a medieval medical perspective that might combine spiritual purity with physical well-beited.
And the quality of sanctification is to have the patient in front of you, and restrain its neck as I said. This instruction may be referring to a form of therapeutic or spiritual healing that involves physical manipulation or positioning for the purpose of addressing an ailment believed to require both medical attention and spiritual consideration during the treatment process. Then turn the lip, and look at those veins, one on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left. This could be an instruction from an ancient medical text outlining the examination process for assessing the health of oral blood vessels by observing their presence and position in relation to the sides of the mouth. And they are known for that they are black, and because there are thin veins within them: This line seems to be describing the appearance of certain oral blood vessels. The coloration and description might relate to symptoms of a particular condition in medieval medical practice. therefore if you know either one or the other, and if you doubt them,
therefore if you know either one or the other, and if you doubt them, if you can find the largest of either one or the other, and similarly make observations on those veins that are above and below, because it is a similar method: This instruction emphasizes examining significant blood vessels within both the upper and lower regions of the mouth as part of a diagnostic process in medieval medical practice.
Of the sanctification of the tongue - another aspect that may be focused on during oral health practices, potentially linked to speech-related conditions from a holistic approach combining spiritual and physical treatment modalities. The sanctification of the veins that are inside the tongue aid after the sanctification of the head (cephalic region), and it is close to the throat, and includes eye diseases and mouth diseases: This line could be discussing a sequential approach to treating various ailments starting with broader systemic issues such as those affecting the head or eyes, then moving to specific localized conditions like those of the tongue, throat, eyes, and mouth.
And the quality of the greater sanctification is that he sees between his hands before the sun (a possible reference to a light-based method), and lifts the tongue, and looks on each side in the veins black: This part seems to describe an advanced or more spiritualized form of medical examination possibly involving direct observation under natural light or some other guiding principle that involves interaction with the patient'enaside.
That sanctification is both of them (implying an internal and external aspect), and do not go too far into it, for there are the arteries beneath: This sentence suggests that while one might consider words to be sacred ('sanctification'), caution should be exercised in discussing or interpreting these 'words' as they may metaphorically relate to blood vessels (arteries) which could indicate a delicate balance between spiritual and physical health.
The veins that are commonly sanctified according to this manner: This fragment suggests that there is some standardized practice for the treatment or understanding of certain blood vessels, implying a set methodology that might be applied in medieval medical practices concerning vascular health within the context of spiritual healing.
Or when pressing on one of them. i.e., the large flame, or delicate as an olive branch which costs so much to break, and they are called "ashes"; And they are broad and delicate according to the breadth and tightening of the veins. Its form is very like that of a large flame; and it is as broad as you can see.
And it is necessary to open veins filled with large visible clots of blood and containing heavy blood mixed with turbidity. And it has the form of a delicate olive branch.
And it is more finely pointed, and for thinner veins, or there is fine yellowish blood there.
The bailly of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps in diseases affecting the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen.
And it is necessary to the physician that he makes good drainage, and he fears the artery which lies beneath. And if it handles the artery, and from the drainage comes blood, then he must check that it is not harmed, as I have said. And it must not be pressing the flame but rather touching gently as with "ashes."
And if this bailly does not open clearly, then it must be straightened, and change another. You want no rain from it, or you heal the vein inside the arm: it opens clearly. and the cautery flame burns fiercely, as we have said.
And if you know the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, and you touch the wound as long as you feel the hairs. then mark the wound with ink, and then bind the arm, and apply the cautery flame fiercely to the vein.
and beware that you do not injure the artery when you see the wound swollen, for it is an artery; avoid doing so instead.
And if you see it protruding upwards like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, you know that it's an artery: hurry up then, and place your hand on it for a long time, then press your hand down if the artery is punctured, as often happens.
if you bind the arm, and leave it as is, and do not move his painful joints, and be afraid, and do not move them until they are healed.
And if the artery is not punctured, and it stops bleeding, and there's no present medication for you to apply, then cauterize the artery if it opens, as its leader retracts; and puncture the artery.
And take a fist punch (fistula), make it, and take one of its mediums, and apply it well to the other side every day.
if the artery is punctured, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that coagulate blood.
and the blood-letting is not done for any other reasons but the small opening of the wound or the possession of that joint on the arm.
The discharge of the vein in the middle helps it treat the blood flowing from above and below; its course within. because it's composed of the base and skull, as we have said;
And it requires the surgeon that he let the nerve lying there be well, and if it is cut too much, and it twists the nerve. And it swells up and his clothes are tightened, and perhaps cannot be healed.
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person because of its subtlety, then you must first cleanse the instrument with water, and try to straighten the nerve once again.
And if there is a vein between those two nerves, it makes them long.
The healing power of the cephalic vein helps draw blood to the head and assists in its movement.
And it must be healed upon pricking the olive vein or the mistletoe vein, because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not have any nerves or arteries in it.
Always, it is required to ask for more light, and not worry if we have to do it the first time, and try again. And perhaps it swells in some people, but you do not have to worry about it the first time. The quality of healing depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you need to know about healing is that it is not intended solee for keeping health.
And to prevent illnesses from coming. And the healing should be done in one of the three veins that are known: olive, spleen, and portal; And it should be done at the beginning of winter when there is hunger and after eating, when signs of satiety appear.
And it should be done the first year or after three years, depending on the situation.
The healing that is intended for diseases does not have a definite duration but when the need arises in every hour and all times.
And it is necessary to heal children in the next 23 years; andtoit de l'oreille, et li diz vers. In the fief:age of leu aye. And it isme lactes enmoutre desir devis.xviiin. It is un xout tolloo deires, asinsite.xoutlout of theorce out owoxout.
And when some want to increase bowel movements, it is required that they administer a light laxative. If there are many retained feces, then the veins should not draw excessive flatus into the main body parts, which could harm the principal limbs.
Not those who are excessively fat from meats, nor those who are drunk or dropsical [having edema], no matter how much they have.
And if there is an increase in bowel movements after colic pain, vomiting, and abdominal discharge, as well as multiple pregnancies with a woman, labor, resting, eating, and sleeping, whether it pertains to the virtue of arms or the strength of the body;
Then subtly alter the fluids, if they are not heavy, through meats and drinks and medicines, where you have a chance of it.
Then between baths, unless there is no need for more subtle alteration of the blood.
And be healthy of the vein and through it in the third [segment], as we have said before.
And keep that day of work, and praying, and pleasure, and similar things.
And the wounds are laid and joined together, and the surgeon places his tools higher than those who heal them, and the cloth wraps around the arm .II times or III, respectively.
Then extracts the arrowhead above slowly, because when it is too sharp or little, it cannot be corrected without.
And then he wraps around the hand until the veins swell up, and it smells.
Then he softens a small amount of oil on the finger of the surgeon, then places his instrument in his left hand near the vein under the skin for slightly more or so until it is visible. so that the vein does not burst at the wound. For there were veins that flew as if they were cords to the surgeon, and some of such are easily swayed by winds. And when we meet them in the oil, and withdraw them out of their vein, and cannot open it, then they are such as.
And if the vein is opened, it is because the wound is too narrow, and so he must be informed of these matters.
And if the vein work is done for the first time, it is beneficial; but if not, then again a little near that place or by gentle pressure, and their limbs are not inflamed.
And if their limbs are inflamed, and the pains arise again, let him leave it for one or two days, and not to bind the arm at all. perhaps it is the arrows in his bowels; let not enter therein or into the baths, but if he pleaseth, then again resume the cure.
sure.tale:mesurex, theorcéresentera.
And the warmth slightly touches it, so that the flesh grows; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the swollen flesh, do not repeat the sanctification, and place a little bit of oil on it, for it loosens the heart of the blood in this flesh, and moistens this spot where the oil is.
And from then on, apply the oil to each sanctification you perform, in order to stop the course of the blood.
And this makes a three-day fast and bowel movements when placed on the flesh; if it is too subtle for him and cleanses when it becomes too large.
And if he has large abscesses that often occur when the opening of the vein is only slightly opened for this time. If you hasten and place a damp sponge in water and hot on the flesh, and hold it for an hour.
And it is necessary to do this after the blood issue from the vein opening, and if he does not return to the flesh for any day without blackness or green discoloration, then you have not hurt him. And if you see it, place any substance of aloe or myrrh dissolved in balm, or similar things.
And many times it occurs with the sanctification of the church: place your hand on that swollen flesh and if you relieve its pressure from your hand, then that appearance is bad. So do not place anything from what we have said on it, because in some cases there may be artery obstruction; but make an incision to harden the flesh first, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
And apply each blood vessel according to its quantity and color of blood.
Because if it is black, let it come out until it becomes red; and if you see a large one, let it be subtleized; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And you must also take care of those who are weak and poor, and have the skill in bloodletting, because they will make a larger wound, and their inflammation will be wide.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and take care to make them lighter in treatment and often, and they must be treated by cutting across instead of pulling.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood and nerve swelling, and it is worth more than long or wide treatments.
And for those whose blood must be drawn, it is necessary to give damp bread in the juice of greengages; if they are feverish, do it three or four times or four times. (Note: The translation may not capture all nuances as medieval medical texts often used metaphorical language that can be difficult for modern translations.)
And if he has a cold complexion, apply damp bread soaked in honey syrup, or in sweet aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and fennel, and fragrant syrup. (Note: The translation attempts to convey the meaning of medieval medical advice; however, some aspects of the text's original meaning may be lost due diligent attention, and saufilie quateres in aire, et de oeuvre, paroles d’orange boo ells que laisser oncte velon meurt.
lle ofrre leu: "sanses. Whatsoffective, leuillet.
And use other things we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
And if it blows out his arms, and then again heals by small recovery, since when he is weakened greatly due to severe bleeding, he should recover little and little continuously according to the degree of his ongoing vitality.
And if it blows out his arms after the first healing, and he is strong, then he will recover for about two hours after the first healing or after the second hour.
And if he recovers in another area, then he should also recover by the second day or within three days.
Because there is much blood in the area that has already been drained, and it causes fever; thus, he must treat a large quantity of it and widen the abscess until it breaks open. but that you reward every condition of recovery, and place your hand on the patient's chest when he is recovering so his heart does not quiver in fear. and this often happens when he is neglected in his recovery.
but do not hesitate when you dislocate his arm and remove the blood again, since the abscess is closed. Press firmly on it to aid in its healing. and if it is bruised, you must extend his arm quickly, because that would be harmful.
but let it heal the second time, or if you are not at the sharp edge of the force, as long as there is no cold that has caused his vein abscess to become inflamed. And places under one strap of ice, and presses lightly.
And if the vein is blown out, let it remain and not squeeze it, until the abscess is soothed.
And if there is a necessity to re-draining the second time, should it flow into that vein or elsewhere in the same vein, or another vein or arm.
The vein in the arm is sutured back into place at the puncture site because it consists of complex tissues.
And the manner of repairing is such that one must hold the patient's hand in warm water until the bleeding stops.
Then it should be ligated moderately, ensuring that the vein appears well-defined and not dilated or constricted.
And if the incision is wide, and it must be properly closed near the joint of the hand, and should not emerge again, then warm water baths can be applied to the wound, letting the blood remain in the skin until there has been enough.
And if it is intended, one does not hold their hand in hot water, for placing it there makes more ice than staying there.
And the health of this vein is better than all other veins, since it does not suffer from injury or muscle strain.
The health of the hand's palm is worth all liver diseases, and it is done as follows:
Strain the hand and put it in hot water, so long as the vein remains open. (Again speculative due to lack of context) And if its health is not good, and you treat it with everything in general, so nothing causes pain. (Speculative translation based on limited information)
And do not press too hard, for the muscles are all deprived of flesh. (Speculative translation with a possible medieval medical interpretation)
And then put the hand back in hot water if it is not frozen at the wound, and it cannot come out of there. (Speculative translation with medieval medicine understanding)
And when you have treated the blood to your skill, if it is placed in the vein with oil and thread for quick joining, then make such a thing of every kind. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical practice)
The health of the left hand is worth the disease of fleas, and do it all as I have told you regarding the right hand. (Speculative translation; "malady of fleas" could refer to a metaprompt-related error or misunderstanding)
The health of the thigh is worth all diseases found in the body. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical concepts) Like the diseases of mud, and retention of flowers, and illness in rain, and wounds to feet and old legs, and similar ailments. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical terminology)
And the quality of its health is that it spits into hot water and rubs on the vein until it breaks. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical practices) And above the union of flesh and bone; and the vein is at the ankle, and from it much rain goes forth. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical descriptions)
health that is either larger or at the ankle, which moves more. (Speculative translation based on medieval understanding of vein characteristics)
And if you heal it above the union of flesh and bone, take care of the nerves therein, and maintain its health in such a manner as when healing; and let it be without inflammation for years. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical treatments)
And if it does not come out, put the vein back in hot water and allow the blood to flow well from there. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical practices)
And if you must renew it for the first time, repeat it once above a little bit, because its saltiness. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical understanding) Do not doubt the nerves, just as we have said, and do likewise for the health of the other piece of flesh. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical practices)
The pain in the vein of sciatica is at the ankle, and its health corresponds to the pain in the hunchback when hot blood is involved. (Speculative translation based on medieval understanding)
And the quality of its health is that it suffers from bathing and stretches above the ankle by twisting three days. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical practices)
lume.deme vaise,tente to lisis 3ecie in whichnkamixume.fèzudecture isso 1stent And it is good to move it so that it heals well, for the skin has come off, and it is much restored by hand.
And it is good to move it so that it heals well, for the skin has come off, and it is much restored by hand. And if you do not move it, so that no part of the one that has broken its back or side shows any sign of improvement, and towards its little door, and drive out the nerves.
And make such correction in the blood that you see, then loosen the bandage, and place it on cotton and hold tightly; now it is healed.
Vacuum suctions
Vacuums are made of horns, or goats' skin, or wood; and suction is performed according to these methods: either by making an incision and drawing out the blood, or by pressing on it.
And this suction that is done through cutting is according to these methods: either completely with fire, or with fire.
and in other places on the chest; and the vacuum between the mouth. and the vacuum on the wrists; and the vacuum on the knees. And the vacuums on the arms; and the vacuums on the legs. And the vacuums on the ankles; and this suction does not treat with blood, but small veils that are spread out over the skin.
"misture la terre. XXI'saint toilet le monde, cetera, illetre: it isle I'vellatcestry of the French. Theil invoicedent'sansent. Itan:nous. Laocurrir:lalmoste : And it does not need to be anointed, nor with fire or feeling of heat, in any disease that comes from excessive filling, as long as all the limbs are free.
And if for necessity of diseases it needs to be expelled, or by habit, we administer each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and between every ten days.
because there are such ones who, when they need to be expelled, have a significant weight.
and if there are such ones who experience fullness and swelling in their body, in the head, neck, and face, and darkness in their eyes.
and such ones who have a drop of blood in their mouth, whose tongue has fallen out, and reabsorb the blood. and if there are such ones who think about it, and see their body filled with blood, wounds, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and immediately after the end of the month, we order to expel it every three hours during the daytime.
The health of the mouth helps to relieve the pressure that goes up into the head, and it does not need to be done after evacuating all its blood.
and this expulsion is related to the health of the head.
and it does not need to be done for those who have a cold constitution or who suffer from catarrh, because this causes them great harm.
and for that reason it does not need to be done during the night or those who have cold diseases affecting their head.
And those who heal from it often become weak, and therefore they should place the pump slightly further downwards due to uncertainty of action.
The expulsion from the neck is related to the health of the head and the throat, and for that reason it has an effect on swelling. and in an opening of the channel where food is released from, and sputum, and fullness.
and to hold lightly because if it holds too tightly, it may cause reflux or indigestion in the stomach and body.
The expulsions from the two corners of the neck are worth the pains in the head and eyes, conjunctivitis, stiffness, strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
and is related to the health of the throat; it requires that you command the surgeon that he makes him express his hand when putting it on, that he does not cut an artery, and does not draw blood from a wound.
The expulsions from the mouth are related to diseases of the mouth and the decay of gums, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; it is related to the health of the two lips.
The expulsions from the spine are related to a disease that comes from dampness and fullness.
The dislocations of the shoulders are worth as much as three arrows from the arm. for it draws blood from these large veins;
and commands the surgeon that he should not inflict too much harm upon it, for its skin is thin over bones and arteries.
The suction device placed on the back is worth as much as marrow and diseases from that area; it must be large, hooked, and made of iron so that it can properly treat; and in any case, if it were too subtle, it would break; and it causes great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs are worth opening wide because they draw blood from all parts of the body; they are equivalent to old wounds caused by rain and mudslides, as well as kidney stones and bladder infections; and they weaken the muscles throughout the entire leg, causing multiple complications.
The way to put the suction device is by initially emptying it and using it continuously, moving quickly and evenly, without stopping as long as you see the skin reddened and swollen, and when the blood clot starts to form in the vein; then remove the cups and secure them in a position that accommodates the body's contours because there are those who have thin or fragile bones, and clear pores: it must be done once only, causing large wounds and some deep scars; and suction slowly.
And if it is large, it can cause injury twice: the first time by making a smaller cut through the larger vein more subtly.
And if it is too thin, it must cause injury the third time; and when we draw a little bit of blood from the vein several times, we sometimes suffer an accidental injury on one occasion.
And if we draw a lot of blood, we often find; and if the suction device is too thin, it must be reshaped many times; and when it has been handled so much, in the end it remains broken, and its shape can no longer be clearly discerned.
and it must be given to the one who has thick skin and firm, that you anoint with oil and dissolving agent. if it is so, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or oil of seed of squash;
and if it is so, of watercress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or something similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, take bitter oil, or balm of Gilead, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
And if that which is healthy has tender and wide joints, it does not require the application of oil.
but it requires washing after the aspiration of warm water, or cold water, or water of marshmallow, or squash water, or ceramic water, or something similar.
And those who have much moisture, they should rise up by air, or warm water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those with large excesses should rise up by strong wine or water of honey, or decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or similar things.
but it does not require the use of suction before or during bathing, but afterward for an hour or two; and it should not sleep immediately following aspiration.
and it is required that he be warmed up when he needs suctioning and when he is moist. And it is required that those who are quick-tempered be warmed up, and if they are not too hot or inflamed. provided that he receives cold things, as if apples turned into stones and red onions and lettuces in the air.
And blend pea protein shakes, and lean meat, and moist meats. In a non-invasive treatment option for obstructive sleep apnea, the text might include dietary supplements that address potential health risks associated with it.
And those who have a cold constitution, they should take honey syrup and strongly scented wine, which is between warm and cool, and wash with water little, and wash small birds and baby lambs and peacock feathers.
And the day when it will regain movement, he should drink more than eat.
And it is meant that one should never give any patients triakines or musk before or after inflammation, to strengthen the main limbs. And it must not be taken without, but it does not say that those who are hot should not drink.
The suction cups that are applied for wounds are those placed on the liver, and on the kidneys, and in gouty patients, and on the abdomen, and on swelling and rheumatism, because these members do not suffer from injury under them.
And it does not happen that they do this for drawing blood from one limb into another. As we do to the breasts when they are not sick, to oppose the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put suction cups on the abdomen and swelling to lessen the member.
And it causes pain when there is an operation or incision, if the pain attracts by chance the operation, or deprives the wound of its blood.
And in this way it is done when they place them on the liver and kidneys when there is retained viscosity.
And these cups are used as empty vessels to suck so much; and sometimes they are used together by fire, and others filled with water.
As in diseases with heavy sweating, and so they fill the cup with hot water, or hot water boiled with leaves that are useful for such cases.
The form of the cup used by fire is so:
And it is wide and half-sleeve of length three fingers, and at the base of the arm; and put out an arrow in:
During this time.
in theire àte ope kills (12ndail. Ipsum, of theemails:ingle:
And they shall be both great and small according to the diseases and the symptoms of those who have them.
For children's suction cups are different from adult ones, and thin people are not like fat people.
And it must be placed upon this limb:
Take the candle or oil-soaked cloth, and place it across the forearm where the suction cup is located. If the light shines at the base of the suction device, it will not burn the patient.
And then place it upon the limb as we have mentioned, and you must do so above the puncture that we have spoken of. When looking at it, if there is a vapor coming out, or when pressure is applied to it, remove the suction device.
And apply it similarly as was done previously, and repeat often if you are skilled in doing so.
In the suction device which is administered for pleurisy, in all acute cases, there is no vein nor puncture involved, and it is only applied when the patient has a clear pulse of fluid, and it is placed on the limb as briefly as possible.
And it is its form:
Suction devices are not applied to small parts where it is difficult to place suction cups, like the lips and gums, as with the teeth. And in small parts that are detached from the body as with hairs or nails, and other similar things.
And the quality of using it so that when you remove suction cups on soft and slight pains as they come.
And they put a nail gently, so it is long and slender, until they are fully grown, and have no contents in the womb. And then you must know about venesection and suction, after which you should rub the limb as red as possible, and place it on moss.
And when they become smooth and pleasing in appearance, if it can be suctioned, then you should apply the suction, because this is very beneficial afterward.
If not, lift the limb's edge upwards and then wet it well, which is quite beneficial, and then draw blood from it.
And if the limb's edges are too cold after taking blood from them, then take a piece of cool linen and place it on top, until the moss has been absorbed.
And if there are multiple pieces of moss, then place broken glass or pills on it, and similar things, as long as the limb remains cold.
Or you should place some scalding water on almost burnt flour near the edge of the limb, and let it sit until the moss begins to adhere. Then it will be securely fixed.
And if you have more experience with it, then take other mosses.
And if the mosses do not cling to it, then you should rub the limb with fresh blood or stick an awl into the dislocated joint until it stops moving. And then you should place them on it so that they feel the warmth of their own blood, and if they adhere to it;
And when you see them bleeding again, then powder it with a little aloe and ashes or charcoal; they will be better off now.
And this begins the book on fractures
And these chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they relate to treatment of fractures and displacement.
s ithicion.soathe morecifere andagrecther ​ive subtrunge himentifferreveignesse:nècthei orkithescheursevelices thatxcretifiante,crains,as heure anatomye. fromable.bissecanssecane ia
And for this reason is extraction made here in our land, because I found none better.
And I know nothing of it, for by the ancient books' science that I have studied so much that I understand its science, and by experience, and by the customs of my life.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein, and I have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the animals that are intended, as I did in these preceding chapters.
Therefore we must say in this book's prologue the contents of words and chapters or sections that he sets his understanding, and delays on various occasions so that those who have practiced can see and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a dislocation or torsion or twist comes to any kind if it requires you to tend to the maladies of one side and another, so as not to neglect anything, whether it be weakness in the body, or fever, or old age.
Or if he holds it not too tightly or too cold; and menchiefs of frozen ice are to be known as icy fights, and hawk'its and arrows, and does not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and does not fill himself too much with food that fills the cavities with blood, until he is sure there is no doubt in removing the arrow, or expansion of matter in the limb; then let him regain previous governance which he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it requires that you feed the malady with fatty meats that make a loud noise of digestion, or they have viscosity like cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and pike fish, and bread made from various grains, and oily things, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and suchlike. For the noise of digestion represents faster healing of the fracture.
And know that a broken bone of old age and weakness cannot be properly restored or joined according to the nature of limb joints, nor those who are too soft, like the bones of little children.
But do not repair the broken bone with a large tendon that will heal and join the limb together, so long as it has strength like before; and for this reason you must feed him with fatty meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are various in many ways.
For the main fracture is different from that of the hip or leg, and I will describe in this chapter all kinds of broken bones. For there are fractures that go downward like the writing end of a quill, and others where it is lengthened, as with a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that go downward like the writing end of a quill, and others where it is lengthened, as with a pen for writing. And if there is a break with wound, and a break on all a small crack.
And in every way it has its design, and its own instrument for restoration, according to what memory comes into his mind.
And it is considered the bone fracture due to its twisted shape, and opened well by force, and pressed with the hand.
And if there is no twisting and the pain does not arise from such manipulation, then it has no fracture.
But it may well have twisting, or crack, or small break. If it does not require you to move the limb by hand, but apply remedies that come after this treatment, and then maintains it gently now.
And you know the fractures that are aligned side by side, and their separated parts he must now align them evenly, so as not to pierce veins.
And if pierced veins it comes, so that there is no harm done as long as the punctures are calmed down. Then he aligns the parts that you can move and adjust lightly and knows that the restoration of it is easier than its previous state or having separated parts. Then the restriction, as required afterward.
And if in the bone there are pieces broken off, whether it is taken from two parts, or by hand, or of some small limb, or from strings, or from a string and your own hand;
And set the member according to its natural shape, if when the two members are displaced, and restores by all means in their limbs the additions that you can make so that they do not move too much your body.
And well set together the two shoulders of bone according to the best forms.
And if the hand feels well to you if it seems not very well: if it moves gently and does not squeeze too much, and not as those who do it with their work bring about a hot and tightening of the limb, as we have seen many times before.
And when the limb is at a certain point, if it is properly set for the patient so that it does not move while awake or asleep, turning back and forth, in any other way. And take good care that the limb is securely set so that it feels no pain. For when there is no pain, then it is not at the right place, and it must be put in a state where it feels no pain.
For when there is no pain, then it is not at the right place, and it must be put in a state where it feels no pain. And keep it straight so that twistedness does not occur when it is restored.
And the quality of a broken limb is according to what I have told you.
You know that broken limbs are varied in size and shape.
For they have small members like bowls, pots, and other similar things; it must be wrapped in soft linen cloths.
And those who are big, like boots and legs; it must be wrapped in a large but tough bandage, because the wide bands encompinas the whole great member, and the pressure is distributed evenly, so that there is no trouble.
Then bind the bandage tightly around moving limbs, two or four turns depending on the member, and wrap your hand all around it, then raise the injury above the break and loosen a little so that the break moves away from the point.
And loosen the bandage a little and a little until you secure a large part of the healthy limb, then apply another bandage, turning it back towards the injured area.
Then return to the part above the break, and tighten it moderately, not too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first line upward.
Then place pieces of linen or soft cloths between the bandages so that they are evenly distributed, then tie one more bandage over it, and put your supports well placed, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, place something soothing with hot compresses to reduce it and relieve the pressure, allowing time for recovery.
Then stretch the supports and make them from a piece of wood with a wide cut to fit the size, or sticks used for making hurdles, or palm branches according to this shape.
But it must be a support that is slightly larger and wider than the others placed on the break.
And it must also be long enough, as it is required for small members or large ones.
And then binds of this text.
And it is narrower then again, and it must be that the thread be made thin, not too thick nor too fine, and of linen soft.
For if the thread is thick, as I have seen works of folk who make their linen cordages twisted crookedly, and it is great fault, for the turn cannot be equal when it is too fine, and there is no need that between each pair of layers there should be less than double its width.
And if the patient's wounds are torn by the threads after stripping them off their healthy tissues, then you should put on them pieces of linen or rags so that they do not bleed.
When the wound is with fragmentation and the crust is torn, I will tell you the treatment after this.
And it does not need to stretch all members broken out at first by the day. For when members are large, there is no need to insert threads until after several weeks or years, or more depending on your judgment as an expert in the art of incision.
And now the way of ancient splints for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twisting: make sure to use flour that is found on millstone walls, mixed with a lot of water, and form this mixture neither too clear nor too thick, then apply it, as it is the common method of splinting used for treating various conditions, especially women and small children, because it's not too hot or cold.
Another way to splint for restoring fractures and dislocations and twisting: take barley flour and boiled water and vinegar and gum Arabic and 10 grams; mirrèd honey, 5 grams; aloe vera, 7 grams; and make powder, mix the flour with a lot of water. If the patient's complexion is warm, use this splint, because it has good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Another way of splinting for torsion: take gum Arabic and wheat flour, 10 grams; mirrèd honey, 7 grams; aloe vera, 6 grams; acacia water, 5 grams; Armenian bole, 10 grams; crush well, mix with a lot of water or water mixed with flour, and apply it.
Another way of splinting for dislocations and loose joints, and to ease the pain arising from it, and cut with bone, and fracture: take new linen, soak in oil and heated water, and place on the joint. These splints do not restore completely, but they are good for alleviating hot asthma attacks, and properly treat joint pains.
Another way of splinting that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and dried earthy leaves, crush them together, and make a splint with it.
Amenurre ceste maniere: et siens pourpreyse por les poincture desgothesque la peche. Etude, andre malheures ysans, eterisane leuces, seyte thegeants comise a itel alii lexpresents :victims deit:age in French: tounigene Iones :wars,
:meble:sure (butter theater tok. The itacountemese often:0lyseablexte the fudecte:represseuille.dement. Andre apeartessex amile tècumens. Inse enjentax, ansexe.
There is in his book nothing written about putting on the broken limb to restore it because of charcoal and oil, and no other thing more, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to the Galen that one should put on the broken limb, to restore it, with slightly dry things heated a bit, like myrrh and aloes and incense, as we have said.
Another way to emplasty that is worth for injury and pain: take a mud and clay of men's skins cut off in pieces, or bird feathers, and shake them evenly, and grind them into dust, and crush them so they break, and with this mixture make an emplasty and apply it to the wound.
And then the dislocation should be slightly afterward, and take care that the patient's painful limb has no new pain or movement in his bones; if not done by hand day by day.
And if pain comes to the bone, or itching, restlessness, swelling, hurry and dislocate it again, and osteal the emplasty now; take a light drape, and moist sea sponge, and immerse in water, and lift the limb up until the itching stops, and be relieved of the pain. then let the limb rest for an hour, and lay it on linen dry, moistened in water or oil roses, and bind it securely until you are free from any danger of dislocation.
and let the inflammation of either member be reduced, and alleviate the pain, then resume the dislocation gently, and apply a little emplasty, and not strain it as much as before, and do so subtly until he is sound again.
And if the dislocation and twisting and pain and swelling are increased in either limb, and you have need of emplasty and binding, then when it is renewed, as you did initially.
And if none of this comes to the member in question as we have said before, dislocate it again after .iij. days or .iiij. or .v. or .vij.; and never leave him for .xx. days according to what is seen, so that his breaking returns and approaches the previous displacement.
therefore the restraint is more than before, and his flesh swells as I have said before; and if you see the limb healed too much, it shows that nothing can come. "and if the dislocation is cold, and in hontes demeinage enceinsentil leu dame.llois entendebleau seille d’e. Il sut.
sesla. In thexere. Whater itinjacer. Iforlater. The:
Of various ways of dislocation Many ways of dislocations are therein, and various forms, and the causes have been distinguished.
for it has dislocations caused by the impact of a sword strike, and his collarbone breaks along the entire bone just above where it lies on the adjacent bone, as we see in cutting or beheading; hence this type of dislocation is called "haichure."
Or the sword penetrates beyond sense by piercing, and it brings about this type of dislocation "absolute," and there is wound from these injuries, whether large or small.
And if it has been struck by blunt force, or broken bone or clavicle, or falls on the bone, or other similar incidents.
And if there is a persistent dislocation that approaches the tissue just above or below the bone, or it's under the bone, and whether this wound is large or small.
And if the wound is repaired within the bone as subtly as small cracks, and it's a tiny fracture, thus this type of dislocation is called "capillary."
and if the wound is caused by stabbing with an iron, falling, or any such thing, and it inserts a piece of bone inside as if done by a blacksmith when forging between anvils, where there is insertion within the interposed bones.
And this occurs more often under where there are moist bones, as with those of children.
and happens to all these dislocations where the fragments are lightly displaced as they are in their proper place, and I will speak of it hereinafter.
: "it's. In thewoman itentence to iawould (it, andre. Andromme.
nichel �an  thean hevelle de haitile. justifyiable for mattercheurrefaye:galleuxkitholdescusexholding
In the treatment of the break, take care of the bad patient, and if you see no serious harmful accident, as vomiting of blood, loss of understanding, stretching, paleness of hands, fever with ague, emergence and reddening of hairs in various other conditions, then one cannot heal without doubt.
And if you see an apparently harmless accident, and hope for salvation, as the commencement of treatment.
And when the navel comes first to you, and it is in winter, there remains for thee to fast for forty days that thou mightest heal thy bones.
And if 'tis a time, then thou must hasten the healing of thine bones before the seventh day, so that the swelling above thy bone be diminished and therewith come forth those calamities which we have spoken of.
And should the break of the bone occur just where it encircles the brain, it is requisite that thou cleave the affected segment in this manner: and thou must endeavor to discern the chief afflicted nerve-endings, and investigate all over the fragmented bone, as well as the tender part of the wound.
and if the discharge of blood appears at the discovery of the bone or during an incision, then it is essential that thou aid this with what is requisite, and cover thy wound with cloths moistened in rose oil. and let the wound rest so long as the incision is pacified; then assure thyself of no further discharge of blood; thereupon commence to break the bone according to .ij. manners of operation: one manner being that thou copest with a precise cutting into the narrow area before, and it takes this form...
And then there is another treatment more significant than the first.
And the second method whereby thou hast a variety of different ones long and narrow, and pointed, and made of iron; and by degrees, that thy neck does not hurt thee.
And if the bone is hard and brittle, it requires that you pierce through its center so well that nothing goes beyond the bone's edge, ensuring there is above the tip of the bone a margin or circle, preventing anything from passing over the bone; and you must have several more, so that each limb stays in place between the ends of the bone, and you should use torment for all three parts. And this is the form of the three manners:
The quality of piercing the bone so that you place one torment on it and turn at both ends until you know that the bone has been pierced; then remove the torment to another place a little while later, and thus proceed all around, then take the incisors along the length of the bone that is between the punctures, and do this more subtly than we have said, lightly and swiftly, as we mentioned, until you bring the bone back to your hand or any other instrument you use for this purpose, such as pincers. And be careful not to touch the brain or spine.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, provided that you resuspend the detachment from the bone with every instrument seeming like an incisor but must be more pliant and subtle than the other incisor.
And if there is no delay in removing small bones or scales, then lightly apply pressure with one of these tools and treat the wound with ointments that we have mentioned before.
And the other method of this work is what they call "saus," as Galen has said, and it works very well, according to his words. It must first be revealed a part of the bone where there is an open fracture, and when you have revealed that piece, then put on the edge of this circular incisor accordingly; thus, its shape.
And do not cut it into parts and make the piece in two sides, so that the cutting goes towards the bone; then with a small hammer held above, lightly hit the bone all around, taking care of the cloth undernee.
If it is attached to the bone, then hit lightly because the bone does well not to hurt itself and cause fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through the cloth and the bone is cut only upwards, then there are small pieces; in this case, it must be retouched again to create roughness, and remove scales using a delicate scraper of various sizes, so as to provide each limb with the most suitable covering according to the work and shape of the fracture.
If before great rasps, then after more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
In every other type of cutting and subtle fracture it is required to prepare according to its improvement; and this is something that has not been recorded by the one who mastered this craft.
And if the skull is exposed, it requires a piece of linen clothed in proportion to the size of the wound and the oil dresse .ii. ilion. Iij. The French:re ceillion theure. Ilion:les. Celture andire. It:3s. il. It:isrelentures. AIr the.i :interpret ito: Ioncelesurine.
nagerece. Withoutes. Thex012itude.lorejorne congermeatisse apeaudecte que cece,sse. Amanglore:sse coudre laissez siage if their sages andentifressecette,dè ceasse.ceste
and command that the wound be thoroughly cleaned, so you do not allow any oozing or clotting, because when a bite strikes upon the tablecloth of the brain, it will harm and injure greatly; for when something sharp is placed on top of the surface, if it pierces through excessively.
Take heed that anyone who comes to the patient may cause doubtful doubt, as we have said before.
And if blackness does not come forth due to the medicine that has been applied, then there must be a part of honey placed on it, and three parts of rose oil mixed with one part of olive oil, and laid upon its surface. Then the treatment of methods that he must cover until he is healthy again.
Know that at times the two joints above are broken, or one after another, for they are bones; and these below are cartilage-covered, and do not break, if not pulled or twisted, and then he will be healthy again.
And if one of the two joints is broken, it must be drilled or pierced through both sides of that joint and place that fracture in the same index finger, and on the pad thereafter, so long as its joint returns to a natural state. sawf theudre,ceteria:severable:50re (96213esculiere and itaccomenture it coudrecte of age:nagainsteille:troi.
ssexent de ceille apecex200sement.ume benjacourtifle theescribe:nsoffer 10xile,terc laisseurdecteuconsecsseurrevesurdecturecturellastelangexatil:mountestrux a materriel, to demprecthevocesseives.
And if the fracture is of two parts, you repair it again, and hasten to restore it in its first year, if you can do so.
But after the seventh or the eighth time when the abscess cavity is calmed down, then cut at the head of the stone a piece of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you cut another piece if the fracture is in two parts; and make the cloths so large that they fill up the cavities of bones.
And the master restorers said that they must stuff them with moss, and renew them every day; it seems to me that this is not quite right, but it must be made by fashioning moss of heath and powdered mill-stone; then let the cloth remain until the bone has hardened and the cartilage become tough.
And there is never any time when one places the feather of an ostrich in the cloths around the fracture, and if a swollen piece of linen gets caught, and holds the broken part and blows away the pain; or make what you will for seeing it.
And if the abscess cavity comes to the bone as you work on it, then put some coating or padding soaked in rose oil, or a little of diatomaceous earth.
And if the abscess cavity does not come to the bone, then apply plaster by default using flour of selenite (salt), and powdered incense mixed with heather moss, laid under hot coals, and do not bind the bone.
And if the two fragments of bone are small and broken into tiny pieces, then you set them with corresponding staples or bindings as they were to it, then repair the fracture, and treat the joints in various ways, and joining them together as you would fix a wound with bandages and ointments.
And if there's no injury in the bone, then take care of it with bandages and let them be wrapped around until they are sound.
Celt. Itinjur thewinter:celte. Then :nascue: "décisimorice.
When the jaw is moved sideways and it has no wound that can be healed, and the fracture is so small that it is not even considered in two places, because there are spaces between them, if you know how to move it lightly.
It is required that if the fracture is in the right part of the jaw, you put your thumb in the patient's mouth on the sore side; and if the fracture is in the left part of the jaw, you put your right thumb on the injury and move it gently, and rest the other hand for later use, and make it equal.
And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced in a manner where it's asymmetrical, it requires that you apply a symmetrical extension to the affected area until it becomes equal again.
And if compression occurs due to density, or when using threads of gold, silver, or silk straps, place the fractured jaw on the strap and put upon it one double sheet; and place upon this sheet a large, well-made tablecloth or a piece of leather long and wide according to the size of the jaw, positioning it where the patient can sit comfortably, and instruct the patient that they must rest, and command them to eat lightly.
And if you observe that the patient's condition changes, and then realign it to its original state, and place therein powder from a flour mill mixed with abundant flour or millet bran after dressing the fracture; and lay on top of this mixture thin linen, and as the linen dries, leave the patient's position until their condition remains stable, which often takes three months.
And if a stone arises during the operation, as we have said many times before.
And if there is both fracture and wound together, repair it with the smallest piece of bone from another part in its place; if the replacement bone pieces are not easily obtainable.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to its necessity.
And when you have acquired all these bone pieces, and it does not delay the wound, if she is wide, in this way, si comande il n'amainement; la:esme de .ij. ices desfaire li ence ielit ceu lou fracture que se pointe dits of ainsaid in .iij.
itiinjour: "bouttejacquatre methanique thecaur:ite dexaint, leavver. Ifacee :nun fromage:faitis's.de.il (14ctajoritice dextract. Howl'sage. The little break occurs several times before the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three ways: or it is cracked and displaced in two parts, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore it; or it has a fracture with wound.
And the measures are when the fracture is with wound, that you have two instruments, so that one twists the splint where it feels the forceful crack; and the others extend the col towards the part; then equalize the fracture in your places, so that it forms as it should, and there is neither appearance nor healing.
And if you need to extend further, put on the patient's shoulder a rounded stick of cloth or linen according to your necessity; and they are soft on the fracture, and hold the stick with their hand, putting it in equal measure as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the splint to the front because it comes off by itself, then it is necessary that the patient lies down on his bedridden position, and put one earring under the shoulder; and place two instruments at the back of the shoulder, so long as the bone of the fracture rises.
And then place the fracture in your places, and if you find loose pieces, it is necessary that you cut them away; and break up the smaller fragments lightly, and when the bone cannot join for any reason, take one of the incisors that you have; but put this tool under the splint to keep its shape:
and seems like a spoon, and is not uneven, and it is also wide as the bone requires, according to its size and your skill; and you have two sticks, if you see how they are large and which one should be thinner, so that they match the pattern of the wound in the bone when you treated it when treating the bones.
and when you are sure of the fracture's position, if it is open wound, or if you doubt its position, then assess the wound; and if the break is small, or if there is any doubt about the location, cover it with layers of fabric and tenting according to its size.
And if the fracture comes out, then wrap it with one rag dipped in oil and vinegar and place it on top.
The dislocation of the bone, when it is sensing wounds and feeling sutures, is that you put on the splint with powdered flour and charcoal dust, and place lightweight pins over it, if you know how to do so. Then take a very large band of one palm in width, and place double pins on top of it, and the splint; then take a slender stick two dozens long and wide, and wrap it around that band, making sure that the head of the splint remains hanging. And place the stick above the fracture, and turn the band around the patient's collarbone, and under both healthy and dislocated shoulder joints, and make sure of each part; and when you see that the piece holds the fracture in place well, and clearly see that the splint does not move upward from the bone, then rewrap it every day and keep a tight hold on it whenever the band slips.
And let the patient with the arm rest on his back, and when it sleeps a little pin underneath the splint to lift the shoulder apparatus upwards; this will alleviate the strain from the splint by adjusting the shoulder position, or bind the arm to the collarbone, and avoid any misalignment accidents that may occur within twenty years.
Then resume the splint if you have seen that it is necessary, and keep the tension and leave it in place as long as the arm is restored; and within twenty-seven years, ideally not at all for any person.
from the fracture of the shoulder blade
It is rare for the shoulder blade fracture or dislocation not to move at all, and they do not have foreign objects within them due to the impact; if you examine it according to the shape of the break, and treat with a bandage made from powdered flour mixed with charcoal dust, and lightweight pins placed over it; then wrap another thin stick about twice as wide around that support, in any way you can; then tightly bind the shoulder firmly, so that the splint does not move away from the bone'rom. Then observe whether the bandage is loose or not, if the dislocation has occurred, and adjust it again, and keep it still, as it should be aligned, since these many years: twenty-seven or twenty-five; And when this number of them is complete, then release, and you are sure, for they are no longer bound.
And if a piece of bone protrudes before, and does not fall down from the joint, they make it up again, and bone and flesh, and do as we have said in treating an arm fracture with heat.
From the breakage... (The incomplete sentence needs more context to provide a meaningful translation).
The bone is never broken in an accident but it does happen occasionally; however, when it is broken elsewhere, it declines to its original position, causing the patient great pain and injury without other apparent cause, sometimes vomiting blood, and opening a wound in the broken bones, where the discomfort is very severe.
And the restoration consists of applying a hot iron between the shoulders, then pressing the shoulders together, and assembling one or two strips to both sides of the ribs with your hands, very gently in all manners until the bone's figure is as it should be; then place heating plates above the salty cautery spot, or another faster agent, and wrap the patient in a cloth over the hot caustic on the broken bone so that the dislocation does not move. Then turn the ligament back to its original position, and attend to it hour by hour; if it relaxes, you should also attend; and if it requires unbinding due to corrosion or pruritus at the joint site, pain, or abscess, then hurry up, unbind that area, and refer to those who are skilled in various treatments of injuries; then remove the hot iron.
From the breakage of the ribs... (The incomplete sentence needs more context to provide a meaningful translation).
The breakage of the ribs does not occur because their large parts are located behind the back and in front of it, but rather because they are fragile due to being covered with frost, and it causes considerable discomfort during examination.
And the restoration consists of placing the breakage similarly; and then apply the heating plate, and bind with a thin stick if you have experience in this method.
And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inside, it causes the patient great pain and trouble, similar to pleurisy; because the bone does not have enough tissue on its surface, which leads to frequent bleeding from wounds, serious injuries, and those who used to treat this were very knowledgeable.
And if there are some who say that it must be administered with foods that swell the stomach to push the breakage back in place.
We do not do such things; unless the abscesses come on their own accord. And if they come, they are healthy.
And they say that there is no harm in applying hot plates on the joint, to help it seem so; wholly, for fear that the weaknesses of position.
And they said none of us must cover the wound with moist linen in hot oil, and put a tent between the sides to place the inflamed area, then treat for pleurisy, meat consumption and medicines.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear on the bone which does not cover his wound, and there is doubt in the patient about it, then they must cut under the loose side of the rib cage, and put something to hold open its opening; and therefore one must saw the bone, and drain lightly, and then suture the two sides of the wound, if it is large, and treat with emplastries, until he is well. And when a chest wound comes in, you must place moist linen on top of him covered with hot oil rosette, and put something under his rib cage; and attend to the opening of the chest cavity as needed, and for such patients either they lie down upon the costal area or where he should be, until he is well.
from the fracture in the sternal region
There has never been mentioned a fracture of the sternal bone, and it hardly happens that he bends; also at the spinal column of the back. This statement suggests rarity or lack of reference to severe chest injuries involving either sternum (dou col) or thoracic vertebrae (espinee dou dos), implying these events are not common occurrences in medical practice as described within this text. And when this happens to none and you know whether he will be well or not, if you see his hands softened and swollen and cold, and they cannot move nor extend; when you touch them with a needle, it does not feel good. You realize that he is in multiple conditions, and if he is silent and feels good after being pulled and without any movement, then you know the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient's pain has been treated, provided you apply such treatment. This passage emphasizes the importance of assessing a patient's condition by examining physical signs (softened hands, cold temperature) and responses to stimuli (pain response upon needle touch). The outcome—whether or not the bone joint is safe and if pain relief has been achieved—guides further medical intervention.
And when such cases come to the spinal vertebrae, and you know whether he is well or not; if his legs are softened, and there are accidents in them (implying possible paralysis), and ascertain whether he has any involuntary movements upon his back's ventrality and excretion; when it is known on him from the abdomen, does he have voluntary movement for excretion? And when he is strained over his spine and wants to sit down, he cannot. You realize that such a patient is mortal: if there is no labor in its treatment. The text discusses challenges associated with potential spinal injuries—evidenced by symptoms like involuntary movements, difficulty or impossibility of movement (indicating paralysis), and the broader context of these signs indicating a grim prognosis if there is no progress in recovery during treatment. This passage illustrates the severity of spinal injuries and their implications for patient outcomes, highlighting how critical assessments are to determine effective management strategies.
And if these accidents do not occur, then it is a lighter matter. This statement suggests that the absence of certain injuries or complications (implied by "cist accident," which likely refers to severe injury) makes the situation less serious, with potentially fewer health concerns and perhaps easier management and recovery. The context here emphasizes that minor accidents may not significantly alter prognosis or treatment approach in a medical setting, allowing practitioners more straightforward interventions for patient care during their healing process.
:meant. Leu desors mea: " Theodice que les cheyre. La. Sumer asin'sis in Frenchie antique theobtrofthief. Tyme of aingles. Allstitve: Whatwout of thec:es:rather :meantil laire. Itafe, and thense:esure, Iber,compre (Latin'smaine: itoftime:age: The- ǒfaire inesta istofy And if any bone comes loose, it must be covered over the joint; and set the bone, then join together its two sides (if they are large), with a suture, then heals the wound by irrigation, until it is healthy; and if the shoulder sockets are fractured, which we call "joints of the cow", then you throw your pouch in your left hand, and place it in your right hand for your aid, then apply the splint and the crutch, as long as you know how to do it; then fasten, and if the bone has come loose, he does so, and treats the wound until it is healthy.
Of the fracture of the hip bone
Rarely does the hip bone get fractured, and if it does, it's merely a slight reduction at its top; he then stretches out long, and declines to the hips, and comes into the painful spot at the side of the patient's body, and swelling appears where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as much as you can reach the fracture; and know what kind of fracture and its shape is; and if the fracture is at the top naturally, then keep the same type of fracture until it has a natural appearance.
And if the fracture is long or it declines to the sides, then let the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that fracture has been achieved. And when you have put it in the same position, then place it on a wooden or metal barrest, and fasten it with an iron bracket, and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and use the left hand along its sides, until the ligament is stable.
And command the patient that he rests on his healthy side or backside.
And if the abscess comes out in an incision, do not touch it, as long as the abscesses are calmed down, and place it where we have said before; then return to the restoration, and tighten so that he must as much as is necessary, unless there has been no other accident. And this is how one does it.
Of the fractured brace:
The shoulder-girdle is this which lies between the head and neck of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of these two methods: as there was a particularly swollen joint in that manner.
And there are two joints in these ligaments, and they extend upwards, and see the malady under that roof; then he breaks his arm so as it lies on the stem, until it bends at the elbow, and puts a wrench of wood onto it, which makes him hold it with any weighty thing or extends it downwards below; and place the break equally in both hands together, so long as the break returns to how it should.
And the other way is that they believe the disease lies within its tendons, and hold the limb by the collarbone, then instruct two assistants to each touch the fracture in both hands while others move it along every ligament, extending it to its respective part.
And if the extraction seems further advanced, then constrain one of the ligaments around the fracture and under it, and extend them with the helpers from different sides; and if the fracture is near the head of the scapula, then he must place a limb within the shoulder socket, and another towards its edge below the fracture; and if the fracture is toward the scapular head, it requires him to gently press with these helpers along the line of labor, ensuring that the break remains level under the body and at the joint's edge. And similarly, he must place the dislocation equally below its location, and restrain it so that no other movement occurs until the displacement returns to how it should be.
And if the dislocation recurs, one should not extend it further than a few years, and place it in an upright position with moistened bandages on both sides and above, until these movements are relieved; then apply pressure again, and the method of applying this extension involves placing the splint on the fracture site, assembling the arm onto the splint, and placing one hand on the shoulder or breastbone (sternum); and put a covering, and press the splint, and the arm, so that the arm is elevated with some support under it, provided no external factors interfere or if there are not movements in the bone.
iveuises:loreffectifiere  sengesseuse
And if you see the seat of the stones, and the stretching, as we have said, when restoring the broken member, and you doubt the incision is hot, let it stay tied for seven days, as we have said; then observe in each three years that no swelling grows near the seat, or the dislocations come to the limb because it is too stiff. If so, if as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur within three years or more, and the pain remains on his back, and in his hands above his stomach; and lay one simple linen cloth evenly over the aid, and observe every hour for two days whether the misaligned joint does not move or become softened, if it occurs by virtue of medicine and gives flesh as we have mentioned before, so that the meat is first slightly broken down; and when starting to recover, if it becomes heavy. And it is customary for the aid and leg to be recovered in forty years each; and therefore you must untie and administer baths and medicines on his skin to soften the joint. And if the tightness is ugly and swollen, let it stay untied for one year or two months.
of the arm breakage (fracture)
The arm consists of two bones called the "double-humped" one (probably referring to the humerus), where one is small and serves as the socket for the pouch (likely a reference to the glenoid cavity in the shoulder joint); while the other is large, situated near the smaller depression; consequently, it can break either the larger or the smaller bone of the arm, sometimes even both together.
When the small bones are fractured, recovery is light and healing; but when the large one is broken, it signifies a severe injury, and more dislocated than if they were jointly disrupted. If only the smaller ones are fractured, then little extension should be done gently, and apply equal pressure to them.
ses dise, ince (1: Cure :en ce morcegas.
And if in the breakage it breaks into pieces, put each piece back to its place, and if there is no displacement of the bone that he holds, and you cannot restore it back to its place, then do so with him and the doctor, as we have said before.
And if there is a wound from the breakage that I mentioned to the individual physician; take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration process it sticks at the incision sites, then apply a piece of cotton made from rose oil and beeswax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and slowly place another piece by subtly lifting until the incision sites are calmed. Then apply the medicine to the powder with plenty of wax, putting on plates, and make the plate for the fracture larger than the others, and ensure it has at least two or more joints: whether the fracture is in one bone or another; and tighten above the fracture rather than elsewhere, and do not move it too much each year, as I have said to the individual physician; and make the cotton around which are moist and soft, neither hard nor rough, and tie the bandage made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And reward the limb and the ligament after a few months. And if any accident occurs to the limb, as when itching comes to a member, then it is required that you warm the limb with hot water until the itching subsides; and let the limb not be kept in a narrow position. Then resume the traction, and if the ligament is weakened and the bone dislocated, as happens in such cases, so address accordingly.
And if the contraction does not come to the member, because it is too stiff, then it requires that you soften a little bit, and let them rest for some days until the contraction corrects itself, and then resume traction.
And if none of these things that we have said do not occur to the patient, then let them rest for as long as twenty years or less; bind the hands to his collar, and make their collars even, and restrict movement and drainage, and lie on their backs; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty years or more, depending on compositions and temperaments of virtues.
Of the fracture of the hand.
Know that on the back of the hand and we rarely see such fractures occur, but there are many times when it is simply a flexion injury.
And if the hand's plantar is fractured or flexed, then it requires that you check for crepitus, and lay him down evenly before him; then put his hand on a stretched out towel, and extend the broken bones so they are level; and apply the emplaster and bandages, if there is no movement of the fractures, then make an ellipse according to its size; and wrap it in one layer of linen.
leuke de laissabe of theorin theplume frome. Iface kills wither itkne theore tokes. Fromage frommeans in a formule, sockle :pourint: Fromage fromles thek: "kisse:esque l'en le:
And if the fracture is in the foot, it must be that you place a stretcher above, and another under the sole of the foot, so that the hands are upright and right, then bind the limb tightly between the two with an unyielding band.
And if the fracture does not belong to one of our two sides, if it is in the pouches, place it so as it must; and tighten with the sole, and when you see a small straight stretranor to elevate the fracture, making sure it does not move; and if the fracture is on the other side, like in the index or one of the others, put it similarly, and bind them all together so that they hold firmly, or place them on an inclined plane, as we do with a pouch; and be vigilant in restoration and positioning at incision, and heed what comes next, as I have said.
of the injured joint
The bone of the joint is often fractured, and we can see it when she turns in front and back; and restoration should involve two supports: one above the fracture and another below it. And the maladies strike his face, then extend each of his bands evenly to its respective place; and it is when the fracture lies within the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the joint, place one band toward the elbow and the others around the fracture; also if it's close to the knee, then position some bands next to the kneecap, and others below the fracture; then apply a splint on the bone evenly in both hands until its natural shape is restored, and then set up the traction apparatus, and the band, so that no complications arise.
And if there are complications, let it calm down first, and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in part method. It is required that you wrap around the fracture with a sturdy double band tied in two or three places above and below; remove the excessively tight, then turn the leg so that the toes are bent at the root of the thigh bone, and place an elevator plank undernee on the thighbone, and put the linen cloths, and tie iselinon entor.
And if it happens, straighten him out and direct that which comes to him, as we have said many times; and if he has pieces of bone in his hand, it must be extracted with effort, so that he can; and if he cannot, then the joint should be cut open, and the bone removed; and treat him as we have said, until he is healthy.
And there has never been a time when the joint was dislocated in such a way that splints were used, as in the shoulder and arm; everything else done for restoration does not affect the patient's severe pain or injury.
And you know that the dislocation is restored within one year or less or more, depending on the various conditions of the individual's constitution.
from the groin area
You know that in the groin area there is sometimes a small tear, but it folds many times; and if it tears, it becomes either a fissure or a puncture, and affects all wounds and injuries, and such sensation is well felt.
And the restoration if it is to put back what should be restored in its place, as long as it can hold itself together; then bind the joint, and put on a rounded support, if you are skilled with it, and tighten it as it must, then provide all the conditions we have mentioned for other fractures and similar appearances; for each incident, that is what should be restored to him, so long as he is healthy.
from the fracture of the leg
You know that in the leg there may be two bones, one called "moustel", and the other "fusil"; and all other injuries it causes as it does to the arm; thus restoration is the same as for the arm, and the operations are the same for each.
And if the two bones are broken together, turn the leg in all directions.
And if the subtle bone is broken, turn it forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and he can see well; and turn around him; then make extension, and put on the same thing; but however, this break must be ugly, and there are several pieces that the extension should be less severe and lighter, according to its nature.
lameinthevellastre formeurrenseunage çoithecournifere ieuche
Of the break of bone so painful
From the ankle there is no break, but the bones of such a painful joint never experience fractures and require only slight pressure; and they do not suffer any more severe displacements or movements.
If the bones of such painful joints break, and you observe these bones jutting out against each other; then place your foot on their lower parts as if they were flying, and lift it onto his side so that the bones are raised, then press down firmly until they return to their original position; then apply an envelope of bandages around them at intervals of .5 inches from the joints, and other things you know how to do.
And after three or four years passed, if you loosen the bandage, you will find that some bones may become even and those which were broken may have healed.
If there are no bones to be broken, then restore them as we have previously discussed for the hand; next place a stretcher according to the length of each side, and make it slightly wider than necessary, and then set up the thin cloth that I mentioned earlier on top of it, apply pressure accordingly; if there are two or three, or more bones to be broken, position a stretcher corresponding to its quantity, enveloped in one piece of linen, place it underneath the cloth covering the joint, and ensure that it is properly aligned above the body.
And it is imperative that you remember the other things we have mentioned about various fractures and accidents; deal with each one accordingly as required.
Of the fracture of the bone at the point of injury
If the bones of a woman'occur, if it is swollen at the back part, then incline her toward the rear, and hold her by the waist; fill the body with cotton as much as an inch thick; then let the cotton come out from within her body until the fracture reforms; and then filling of cotton, forsake for nineteen years or so long.
And when the bone of the shoulder blade is fractured in man or woman, and he restores it as we have said for the bone of the neck; and these new breakages are not hidden from those who study and practice medicine, and understand my book, because the fracture signifies many conditions that lead to recovery: therefore.
In the vein, when it is fractured, take an eel's gullet and insert it into the vein; then wrap it with linen bandages, leaving it for three or four years until he is cured quickly.
In case of fracture with wound
It is required for those who have a fracture with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the shoulder or the joint aid or similar, that they are cured immediately; and this healing proves what we have said before.
And if the wound is clean, if you apply vitriol to it, but if you have no other treatment, then start restoring the fracture in that very hour or the following day, as long as there are no abscesses at its base.
And if abscesses appear at its base, postpone the restoration until a new day, as long as the abscesses are alleviated, and do not attempt to treat it again within one week or three days because you might cause further harmful accidents.
And if the fractured bone is discovered to protrude from underneayer clothing, it's required that you handle and adjust your hands with careful moderation in movement.
And if the extension does not allow for positioning equal to your hands, utilize this instrument made of iron, which measures approximately 1.5 or 2.5 feet long; the extent of its application depends on the size of the wound; therefore, it's necessary that you employ either three or four such instruments as required by each case of bone fracture; and whether it is round or slightly elongated in shape, it should not compress the affected limb during your work.
And it is called "palinque," for the patient's fracture protruding bone is required that the knee joint be placed under the head of the humer. Andresonge of le couleur of the thief, andes tote. La verre the elbow.
And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, if the tool of an appropriate kind for this purpose is available, whether it be a knife or thread, then examine that which is delayed in the bone's hardness and fine cracks.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, you will know that it is not naturally in its place. If it has been restored to its natural position, then pour one liter of black vinegar solution into it properly; and do not put any medication on the wound or oil that could lead to rot and corruption; then dress the bone after removing the skin covering, and cover it completely according to the size of the wound, and warn well that the wound should not be stretched with a break; and many times have done this procedure themselves, causing harm to the patient or leading them to death at any time; and make the dislocation more tender and softer than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large and you doubt that it may not heal, as we have said, then relieve the pain at the bone, but do not put bandages on top of them; instead, wrap tightly around with sturdy cloths, and when after one year or two weeks you see the bowstring recoil from the wound, remove what was applied above it in vinegar and apply a healing ointment to the wounds as we have described for similar treatments.
And you must realign the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is fused and healed.
And make sure that the limbs are separated to some extent as if the bowstring runs smoothly along its length.
And if after a month the patient cannot fuse but returns to being bow-like, realizing that there are small bone fragments, since it is necessary for you to treat the wound with poultice and move all these displaced fragments so as not to cause further pain.
And if an abscess or other form of corruption occurs at the bone's surface, you must treat it according to what is stated in this chapter by the author. And when the bone is broken and protrudes from the joint, as with a kneecap or shoulder screw, and similar occurrences in large limbs, do not treat it; for many times patients die due to such treatment, but leave it until it attempts to heal on its own; perhaps after 20 years or more, then care for the wound if you can. If you cannot, leave it.
fractures that occur due to moisture.
We have often seen the healing of fractures, especially when it is close to the joint, and it is quite astonishing to see the natural form of the limb; and sometimes patients cannot regain their original mobility.
:saint lespointe toun 12. Alautre theures lamejacute tostere de:tere : 12. The French (faire.compreintelligence. Whattejac.
When the bone fracture is restored and afterwards weakened in its limbs subtly, it may happen for many reasons: because one of them was tied too tightly, not as it should be; or because there were too many ties, and could not move freely at all; or due to numerous arrow wounds; or from excessive movements, not necessarily happening within an hour; or because there is not much blood in the heart, making it weak.
And the treatment for this malady involves feeding it properly and making the heart tender until its size is reduced multiple times; and giving it baths to bring joy and pleasure, then apply pitch on the limb so that it attracts the great pain by drawing out the arrows often from waterlogged wood; and restore its natural shape.
A twisted joint following health or recovery
When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bone is broken apart again, and the form of the limb becomes ugly, in no way does it return to its natural work: for we do not believe that there should be a complete breakage of a member at once, nor have many people made such things here; and these works are blamed, and can lead to great harm, perhaps even death. However, if the nods (inflammations) and tortures persist freshly, one must raise the limb in hot water, or cook soft herbs like violet leaves, roots, etc., as medicines do; and make a mild disintegrator, similar to good honey, and take musk of violets, confit with fat from a pig or oil of sesame, and apply the preparation on top; or take figs greased with fines (fines are likely a scribal error) of colon, and grind them as medicinal remedinas to alleviate stiffness.
And there is nevertheless bone injury for constant and prolonged rubbing of the limbs with wet hands. And every hour, make room for movement in the joint.
And if the twisting is aged and hardened as wood, so too, and it needs to be smithed subtly on the blade, and put in his place of treatment:
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation is derived from none of its joints, for it cannot move because of that, and it has misaligned limbs, and feels the patient great pain and significant injury.
When dislocation comes from none, it must now aim to return with targeted attention.
For if it delays, the swelling grows, and perhaps by chance he puts pins on its joints; for there is no reason to move him now that he has grown swollen: many times brought forth rashes and other pains.
However, when this happened, let the sick patient be made lighter, then leave them as long as their pain at the point of incision subsides; next raise the inflamed limb with hot water and oil, then quickly reset it, and attend to each member as they will need in their joint.
And I ordered the chapters of dislocations to be written about these subjects as well.
of jaws
It is rare for the jaws to be dislocated inside and out; the dislocation of both mandibles depends on: or they are a few bones of their teeth, and softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part of the face, and obstructing the saliva from the mouth that it cannot retain, nor close its mouth, and covers its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by various arrangements.
And if it is complete and accomplished, it must be reset hurriedly without targeting.
And in such a manner that the servant cuts the chief of the sick person's beard with one hand on the root of the dislocation inside the mouth where the dislocation is from part .ij., and the other hand defends it, to make it equal; and orders the patient to soften his mandibles, and move them in all parts.
And the master makes it equal, so long as she returns to her joint.
And if the reset is gripped, immediately it are the .ij. mandibles together, with hot water and oil, let them be moved lightly; not to target the returning, as we have said.
Theodre develesse. Etude of ous desgaule morne lesurant surgeaudsis decoitadiexelentures duche.nce:ingledeputy adame en Latin. Isoldesque acreveintraining iton.
And the patient lies heavily on his back, and his teeth are between two fingers, not moving left or right, nor attempting to mix, but rather soft meat, until the pains have eased and the jaws are closed.
And then he cuts what he wants quickly, and does not work to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well closed and healthy.
And if the two teeth cannot be set to point within an hour and are not converted back to their original position, then they may come with familiar fevers and abdominal pains, and sometimes even diarrhea or vomiting all at once.
And when you see that, then you know it is a loss; and many times have died those who experienced it in seven years.
of the forceps (note: this term might be more accurately translated to "instrument" or "tool," given its use in medical contexts)
The instrument cannot raise anything between the sides of it and below, and is never released thereafter, and certainly he feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down heavily on his back, extends his arms, and then presses the wound firmly with your hand, which returns; then places it on the pillow and binds the limb, and straightens.
and the teeth that are towards the side cannot be moved; if they do not move at all, and if they have never been released thereafter, then press it with your hand as we said before, place on the pillow and bind the limb, straighten it, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and at this time we bring back the teeth of the palate when they are displaced from their position.
of shoulder dislocation (note: this is a straightforward translation of a phrase referring to a type of medical condition, not an instruction or action).
You know that the shoulder is not dislocated because of only two manners: one where it displaces part of the arm below the armpit and the other where it moves part above the elbow, and such cases occur rarely.
and not displaced backward due to the shoulder, nor dispersed inside due to nerves; and in most cases it is dislocated down towards the arm, mainly for those who have little strength because she jumps abruptly there; but for those with enough strength, she leaps and returns.
And perhaps it happens to some people with percussions or fractures, and the shoulder swells from an abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
It must then be verified by you as long as you are certain; and then begins the treatment.
And know that dislocations occur when it is pulled towards the arm, and you will find a clear difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and there is evident variety between them. and you will find at the top of the shoulder an indentation, and touch it with your finger as if it were a hernia; and no one can make the painful shoulders return to their position.
and also, since it is unesce que chascunjourneau.
:com espace.  2013 (in the early it isme ions comme le casse laire 5: in thees decait, cose.
And the way is that the ministers love the hand of the patient in high regard, then place your gloves above the wound, and lovingly apply pressure on the joint upwards at the edge; and the ministers love the hand, and extend it upwards, so as to put it above; if there comes suddenly.
And if it does not come as we said in the past days, then it must be that the patient's pain is bathed in warm water; and they are advised to rub softly and soothe, similar to a decoction of honey and fenugreek and melilot in warm water, and they are comforted.
Then they should support the patient's pain on their back, and place a piece of linen evenly over the wound, not too tight nor too rough, then put the rings on the linen, and lovingly treat the head of the shoulder. And take hold of the patient's hand.
And another minister tints the head of the painful area, so that it does not move further downwards; this shoulder returns to its normal state now, and if you see it repositioned according to this manner:
And it is that you make sure there is a person who is bigger than the painful area; and he should be placed by the side of the patient's shoulder, and stretch the linen over the painful area, and lovingly lift the linen so that the painful part hangs down. And other ministers take the patient's hand down towards their abdomen; and if the painful area is too heavy, they do not impose anything on it at all, and the dislocation returns to its normal state now.
And the repositioner also does it in another way: and this is to stick a long piece of wood into the ground, with the shoulder being treated similarly as with an arrow (pestle), neither too large nor too rough. Then it is placed on the painful area but with softer cloth underneath, and the painful area lies long in that manner; then it extends its hand downwards to another part, and the joint returns quickly.
And if it does not return to all these things that we have said: and take ymbreu douns esparte chaundre deffective in the voie of thees peuch.
sse ceceux en laquelle foise (entifere.
And when she is in it, in any way that may be, it must that you place on the shoulder a spindle of wool evenly, then set up the ignite apparatus with powdered mineral, with incense and lamb's wool all over her shoulder and back, then strap the woolen band around the ignite apparatus, and turn the leather straps to the ignite apparatus, and embrace her hand in his collar, and keep their hands moving as such.
And it must be that he massages gently for as long as the limbs are comfortable, because they will heal faster; and then massage more after 2 to 3 weeks or so, and move them around, and if they are firm and not softened, they are healthy.
And if the dislocation is strong because of moisture or for another reason it must be that you administer three punctures to him, as if he were in front of a medical practitioner skilled in cauteries.
And if you do all that and after 2 to 3 years the dislocation does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then you know that the main nerve in the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened; and you realize that the dislocation was never properly fixed.
The dislocation that is closer to the palm or backside, made by a push or extension of hands and administered another treatment line; and take care as long as he remains healthy.
And after recovery comes stiffness to the limb and with movements again he uses his painful hands many times until those stiffnesses have disappeared, and return them to their original nature.
from this dislocation
It is understood that this type of dislocation has been displaced into pockets and then back again; it has been displaced from all parts and especially in front and behind, and the dislocations are not properly repositioned because you can clearly see and feel them; they are displaced according to each case. And when you join the sore shoulder with the healthy one, so that it can be seen openly; because the dislocation is fixed, and it cannot bend his arm or touch his shoulder in any way.
And it is necessary that you reset him immediately after the abscess has opened wide, for if the abscess opens widely, it would be grievous to bring back; and possibly not all can be brought back in one go, especially when it is at the back, more so than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and probably the death of the wound.
And the restoration is when it can be brought back like this, extend your hand to his hands; and let his arms be spread out according to its shape, on both sides, under and above, joining together all parts of the joint or at the root of the palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it comes back when he doubles his hand on his hand, and stretches out from the root of the palm where it has been dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, give it a strong extension; and let two ministers extend his arm and tie them both, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn his arm in one direction, wrap him with a long, wide cloth.
and when the pain at the joint of his hand, he does not oil it in any way to soften the joint, then bind the joint firmly, so that it returns.
and when it is back to its place, put him on a hard bed with woolen coverings, stretch his arm firmly, fasten the limb of the malady, leave it untouched for some days, then remove it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, let it rest there, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then reapply the hard bed and bandage, and leave it for some days so that it is securely fastened, then remove it.
And if he feels gripped after the tightening of the joint, and it moves, then bathe him well and rub softly, press so that it becomes relaxed; or you place a greasy sheepskin on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then let the physician examine it or apply a bath. and when he sweats, regularly rub the joint, replace the sheepskin cover, and then apply a bath; and do this for one or three times until it is healed; if you see him, put a warm wet cloth with lint on his body and stretch the arm firmly. If so, he returns to his normal condition.
The shoulder dislocation
The dislocation of the joint in the hand has occurred and its return is light compared to other joints; it must be brought back to the place immediately when the joint is dislocated, as soon as possible so that his fingers are spread out wide. (Note: This translation appears to follow from an incomplete sentence or topic heading.)
And the restoration is when you place the malady on a table, and extend the ministers' hands, and look at him similarly so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and bind it tightly until it returns. (Note: This translation also seems to be following an incomplete sentence or topic heading.)
n itin. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, he places his painful back on the table, and the doctor puts his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
But if not, then strapping with soothing antiseptics on the wound will prevent it from repeating.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put the dislocation back to its place after any day, then the dislocated joint becomes stiff.
and you cannot deny to the patient that as long as his hands are limp, he cannot stretch anything: therefore you know that nerves or arteries have been cut; if there is no other way worth trying than with cautery near the wound, and perhaps it's not better.
And when the hands are back in place, put on the strapping we have mentioned beforehand, then stretch and let it rest for a few days, then remove it and leave it as is.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no sign of injury, then apply warm water to the area, and rub until it becomes healthy again.
about the dislocation of a hand joint.
There has never been an extraction of the hand joint to any part, not once on the back of the palm or in the abdomen.
because it is the joint, and reset the dislocation in your pockets as long as it returns, then support the head of the hand joint, and place it towards the part where it has come undone.
and let it rest for two days, and then put it back in place; nourish it as we have said before, loosen it day by day, make it move again, and reattach it; do this often until it is straightened.
and also do this if it is extracted from the palm of the hand, just like you did before, until it's healthy again; and also do this if it is extracted from another place.
two dislocations of the shoulder joint.
When the shoulder or neck is dislocated and there are more than one, if there's no treatment, because the patient suffers greatly.
And the signs are that the strappings will fall off by themselves, and he cannot hold them, and many times become loose on any limb, or two fingers or one arm.
And often the shoulder joint moves to four parts; that which moves backwards is called "gilbostitis":
the treatment is that you consider if the gilbostitis came from childhood; otherwise, there's no need for any remedy or healing.
And that which fell down or was hit by blows or similar things, the ancient treatises of healing say with great words, but it doesn't bring much benefit in all.
but I have taken this according to my intention, and formed remedies in various ways.
I say that the gilbostitis comes from the uterus, there is no better medicine or healing.
And also this one that comes directly to two points, and cannot be healed other than the wounds it directly affects in its own right as I have said.
And the pain is so great that it extends down to his face in one level, and puts strain on his body which prevents him from bleeding out.
Then place a firebrand at the head in ground form, and another on the shoulders, and tie a pad around the wounds of the maladies, and another on the thighs, and calves, and ankles.
And he divides the bands, one to the head and the others on the shoulders among the two firebrands.
And they must be tightly fastened, as we have said, and the doctor places his palms on the spine in its proper form until it returns.
And if it does not return with this cure, take a board of two arms long, and clamp it under the part, and place the patient on the board, and then position the headboard beneath the spine, and put the support of the board against the spine. And place the doctor's hands on the other chief of the board, and press well until it returns to its original position; if you see it, make it turn in the hand that turns by itself.
And place two firebrands on the head of the malady with one arm long and others two at the shoulders between each pair of flames, leaving about an inch of space between them.
And in each firebrand place one hole, or if the hand turns it, and fix the firebrands firmly into the ground so they do not move; between each pair of flames there should be a turning firebrand, because as the ropes turn, let there be small flames with about an inch of length to make the turning happen.
And then tie the band that is among the ropes to the headboard's turning mechanism, and the other band to the shoulders' turning mechanism at the other torch; each minister turns his turning mechanism for the entire chain, and the master positions the spine equally as we have said.
And when it is levelled, place a drying agent with an abundance of oil on top, and then the embers, and then a tablecloth of three feet long that covers the area of bruising and healthy part of the spine, and tie it to the band as we have said, and use the patient's grunts subtly until he is sound again.
And if nothing happens at the end of healing, it must be to administer soft and soothing medicines with the tablecloth we have mentioned before; and never do I administer a piece of wood.
And if the appearance appears in the rear part of the spine of the back, and one must take care that it is dislocations; and because the bone comes out, therefore there should be no presumption that death will come.
Dislocations of the hip.
:allit aferment of the English andrevert in the ancienjour. Iiij.illements deaf. Itinerior thek:in theire tithesu frommelet the right nowrere. Allude aye. illegure ofsoule.  iewentir. In the end.
And the knowledge of its dislocation in such a way that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens more of the sick man's joints than the healthy ones, and it cannot double its knee cap by fire. And is the leg that lies behind the incision hot, because it brings forth blood from the hip joint.
And the sign of that person whose blood flows to the wound is such that this accident is contrary to these beforehand.
And the signs of that person whose leg is properly performed according to completion; all this, it does not double its knee cap with pain and if they try to make him move, he cannot beforehand and retains his urine, and swells the angle, and when he goes, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of that person whose leg is behind, it cannot expand its knee cap, double, and that leg is more tightened than the other, and the hip joint is softened, and the hips are at the edge of the flanks.
The return of this kind of dislocation is that it has been there for some time, and it takes place according to its position, and it requires no treatment; and it does not need any assumption.
And in that which the dislocation is fresh, and it consists of four types of dislocation, if you hasten to return the joint, and put them together again at both sides, and cause movement on the right and left side; perhaps it will come back by itself, and there needs no other treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary to prepare one strong minister and hold the leg firmly with two hands or with some fabric that wraps around its knee cap; and others stretch their hands over the joint in such a way that they push their hands against its sides; and some hold the edge of the bandage.
and extend upwards and downwards them all once, so that the sick man remains raised from the ground for one time, and then hangs again.
This method of extension is common to these three types, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it is well done.
If it is not so, then there needs to be a remedy for its appearance. When the dislocation is in its previous position, it is necessary to keep the sick person on his side with their knee bent, place the bandage under the root of the hip joint, and tie it above the hip bone, around the angle, and then the bandage is placed high towards the angle, and towards the force.
and other ministers then surround the big toe of the sick foot, and extend it to this dislocation is less severe: and this manner of dislocation is more delicate than invention.
And if you cannot join them in this manner that we have said, it requires you to bind the two feet of the sick person together with a strong rope under the two heels and thighs, and make the ill leg extended more than the others;
Then hang the patient's head from a beam, and have it hanging for .ij. arms of length; then command your minister to embrace the neck of the sick person, and let another group of ministers hanging with the sick person who embraces form the neck, because now the joint has returned hastily.
And when the dislocations are gone away, if there is pain in them sick person's feet, as we have said in those who suffer with bumpiness, and straighten out a rope under the ill leg itself and also under the foot;
Then put .ij. pricks on the head and .ij. other on the feet of that sick person, then drive a pin between their necks in the form of the embrace; And plant the wet cloths on it so that it does not harm the sick person, then extend each minister towards him and put the pin in equal position with his hand;
If it returns, that's good. But if not, put it on the table and press it as we have said in the case of bumpiness, and alleviate the pain in the sore shoulder.
And when the dislocations are before, it requires extending the sick leg hastily, and according to what I have said; then place your fingers on the pain in the area of the dislocation, press with one hand, and extend the other towards the groin of that person.
And if the dislocations are gone away, it does not require extending the sick person's leg downwards or lifting him up from the ground, but rather that he should be as we have described in our discussion of lying on the ground after a dislocation is resolved. and hang it from his neck as we have said before, and he must press the joint to the table.
3. Est-laisse semblans. Estil estoif theoresenter theorecele it'sisillemente leuillel theque pasiletin:1307658,revel, andmeathejac:entire le4 beforeisexent. 9noun. Icelikejunction.
And let it rest for three years or four, then remove it, and place the plaster on it; and if you see that they are even, strain them as before, and leave it. Three years; then remove it, and let the limb go well, until the members are comfortable.
From the double joint dislocation.
The joints are dislocated according to three methods: inside and out, and behind, and do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it doesn't touch its kneecap, you know that they have been dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit right, extend their leg if they can, and place your back on their knee, and put their hand on your knee.
Then take the joint in your palms, and pull apart your hands, then bend each of the two joints forming the dislocation, and other assistants extend their hand, so that the joint returns to its place, and it shows that the leg is moving towards the knee lightly.
And put the plaster on it, and raise the leg to the knee, and tie the limb firmly for three or four years, then remove it; and do not work the patient until their members are comfortable.
And if the limbs are not at all, with strong extension as we have said in treating hernias, until they are healthy.
From the double heel dislocation.
The heels have never been displaced completely, and inside and out.
And the signs are that the ankle is loose, and try in front of where it has been displaced.
The repositioning should be lightly done with the limb extended when it is loose.
And when it is completely displaced, it must be made so the patient sits right, and only two other assistants by the leg, over the ankle.
Then place your hand on his right foot with one of the assistants, and then again left foot two times, then lift it up well, and push gently the assistant's foot up.
And do this three times as we have said, pushing and lifting the assistant's foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, continue with the operation, because it returns.
And if it cannot return in this way, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fasten firmly a rope between their kneecaps, and cover with sheets so that it does not hurt the patient.
Then tie the assistants' feet, and other assistants extend the assistant's foot to their hands or one of them where it is tied above the neck of the assistant. Then stretch each minister evenly, and the rope should be then between the patient's kneecaps to hold the patient while you extend it.
Then place equal measures of cold on the dislocation in his hands, and use other remedies to heal healthy legs quickly, so that the dislocation will soon return.
And when it is at the point, if you apply emplastrum and bandages on top, make strains with them, and tie the cloth around the leg, and warn those who are above the ankle not to move too much;
Then let it rest for either two or three years, and if the strain improves, then remove it; otherwise, after one to three months, move the patient back home gradually over three years. And if it progresses before this end, it's still not safe as it may dislocate again.
And when an abscess appears in the foot, it must be eased, just as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
In order to.
When the doctors are dislocated (metaphorically speaking), they must still extend their services to laborious work, which is a light matter.
And if the dislocation is in no particular part of its original position, it must be made to lie either on one or two legged support, or entirely resting on an iron table straightened out completely, and place your mat under the joints above those openings, then press down firmly until it regains its position.
And when it is equalized (the dislocation), and there's no opening at all, then place the foot flat on a table with two legs, make strains with them, and let it rest for three years; then remove the support, allowing the patient to recuperate as long as he remains well.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes along with the dislocation, it is treated in order to restore health; many times we see the patient's painful death.
If you are not careful in the treatment, if it is left unused for longtime, and it happens toils.
And use at the beginning of things soothing aims to cauterize, and let the patient hold God in their hand if there is no hope for health. And when you see hope, then straighten the limb back to its place, so that the incision swelling subsides.
And when the limb is misaligned, if you apply soothing cauterization and treat the wound as it requires, using drying ointments.
And if with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones are displaced, then do what we have said in simple diseases.
And keep yourself from falling into fear, according to what I have said, for it brings you closer to your Creator's will, and for the benefit of your health and body. Amen.
