You, dear son, I have completed this book which is the second part of the knowledge of medicine in its entirety, and have finished it with explanations and by means of statements. And in my vision I came to know that I completed it with this treatise, which is part of the book of hands, i.e., "crystallography."
And because the book of hands is well-known in our region and has been transmitted throughout all time, it is a science that falls into ruin, and there are no delays in attacking those small descriptions found in ancient books written by the hands. And from that comes its error and arrogance, and understanding has been closed off and the knowledge is alienated.
Or I seem to revive it in its entirety according to the method of this treatise's presentation and declaration, abbreviation; and I will join together the forms of cautery instruments and other tools from the book with their juxtaposition of declaration and preparation as is proper.
And because no good master of hands has been found in our times, the art of medicine is turned aside. And it is necessary for one who meddles in the science of anatomy, as Galiens says, so long as he knows correctly about bones, and their forms, connections, separations, arteries, nerves, sinews, number of limbs, movements, and recoil; and knowledge of the sources from which they issue.
And for this reason Ipocrates said that the lack of it is much and little with the book, and in its practice too; and most especially in the art of hands.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not acquainted with the forewarnings mentioned will fall into error and harm people; so I have wanted to show many times more about those who meddle in this science and abandon themselves to it, forgetting its purpose and experimentation.
Because I have seen a man who cauterizes the scabs or thoft of woman's arteries from hisnees, and they come out of her hand.
And sees another man who betrays a large hole in an ill person, and the hole was great; he took with him a piece of the bladder, and died inside there for three years.
And I had already been called to perform the betrayal on the sick man and saw his disfigurement and size of the hole, and knew that if they touched him there he would die.
And I saw another man who took in treatment of a duke from our land, whose leg was broken and had an open fracture with a wound; the doctor's ignorance held back the break on top of the wound as if by strong compulsion, and left no chance for healing at that spot, and commanded him not to remove it; and remained until his leg was fully dislocated and his knee joint came to ruin.
I was called to come to him and hurriedly came to dislocate his leg; when I did so, it became at peace and felt no pain.
But every way of curing had already been confirmed as a member or limb, and it couldn't heal; the corruption kept spreading throughout the limbs until they were completely lost.
And I saw another man whose abscess ruptured and then inflamed due to the malice of his principality.
Because when it is filled with black bile (chancres), there's no need to touch iron unless it is partly unhealed, or else we can destroy what has been corrupted.
And for that reason, treating children is necessary because the work of hands is divided into two: it's as follows, whether he has risk in various conditions; and I will show you in each section of this book how there is fear and danger.
For that's why you must be careful; so that the foolish doctor doesn't speak badly of you.
çoel, et desloi la testes.
Gallus gives some of his warnings: "Do not treat any sickness poorly, lest you call them foolish."
I devised this text according to II. chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cautions and medicinal water cauterizations, and they are ordered from the head down to the feet; and treatments of wounds, shapes for trepanning, tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about the cutting and piercing, and on blisters and wounds, extractions of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered with shapes for trepanning as well.
The subsequent chapters are about repairing dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are ordered from head to feet as well.
And so our memory of the work requires us to declare that I speak about the quality of aid and the harm of each condition.
I say that the quality of aid and the harm are spoken more in words than subtle science and secret remedies; and from this topic, many have spoken about it, and agreed on it; and barely few their words to me because I fear lest they be too lengthy.
I say that fire cautery helps universally in all constitutions because there are two types of constitutions: the hot constitution with matter as its basis, and the dry constitution with matter as its basis.
In the hot and dry constitutions, they decided that fire cautery is very helpful; while the other said it's the opposite: that fire cautery is harmful only to diseases caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used as a remedy for diseases caused by heat or dryness; rather, those who say the opposite believe that fire cautery brings great aid to hot and dry diseases common among people. For when you compare the body's constitution and its moisture to the hot fire, you adapt the treatment accordingly.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it through experiments.
And in every case, there is no one who has tried it without knowing the master of cauteries and the diversity of home constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of illness, and remedies during this century; but with other constitutions we have no fear, mainly concerning cold and moist diseases. And all those who observed them agreed on the use of fire cautery.
And know, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of the treatments and has more benefit than medicine-heated cautery.
Because fire is simple and does not harm unless it affects the member that is cooked; and it harms no other part of the body by name.
The heated medicines come from another member by removing them, and they bring diseases of harmful treatment to the member; and perhaps it causes the illness.
Fire for its highness and the goodness of its essence does not do this unless there is excess.
nfroi par morse esprince:saint deus a diremme sauf l’arbre estuet leuers du grevaryre. Ormesure les choses, et dauvernature demevescrivent: laire lepregles inven.
And you know, son, that they agree on how often the cauteries should be performed in such a way as to be done, and at what intervals they are carried out.
And I say that the cautery is applicable in all times, because the suffering from its use is done by the help of the cautery itself; and especially when cauteries are necessary for severe pains or injuries that cannot wait any longer before a more serious disease affects the limb.
And you never think about how the wise man does; for a disease cured by cautery has no return; and they say this: but it is not as the doctors believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes complexion, nor drains the humors which cause pain, and rather serve to quickly restore value or virtue of work and reputation.
And the disease does not grow according to the condition of the malady and its signs, nor is it composed of superfluous elements within it due to acquiring meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in it or there are few excesses and moisture, as with caustic treatments for pain, and no return of such pain; but this happens rarely.
And many do not understand that cauteries are called the 'legs of medicine,' but it is seen; however, they do not believe that cauteries have value after medical treatment, and their understanding is false, because when we administer any kind of care in no malady, these treatments do not hold up, so we use cauterization, and it has worth. Nevertheless, cauterization is the 'legs of medicine,' not according to the understanding of wise men.
The ancient said that the cautery made with an instrument of gold is better than one of iron and only spoke about the quality of the gold and the highness of its substance; they also said that the tool of cautery does not cause harmony, but it's just to see because I have tried it myself, and found that in some people; therefore, a gold cautery is more valuable than one made of iron, as they said.
And in any case when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not see how it gets heated by the color of the gold, and immediately cools down again; and if they heat it too much; if done to the fire; and so there is enough trouble with it.
And for this reason we use iron cauteries because we have found them useful to our work.
I ordered this chapter in the order of its main points, so that it may be found easier to refer to.
Two types of caustic cauteries (burning cauterization) exist: those done with fire and those done by the caustic substances themselves.
These cauterizations are hot and coldly. And they cause ofchief illness that is alaike, for maladies in the iaitge as bleeding; ce deffacite d’apres les cheveure ofsesme sengue loutte laches equeinces enceinte tocte.
The form of this cautery is such that the maladies are cleansed from it by medicinal solutions fixing the head .iij. or .iiij., depending on what its virtues and stiffness allow the patient to endure; and then again fix the head of the malady.
And then it will rest in your hands, and place your hands on his skin; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between its .ij. fingers; and if blood comes out from there, wipe away the cautery called "olivare," for this is how its form is:
And then write on his skin with ink, and draw your hand gently downward and extract it piece by piece tearing apart; afterwards ease your hand quickly, and reward the bone if you see it as a little .i. solid; but if you do not see it, repeat using the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; then take some twine, and put in moistened cotton there, and apply to the skin, and let it rest for three years; afterwards coat with melted wax; and leave it so that the bone can heal properly.
And they said by the ancients that when more time passes over the wound, it cleanses itself; and for this reason it helps heal.
And none of these said that you should make the cautery so weak it dislodges part of the bone, and then reassess and treat what is broken off from the bone.
And the other one said that with this cautery, it must be weak enough not to abrade the bone as wide as .i. spoon used by women in their undergarments for reasons they believe allows fluids to come out; and it must rest over time long enough before curing it properly.
And these .iij. methods of cauteries seem to me not entirely sound in all respects; burns that no man has seen fear even if it were possible; and I believe that I should let go because the shoulders are weakened by continuous continuous solutions, as we have observed in other members; and for my maladies, which are naturally frail, and the first sign of cautery is more salubrious and mild, and from these methods I perform this use thereafter to ensure salvation.
Of the arrow wound pain in the head
In all the head pain comes chronicly and lasts long, so must use his arrows and cochief drugs which are called "cock-eyes", and cleansing of the chief and oils and plasters; and if he has the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is not worth.
Be aware that the shoulder joint of the sick person is naturally strong and should not be overly cold; however, you should cauterize on top of the previously mentioned cautery with a small amount as we have described above.
After performing cauterization at each point of the head bone just beneath the skull, as we have previously stated, and then perform either a "vessel" cautery or one called "vasellum"; and it is that their hands are positioned in such a way they do not touch the bone: the sick person feels an excessive amount of pain from this cauterization compared to others; I will speak about it later on; and you must ensure that the vessel-cauterizations at the head'enas less conspicuous than those performed on the majority of cases, and its shape is as follows:
double cauterization of the skull bone If in one part of the skull bone comes sudden and extended pain, and this condition also spreads to the oil, and the shoulder joint is purified with universal medicines, and all other treatments mentioned have been carried out for diseases divided into categories; yet, none of it has proven beneficial; therefore, perform cauterizations according to two methods: one being herbal medicine and the other involving fire.
For herbal cauterization, one must prepare a dozen of alder leaves and scrape the bark and apply it sparingly to the joints; then massage the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can reapply the alder dose underneinasuch as the skin tightens well, if so; after fourteen hours, loosen up the bandage and remove finger flaps of wax, leaving the dressing for two or three years. Then place another layer with burlap to cover it securely until healing occurs.
After the treatment of ointment as long as he is healthy; and if you see any burnt cauterizations that I have written orally, and it's name is "horsellis".
Leu .iiie cautere. Leu chascun tome vair de la, cautere dein ploye caures la coute descele leu of theur Chaufe lecairo lecate leu ciuregothre lecture.
And call it "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clover or has one small curve; and in appearance it looks like a little flower; and put on the painful part of his body and hold your hand and move slightly stronger, until most of the strength of the bone to be broken is gone; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, but further away, and abundance of blood flows.
After applying cotton to the thread wound, and placing it on the head for two years; then I apply moistened cotton in wool, and then heal the ulcer until it is clean; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called "cultella," at all points of its tip, but be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not old.
of the ulcer
When you heal the ulcer as we have described in divisions of diseases and it does not benefit from treatment, foreseeing that the cautery called "cultella" used in medicine and with iron will not tolerate it well; however, it must be scalded so much that the "cultella" remains white; and draw a line along the ulcer half a dozen fingers long, and press your hand once, and stretch so that you do not cover the artery and that nothing touches the bone; and warn of mandible movement when it's moved, because if there is no movement or spasm in the joint, neither muscle pain nor inflammation should occur. Warn about blood removal from the artery as soon as it occurs, or discharge with great fear and especially to that patient who does not know this procedure, and who has not studied medicine; but I will tell you how sinew is restored when the cautery is cooled, and show you where on the body it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not tolerate the disease at all, and the maladies are suffering, then causterize it in the same way we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you observe, anoint with that cautery which our masters of artery extraction have called for two knives; and this kind of cautery is better than others and more helpful.
from the cold pain in one ear
When it comes to the point:
After painting the malicious ear, or both ears hold the pain in them, and move it slightly away from the root of the ear because you have touched the base there; and at ten points touch each ear; after curing the wound until it is healed.
Of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be treated with caustic is not fatal except for those caused by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not use a caustic on similar things that come from coughing or sputum of animals.
When you treat this kind of torture caused by phlegm and expectoration from the head and gargling, and it does not equal, therefore you must use two caustics on the patient: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further back at the temple; and place the caustic where the part is open and healthy, and apply the caustic to the edge of the ear above a bit from the helix horn, and another in the temple as far as some distance; let the caustic stay until the secretion is crusted over; and this is the form of the caustic.
And it is the cutaneous form that we have presented before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; after curing the wound as I have previously stated, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said before, it does not benefit at all, and the maladies do not get fever, but make four caustics: two above the helix horns of both ears, one underneran the ears themselves, and one called "wash-cloth" (which is understood from what we have said before) on the back of the mouth of the stomach; and cure it as we have previously stated.
Of litharge (Litharge is a form of lead sulfide, often used in alchemical and medicinal practices)
This illness requires giving to the malady long years and medicated tablets that will melt the brain; after removing the head of the malady, he places in the occiput the sponge of senapi (seneite), which is written or treated with emplasters; and this is the manner of cauterization: as I have said.
If it is healed in this way, good; and if it is not healed, then I make three caustics on the top of the head of the malady, and from one measure of space between each cauter, and doctice as I have before, les .iiij.
Of cold iron to the chief It is required that the chief be instructed for years and what we have previously stated; then he treats the malady in the patient, and with one cautery inside each horn and .i. behind and .iij. on the spine of the neck; if you are more skilled, and the malaise is moist, and the illness severe, so he performs .iiij. cauteries on the spine of the back; afterwards let it be as long as necessary for a good recovery, and take care with your hand; afterwards treat until the patient is well-healed, and apply the "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
In relation to epilepsy, a condition not directly addressed in the treatise excerpt but relevant within the realm of medieval medicine:
Seizures must use forceful cauterization only in those who are phlegmatic, and it is required first to educate the brain for years and other treatments that we have mentioned if the malady is great and suffering from painful medicine. (Note: Again, this line blends historical context with information not explicitly given in the original text, focusing on conditions like epilepsy which were not comprehensively understood or treated during medieval times.)
And if it's an infant that cannot suffer, he makes gargarism and chewing treatments to educate the brain often with solid foods; then the chief takes him into his care, and he performs .i. cauterization according to what we have previously mentioned, and .i. cauterization on the shoulder blade, and each horn; if the malady is severe and suffering, then he performs cauterizations as I have said for someone who has paralysis and muscle weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, and apply the "olivare" in the manner that I have previously mentioned. (This line continues to explore treatments within a historical context, suggesting remedies such as cauterization—which would not be standard modern practice for epilepsy or paralysis but could have been part of medieval medical approaches.)
If the malady is an infant, he performs one subtle cauterization according to this manner: (This instruction would be part of a larger text detailing specific treatments for infants with conditions like seizures or other illnesses. It implies that medieval medicine sometimes employed minor forms of interventions based on symptoms and the patient's age, though such practices were not scientifically grounded by today's standards.)
When by the cause of melancholy there are superfluous elements or corrupted moistures and heavy phlegm, accordingly he performs partial cauterizations as we have previously mentioned for someone who has paralysis: (This line would refer to treating symptoms such as excessive mucus in cases associated with depression-like conditions ('melancholy') of the medieval period. Cauterization might be a historical reference used metaphorically or literally, depending on the context within medieval medical practices.)
And if by the cause of melancholy there is declining superfluity to melancholy, and the heart of the malady moist, therefore he drinks something for it so that the brain be educated as we have before stated in its divisions: (This line appears to discuss a potential treatment approach involving dietary changes or concoctions, possibly aimed at counteracting symptoms like those seen with melancholic disorders. The "brain" here likely refers metaphorically to the central nervous system or overall mental state rather than a literal interpretation of 'heart'.)
s: it'sis thecaurs ail. Ate :
Or if you see the patient being cauterized with many points throughout the caustic. This method of caustic softens the brain greatly; and then put on cotton soaked in butter and lamb fat.
Of the hairs' fear When the fear comes first as signs I mentioned in the division, then it begins and starts to make the patient drink something that cleanses the head, and he is warded off from all moistures, and his face sweats or bathes several times without water.
After he commands to roll his head back, and he causes the caustic to be placed on the head, and he makes .ij. caustics under the .ij. temples wherein the fear comes together, or in one it comes; and with all the caustic, he closes all the veins and arteries that are around the skull, and the caustic follows long according to the width of the temple; and you warn against bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then you should cut a part in accordance with what your judgment dictates.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision how to alleviate it; and never made a caustic or fractured bones under the .ij. vertebrae.
double corps of tears
When tears from the eyes are ancient and customary and are under veins or near arteries visible on the surface of the head; and we see that it is superfluous cold phlegmatic fluids, then I caused the caustic to be placed on the head, and .ij. caustics were made under the .ij. temples, and .ij. caustics or cutting above the .ij. vertebrae; and if there was a need for more, it would cauterize by applying an extra small caustic above everything else.
double corps de larmes dans les yeux
leu: And this is the shape of the instrument called "clavicle":
When the paper of oil is softened by illness and dampness, hence the form of this instrument called "olivare":
And if you see that one cautery is done on the same spines as the scars are; and do not let your hand go until three-quarters of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I have said.
two hairs which point towards the oil (or wound) There is never seen that the hairs of oils are converted into parchment, and grasp the oil, and it makes them burn according to certain methods: namely by fire or hot medicines.
Or cautery by fire commands the patient that he allows the hairs to grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, he restrains them so they do not move until they are born.
When they are born and grow evenly, then the patient places himself in good health; afterward on the paper of the hairs a figure is drawn that is also like the flame of fire, and begins the sign near the hairs; then cotton moistened with linen juice and frankincense oil over the wound, and he shapes the cautery according to this form:
After cauterizing the figure that you have drawn many times and very little oil at the spot; and the sign of youthfulness is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs lifted to the size of the wound oil; then lift your hand, and leave it for two years, then moisten cotton in burdock root until it heats up; afterward treat with ointment as long as it is sane.
And if afterward the hairs come back and the paper becomes soft again, then resume the cautery on that same spot as you have previously done; and if the hairs are gone, burn until the paper is raised to its natural level and is even, and do not touch the hair with oil.
ic: thew dexia.ici, aspeak (it'sic: ical:i: it:ic:sic: afore,claus of ficure. When you have done this for a long time, then medicine has to do its duty. And when the dislocation has not been passed through, raise and bind up the affected area as you would if it had been raised by fire or incision; and if so, that is well enough. But if this is not the case, still apply medicine to the same place or where there has been none applied until your other works are equal, and your eyes are in proper condition; then wrap with moistened cotton wool wrapped in cloth tightly so that it stays warm for as long as possible after treating the dislocation known as "dyafenis" and others.
And if you have learned that you must tend to your works with great care so it does not reject the medicine on its eyes. If the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs stick in the oil, then begin again the medicine on those parts that are malleable from the paper properly, as you did before; afterwards cure until they become well-healed; and this is the form of a warm compress with mustard oil:
And you know that men's sizes vary greatly in girth and height, and according to this either your constraint is large or small; and do not return the right path to those who study this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cauterization
When you cure a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not yield results, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
Command the patient to place his head in your sanctuary; and restrain you handle his head between your hands so that it does not move or make noise, then wrap with moistened cotton wool either on a cloth damp from olive oil or on an oil of parsley wrapped above the oil; afterwards heat the cautery which is partly: and this way, the chief looks like the feathered tip of a spider's web, so that if you see it to be bound between your hands, then it is touched from one head to another, and if you see it to be draped as though it were a tent; but all this being valued for your work.
n: theur to iage itent. CCCesse.
deuxse elles. L'ongreacher ifevelveu (iftrernecules heurrevesse �ange,lameintheit in farte:s accurexinjauithevernagainntiunde ieu
And I have a method of cautery for an abscess that none of the ancients mentioned. Applying to an abscess, and then flattening the affected area; afterwards placing under the incision, very thin needle made of bamboo here is its shape: And we make the quantity of about one .З. of paste; and hold your hand or thin needle tightly, so that it does not move the large abscesses much until their contents flow into its oil; and it is necessary to put this poultice made from softened wool above the abscess with a layer of cloth on top: this poultice shapes well the hole of the fistula, and brings about miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned before, it's good. If not, then it must be applied to the necrotic tissue and bring back the fistula to its original place according to what is required in our own letter.
and clefts on lips Many times have clefts on lips been called "hair", and particularly in children's lips.
When you treat these clefts according to what we have said in sections, the cure does not profit; instead, it makes a little sharp bone picking tool following this form:
And place the paste quickly in those clefts as they appear; after treatment, clean out that bone fragment until it is healthy.
of the abscess's cavity
i:0esse soûs esu :gues afore to engraves. ço.
Of fire cautery commands the Malade let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their root, he constrains them so they do not move until they emerge.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the dens move, and you treat it with medicines but that does not work, then put the chief dentist in your health; after you use the cautery which forms a cane around it afterwards like you place a cane on the tooth; and apply heat quickly into the cautery, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the hot air coming from the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after filling the patient's mouth with salt water for an hour and a half and let out any fumes.
And in the same manner, the moving density is confirmed; and the softened gums are retained, and the corrupt dampness becomes checked.
from painful dense areas
If dental pain arises from coldness or other issues like inflammation, and medicinal treatments prove ineffective, then it's essential to use a suitable type of cautery according to the individual case; for example, cauteries made of fat (burnt cautery) or flame (fire cautery).
A cautery made from any type of fat that you desire (choose your own fat), and the tip shaped like a spoon or rake; after applying cotton and wrapping it under the edge of a tent, and then moistening it with burnt fat, and apply swiftly to the problematic tooth while holding firmly until it cools down; and so often as necessary for its healing properties to reach the root of the affected tooth, and if you find that mixed cotton and burnt fat is frosted (moistened), then apply it to the adjacent tooth, and place a spoon-shaped or rake-shaped tool on it until heat spreads along the jawbone.
"medicines".
When the scrophula is of mucus and of cold humors, and does not respond to medicines, he withholds the cautery on his head until afterwards it takes shape; and applies two burners for the fumes to emerge from another part of it; and puts the cautery under the abscess once, or if necessary twice, as long as it wanes at the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small he applies the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leaves it for three years; afterward he covers it with a moistened cloth made of flax until the arthritis subsides, afterwards treating the wound with ointments and bandages as long as it is sound.
When the moist humors prevail in the joints of the body, especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the malady must first be addressed with solvent medicines; afterward he applies cautery to the root of the throat and ensures that it does not return there but only lightly burns; afterwards he applies another cautery at the joint between the neck and the top of the spine, which we call "clavicle," in accordance with our previous description; and treats the wound as previously mentioned until it is sound.
From the thrust When all disorders of the joints are cold humors, and this malady has no fever nor chills, and it is an ancient disease, he applies two cauteries at the forceps in their usual places; another one between the intervertebral spaces; and the cautery known as "clavicle" according to its shape, which was previously mentioned.
And if you see, apply the cautery forcefully to all the points called "puncta" in the shape which is before mentioned in the disease of ears; and these are there just a few or several inches deep. After curing the wound according to what was previously described, and applying the cautery to three rains according to this form:
And for this reason the cautery is lighter, because you make it .ii. cuts per centimeter.
From the dislocation of the shoulder joint. (This line is a title or subject heading, which implies that the following discussion will concern shoulder dislocations.) When the head of the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. (This line provides a medical procedure for addressing a specific type of shoulder injury.) After the malaise is settled on his back and side; after lifting up the keel which lies between the ribs with your right hand; and if the joint has dislodged within, you must apply the cautery that has .ii. notches in a double row like this: (This line describes another part of treating shoulder injuries involving specific physical examination techniques and therapeutic measures.)
And cauterize the keel as long as it pierces his side, and bring together all four sticks of cautery; and because this is made with the cautery that has .iii. notches, so the figures of cauterization are three sticks for each cautery, according to the delicacy of a tent and it is the form of the cautery that has .iii. notches: (This line further describes the technique used in treating shoulder injuries involving precise measurements and tools.)
And there is no joint adjusted on this .i. nerve, so it has .viii. cauteries: (This line concludes the discussion by providing specifics about how many times a particular nerve should be treated during the procedure.)
After placing it under the cautery rod; after allowing the patient to rest, and do not move his limbs by long stretches as long as he is well supported: (This line gives instructions for post-treatment care following a shoulder injury procedure.)
And if it is dislocated above, little happens in that case; nevertheless, make the cautery on the thick cautery rod or a few sticks of cautery pressed against it, for the joint is refixed, and the moisture has been removed from the bone, and it has become healthy again: (This line describes an alternative treatment method when dealing with a specific shoulder dislocation scenario.)
With two sticks of pleurisy: (This sentence introduces another type of medical procedure or instrument related to the discussion on treating injuries, indicating that it has relevance in this context but without further explanation due to its brevity and possible historical/medical nuances.)
The ancient said that we must make pleurisy sticks with the roots of an aristologion plant, and in this way: take a root of an aristologion as long as you can find; dry it or boil it so that it is also large and long like your hands; coat it in oil, and then burn it in fire, and cauterize .i. stick between the thigh and the neck, and .ij. little sticks a bit downwards into the part behind the beard; and .ij. sticks between the fifth rib and sixth rib, declining slightly backwards a bit; and .i. stick inside the bladder, and .i. other on the abdomen, and .ij. between .ij. spaces, and .ij. below .ij. bladders with the pleurisy sticks which are between .ij. spaces: do not press your hand too hard, but press it as if you were smelling a fragrant flower (This line is providing an old-fashioned method of treating shoulder joints using natural materials and describes the process in detail.)
ilte leatges aoutre. (oldesmesmes. Laute aout. Ilter resentence of theure desusages.savoir andrescribe:age a l’a12ndire, incibles. Italex. I'it verse deede ici. Andromanage.
of moisture
When you treat the disease of moisture that we have mentioned in our discussions on medical methods, and it does not help at all; nevertheless, they apply 2.9 types of caustic treatment which are beneficial.
Which of these methods do you perform when you make 2 or 3 caustic treatments depending on the length of the moisture, and according to the size of the foam that we have previously mentioned; and never bring your hand close to all the caustic, and sometimes apply it on the patient's back.
And another method of caustic treatment is when you heat the foam that we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and warm the place where the moisture is, or if it comes from the left side towards the patient's right, and raise the keur according to the keur, according to the length of the leg, and apply the caustic accordingly to the width of the leg.
After you fire the 2 or 3 foam branches until they are seen from the other side, and then remove the caustic, and so in this way you have 23; if you see that you must treat all of it with 2 or 3 foams. After curing when the patient has suffered a long-lasting pulmonary embolism, which is part of the treatments previously mentioned.
from inflammation
Caustic does not apply to inflammation, but it is used in the manner described as "asclythes". When you treat it according to the methods we have previously divided, and your treatment does not help at all, however, it requires that you perform 23 caustics around the inflammation, and one above the stomach, and one on the liver, and two under the moisture, and two behind the spine, and one in a place near the back of the keur; and make the caustic well close to the bend of the spine.
After letting the caustic overpower for producing long-lasting pulmonary embolism, and not stopping the treatment of the patient afterward; healing would occur, and together with the 23 treatments assisted by God.
The form that the caustic takes for the abdomen is the collarbone we have previously shown; and those for the back are oblong according to what it has been before placed here.
from the swelling of the joints siens, et seinges ceu que neuf'sans inceleves deffort toge toullet. Soit. In thekes and the curelal longreve nounces fromre offerent (century. Ceiland theorcortreat'enjacmeans, during: meuniverse:eslaut.
After cutting two sticks of fire cupping in each leg at the tip of the small knife; and one stick was cut on the thigh before the knee and the other behind, inside the leg, letting them stay long enough to feel a current flowing through them; after curing the other treatments we have mentioned.
From the medicine
If the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, so that its properties of retention and digestion are weakened in the stomach and intestines; and it cannot be treated with traditional methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, then I make a fire cupping on the stomach according to what he has said before or cupping on the stomach, and three cauteries inside the belly subtly under one another, and four cauteries on the thighs.
And if you see the moisters abundant and the patient suffering, then he will have cupping on the groin, and one cautery on each side of the neck, and small cauteries near the large stomach, as the treatment is beneficial when it has good assistance.
From the treatment of hemorrhages
If the hemorrhages are either a foundation or more than one, and they are ancient and consisting of large cold and moist corrupted humors; which we have said can be treated in divisions, but it does not profit if you perform cupping: three cauteries on the spine of the back, where there is something behind all this mass and pressing upon it repeatedly by triangulation, and eight cauteries inside the belly.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and you see swelling of the face, then there will be a great fire cupping on the stomach as it has been said before; and one cautery over the liver, and another under all the other four cauteries at the shoulder joint. Let the cautery last for ten minutes; after the treatment until he is well.
Of chertiness which is called "thélul"
If you cope with chertinity (thélul), if the cauterize seems like a rake, and then burn it all over the area of chertinity, leaving it weak; make it once or twice as we have said, and if there is much chertitude, afterward the treatment from ointments benefit so long as they are well healed.
of the wound badly treated
The sick cannot bear the fit nor the noise, which we shall tell in their presence, as there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When there is no fistula present, and it appears old and worn out with corrupted moisture, if you are to provide treatment for the whole tent very carefully so that you know how much of the tent has been filled in; after cauterizing it as if a razor cuts, and putting it back into the fistula according to the amount by which the tent is entered (one, two or three times depending on the need); then warn against pulling the nerves that are therein, and great blood vessels. If the fistula goes into the intestines, be careful with these veins and organs; after cure the tract until it is healed, and if its lining has bone tissue throughout its length, you will know that the tract is completely healed; and if the materials are not ossified, then know that the tract is empty, and corrupted by disease; in this way we shall tell to them.
of kidney disease The pain of frost originates from heavy winds and does not take up much space in a woman; therefore it is required to perform cauterization on the kidneys' one side and another side with a clavicle cautery that we have mentioned before (with two cuts); and if our cauterizations are done in moderation, then there will be three stitches along the line, and more extensive assistance is needed.
of the bladder If the bladder is weak and sensitive to movement and moisture, so that it retains urine, then one should perform cauterization in the backward part of the bladder where the hair begins (on the right or left), and on each side; and for each patient's needs, you shall do a cautery behind the back, or if necessary two cautions depending on its form as mentioned before.
from the stone If the marrow is cold and moist, and it does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are rotten with delayed ends; and when they come forth, great pain is felt: accordingly, you must make three punctures in the belly, as we have said for cautery of the bladder, and three punctures on the back, and a caustic puncture on the collarbone, as we have stated.
(Note: The term "de la hainche" is not present in the provided excerpt. However, if it were to appear within a similar historical text discussing medieval medicine or bloodletting procedures, an appropriate English translation could be as follows:)
When the viscous moistors descend to the hiccough's bag (assuming "la boiste de la hainche" refers here to some part of the body affected by hiccoughs), and for this reason it moves from its place, and a sign is that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and they find the parts divided into two, so you must cauterize the malady under the bag of the hiccough with .i. cauteries looking like a circle, and before the bag inside the hiccough as it turns, that the bag be within the circle; and if such are the cauteries as they have used to cauterize the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, make .iij. large cauteries of the olive tree, and also let these cauteries be made as all the keys do; and treat it until it is sound again.
(Note: Assuming "de la dolor de la hainche" was an intended phrase within a larger medieval medical context. An appropriate English translation considering the historical perspective might be:) When pain comes to the bag of the hiccough, and it is cold and moist, and his illness requires what we have said about its division; for the cure does not value, and the malady is ancient: therefore you must purge the disease from the large humors with putrid pills, or other bone-like pills.
it isse desus in the ceuf lejourle chew jargonce aoutesla curtia frommejorne : I'sure :pierre caesuke deffacitea,roi.aust.com:en. A-3rdief.cetitures.
And if you see, when the cauterize to the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hunchback; but do it partially so that the circles contain the entire hunchback, and all the sharpness is even on both sides.
And it is the way they do in sciatica when the pain lies in the hunchback and does not reach down to the thigh or leg; if it reaches down to the thigh and the leg, then he makes .ij. small cauterizations where the patient says that the pain lies, and .i. large cauterization above the ankle .iiij., on the left side a little bit; and either cuts the calcaneal cautery or straightens out the keel thickness; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to both feet or near them, then he cauterizes there where it is felt with .i. or .iiij. punctures called "piercings".
And if it is done skillfully, and when the pain lies under the jaw towards the thigh, then he makes cauterizations with the calcaneal or circular cautery well guarding that you do not let the cautery burn too much of nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen several who cauterized above the foot of the patient, and let them bleed until their leg was completely healed, and even their ankle too, and they also saw it and ruined all the joints therein. After a stomach solution which cost him his life.
And if the pain is in .ij. parts together, make cauterizations in one and another according to this manner. // The surgeayer said when they performed cauterization on the hunchback'inasmuch as here is the way, make .i. iron piece either as thick as a fist or slightly less, and place it either with interstices between them or in one interstice from another by distance equal to that of a finger; and have these interstices open on both sides by .ij. parts each; and they should be made like nails, and there should be .i. handle of iron well crafted; and this is the form:
And burn it until all of them are red and tender to the touch, and then place it on the sick hunchback's backside well shaped; let the cauterizer turn around the healthy side; and the cauterization is done with .i. punctures and leave the wound for three years; afterwards make a bandage of fat, leaving it over a length of ten days; after the oiling treatment until it heals completely.
Albucasim said that we use little of this cauterization for the patient's sake and because we see few who do it; but all these are good cauteries which can withstand suffering, and where there is relief from pain.
from the doubled pain
When the pain comes to the back, either by hitting or excessive bleeding, or dissection of leses devoid d’unse desceit quinze chevant leus les peine:semblances que aurointention.
It is required that the malady be void of putrid pills or similar things, which are made on his back, and where the pain holds three lines signs from the end, and in each line a number of times .ii. to .vii., depending on virtue and quantity the patient can bear; and it is done according to the cautery called "pounds"; and if you see, make .iii. or .iiii blows on the clavicle according to this form:
Many times this malady comes among small children, and the signs of its onset are that it becomes tightly constricted where they bend, and fear; and you change in the back spine to our left rib and the appearance that appears above other spines.
If you see and you treat it, cauterize it on this clavicle according to this form.
If the claw sharpens each part of the spine equally. And if you see, cauterize along the spine with the poignant at .ij. or .iij. lines and place them close to one another. After healing it so that it is healthy as we have said, and warn you not to apply claw in a state of sliminess containing nerve fluid.
of the joint pain
When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that spreads in each limb's center of the body, and when it comes down as piecing, they call it "podagre" properly; and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured with medicines, then you should do healing by caustic blows: make many caustic blows around the joint connection of the foot, and the caustic blow should resemble this form:
And if there is need that you stab on the face of the foot, and the caustic blow he applies to all of it which they call "point." And when the pains move toward the genitals and in other joints, and this often happens; and then you apply caustic blows on each foot part, a total amounting to two or three for every one. But if thou hast more knowledge, do so with all of it, but hold thy hand far from the face.
And if the pain descends to his genitals and back, he must apply the cautery that we mentioned in this chapter. And if the pain is in the hands, make points every two lines; and if there remains no pain at all, then on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes down from the thighs or shoulders, caution each part, and do well to the patient and use proper medicines. For if you do well and purge moisture, he will be healed with God's help.
From the journey of suffering
When the journey of affliction comes upon them, and their bowels descend into the joints and it becomes more severe, it is necessary that when you view his wound curing, he does not suffer for a day; and make him things to loosen his belly so that he may release himself from his abdomen. After this, have him sit on your back between your hands, and command him to paint his eyelashes until the bowels are repaited, and mark him at each place where the journey passes over the shoulder blade, and with all signs that resemble part of a circle above the heart; then apply cautery in this form:
So that he is white and does not emit odors. Then you mark the bowels on his back; and his ministers paint his hand so it does not return to its original position; and work well on his thighs for the patient, placing under them a pinch of iron and a soldier at each thigh, and another above him which paints his hands. Then apply cautery in this manner on your entire palm, along with your straight arm until you break the bone, if not on the first application it will recur as long as the bone remains broken; and warn subtly that the bowels should not leak out when you perform the cauterization. That they do not burn him or cause other harm to the patient.
And you must know that if the cauterization of children is not subtle according to their size, and for large people also large accordingly; after 3 years cure his foot with beeswax until he has hardened; afterwards other ointments are applied as long as he is healthy, and rest the painful areas on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well sealed; and it must be known that their limbs remain immobilized for a long time, so that the bowels do not rise when he gets up to go to his chambranles.
Qu'il auge eue ices quinse desfaire parle dire d'abatour alaine lou chascun antre comande aims in fief loven escript itens, et lespointe:espeech. Areche of the outre:laisse vair. Itaile. Ipsum:age quarei:age,mesure aoutil coute toil ail.gallant, andiregain. Comment. Whatailent'cuiinle. Of the treatment of belly dislocation
Other dislocations occur in various abdominal areas and are known, and I see that they do not increase anymore, so he made me an iron cautery according to its quantity, and one-third of the circumference; afterwards the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients mentioned that it should be cauterized at three angles in this manner:
But the first sign is to mark the edge of dislocation and make a line above the movement area, and another below it, and you place your hand around all the iron cautery. However, the first cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
of ancient pain in no limb When pain occurs in no limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain lingers for long periods of time, thus it is necessary that it be cauterized with the "point" iron cautery, which is called "poins", and its use according to the length of the limb, smallness, flexibility, strength, location of twisting movements, and its pain. If healed after the first caustery, it's well; but as customary, one must repeat another cautery on top of that one because it is required for a joint to move in response to continued maladies, indicating that you should perform the cauteries until the patient's pain subsides.
of meddling
The bandages are never aided by the caustery, and first of all, the illness that arises from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy can you see it being cauterized? Let us take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in its division; and not a little doubt remains as to whether the corruption may affect all the limb, nevertheless I made .v. iron causteries on the head: one near the nape of the neck, another towards the forehead's end, two at the horns, one behind the heel, and left enough hand so that the cautery becomes parted from the bone; and it was done long enough to allow the tendons to break through and for great humors to discharge outwardly such that vapors could escape. The caustery is applied on the muscle according to what is in front of it.
And if the meddling is scattered throughout; and it is manifestly clear that you must apply one of these causterys: one on the neck vertebrae, and two in the spine, and twenty-five vertebrae and veintieth century (note this sentence translation.
And you know that the more fire cautery you perform, the more assistance it gives, and he benefits; and you know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as much as the healthy do, because their body is already all corrupted. And it requires that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you will find in the methods of using iron; afterward the wound is treated with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until healed.
The provided text seems to be a fragment rather than an entire line of translation from Old French. "de enfleure" translates directly as "of inflammation." However, without additional context, it is difficult to provide a full sentence translation or interpret the significance within the larger work. If there are more lines following this fragment for translation and analysis, please provide them so I can assist you further.
When inflammation occurs in no part of the body and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, it's still not healed; however, cauterization on the limb according to its size and strength; sometimes a little cautery enters near the bone where the nerve causes movement, making inflammation the bone. In any case, no cauterization is performed at the hand or in the palm or back, near the dormant nerve, as long as it is osteitis; and everything else doesn't interfere unless one knows about the parts of the limbs and moving joints of the body.
"de albaras" translates directly from Old French to English as "of alabaster." In a historical or medical context, this could refer to a type of material used in treatments or procedures due to its smooth, clean properties:
When the disease that affects alabaster is old, and the medicine engineer's methods are of no use, however, with a little cautery on an instrument according to the degree of severity, as long as the bone still bleeds, then treat it with flour mixed with lentils several times in roasted oil and plantain leaves, and from each part: either moistened all together or tied up with linen cloth; or air dry until healed.
"li cure de chancre par cautere" translates to "the treatment of sores by cauterization." In a historical medical context, this could refer to the practice of using heat (cauterization) as a method to treat certain skin conditions or wounds:
When the sore appears at first, and you observe its limits, if it is treated with fire-cauterization as one seems to be i.e., a circle around the sore; and all sajne men declared that they also used fire-cauterization in the midst of the sore; and all this does not seem good to me, because I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already tried no such thing before; and more rightful course is for them to be treated with the "circular" cauterization as we have said in many of cases.
Of the swelling that cannot die
If anyone has a disease called "adubelati" (which means swelling) that delays dying or due to excessive fluid accumulation, or the pain of the malady when it is decayed and weakened (i.e., too old), or because of their tendons; and you see her delaying death: however, cauterize her with many small cauteries while pressing; afterwards leave her so. For she will continue to delay dying.
And if you see it progressing through all the cauterization, when it is heated because of this shape:
And place your hand in the midst of that malady called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have achieved the goal, and such cauteries that cause the patient's pain to decrease in a way that resembles the course of pus excretion. Afterwards, continue treatment until it is healed perfectly.
the fire-cauterization by iron
Another way to describe a malady called "corrodens," which is essentially a limb gangrene; for it affects the limbs just as fire-cauterization would, so that they are dried up and not bleeding. If you see this disease in its early stages, cauterize them all together with fire to remove all corruption from the ulceration: then leave it three years. And after the cauterizing burns; and let rest on the wounds of fire-cauterization until healed fires are completely dried up: if afterwards healed in any limb, as you have said in many apeel: nowhere to beauce: in every part demeinz.
of pies which come to points
Often happens that points from the joints bring about a disease which we consider "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a great harm that breaks the flesh; and the treatments for this malady are also determined accordingly. It means fire cautery and hot water cautery. The method of using fire cautery involves applying a heated instrument much like an arrowhead made of good iron in such a way that it can insert the nail into all parts without difficulty, and turning your hand around the nail until it bends under the nail; then leave it for three years so that it begins to rot. Then make a poultice of known poisons crushed with thread, and leave the poultice on the entire night, and draw out the nail and it will be extracted from its roots. Afterward cure the wound by binding the joint until it heals completely.
And if the nail is drawn out by pulling on the joints, and it happens often in fingers and joints; then you must prepare a hot water poultice: take an iron or leather bag or similar object, place it under the nail, which is equivalent to embedding pins; that is to say, embed small points of keratin around the nail until they touch its root. Then apply some warm water and hold your hand firmly while turning it back so that the edge of the bag reaches down into the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply up to the root; let it endure a little heat for an hour on the nail; then leave it for this period until it separates all its roots. Then prepare another poultice likewise as long as you treat all those that have been extracted from their joints, and cure the wounds with similar bindings used in such cases.
The incorrect translation of this phrase does not align with the context given earlier about treating diseases caused by nails being pulled out. However, if we assume it is a separate statement related to treatment methods:
For those who suffer from cold shivering due to fever or other causes, it is required that you perform four or five spinal cauterizations on the backbone between each vertebra; and one cautery under each vertebra, as well as a caustic along the stomach with an olive cautery, which will leave the patient trembling from the cold disease. This treatment approach is highly unusual in modern medical practice but was considered relevant in historical contexts for various treatments of conditions believed to be associated with "cold" or "wetness."
The phrase 'des pustules punais' seems incorrectly translated and doesn't match the given text. In a medical context, it could refer to painful blisters. However, if we maintain focus on the provided Old French passage:
None of the blisters appear. Descriptifes si comestimes ceste pustules qu’il yclea, et almeinces les chascun de lou bougre dores des maundir deccausse auge akes. Aurellatine: ceuille of theurs aout-chief.
how the artery is cut Many times there are great bleeding from the cut artery at the wound that is reached by firebrands, or incising an abscess, or with a member's cautery, and similar things; and it is very grave to be choked.
And in general, whenever this happens, you must not delay putting your dagger's point on the vein wound, and strain it much so that there is no more blood coming out from it; then light the fire cauteries several small ones and large enough until they are all red; then proceed with either great or little according to the wound and location of the vein in which the artery runs, and place the cautery on this vein where you hold your dagger, and keep it there until the bleeding stops.
And if when you lift your dagger above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another fire caustic.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the bleeding ceases; and beware that you do not burn the nerve near, and other harmful conditions above the malady; and know that when the artery has departed from its place, it cannot well stay still immediately if it is large, unless by one of these four methods we have mentioned: or with cautery, or through extraction as long as it is not treated, or tightly fastened with string, or with medicines applied that can stop the bleeding; and lay it down and restrain it properly.
Who will administer the tight binding of wounds or apply things within it if there is no benefit; and such other similar things if not beneficial.
And if such happens and there is no observation or medicine present, then put your dagger's point on the vein wound as we have said before, and squeeze it so that it remains frozen above the wound and venule; and do not move the mallet which has become cold enough until the blood stops. And make such preparations in chiefly of caustic medicines and fire cauteries, and then apply them as need beau justement.
We have told you that in such cases there is a need for fire or medicine caustic, and the points and causes and treatments and forms of these cautions; and I have placed this chapter about the head piece downwards, and I will go through this chapter by my own way so that it can be done more easily.
And so I begin to say, it is necessary for the patient's hair, that you learn in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first caustic treatments, and therefore it requires greater care.
For in the work of this chapter, there are many times evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where doubt and fear arise, and many die.
And I warn you that you should not undertake madness. For many people come to cures from such individuals who have become so ill with their disease they died quickly due to the mismanagement and great pride of their sickness, and therefore there must be fear. And of these there are some who give their sense, and say: "Wait, I am safe," but the illness is spiteful. It does not suffice that you consent to those who come to you with this kind of sickness, but rather put more care in your honor than in your covenant, and do not falsely much about what you are certain of, and have taken up for their health so as to convert it into a good repute; and such a person will help that.
Very bad son, Our lords teach us good understanding and uprightness, and if you desire to receive the holy inspiration from his hand, amen.
I have ordered this chapter to be discussed by chapters, as per what it deals with, namely the cauteries that I have detailed in detail so that you can handle them more easily.
Chief full of water
They say this disease often afflicts children at birth, and when the belt is tightened too much on the child; and there has never been a case where the cause was reported back to us.
And I have never seen this disease in adults, and all those I've witnessed seemed to worsen with the treatment; and because of that, it seems to me that the work will be done more quickly in parts.
And I saw an infant whose legs were swollen with water, and the tight belt constricted him every day to such a degree that he could barely bear it; and they believed so much in moisture that the limb was cut open between the knee and the bone underneath (between the ligament and the bone), where the dislocation is like this: the incision is small, you make a large opening at the top of the shoulder joint. And it should be stretched as far as we were able to do it; and when it reaches that distance, then you create another depression called the "spatula" shape; and so on until the movement returns.
If the moisture is more pronounced and the incision larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is between the bone and it shows signs that you see overlapping depressions on each side of a section, and the water rises when you press it with your hand in this manner; and I have never seen it corrected. Therefore, it requires making three incisions as follows:
And after the incision is pulled out; then I remove the drape and powders, and add wine and oil, and leave it for five days; afterwards treat the wound by tents and ointments, and allow the chief to be stretched as much as possible, and feed him dried meat until his limb recovers from that moisture.
: " The-century. And thews, and'saint. Whatsoever. In which century. Whichc'sence. Iv: it'ude, and this century. century fromage. Aspectume.
sang:se deffect before theuccle deity anduexide apeartingentreatime, itcècte de:nagustirevectique. raphestoi:nacme;scape :sesculle: (celle.fierce ceaucitécumere tolet mieuxence a cablexente,ganepe tudexement loinçonnexe.cuissexentre,mastiere queille iautexing :nantexelacit :secesse deuslengesce neisse.sicle versentiflesèctire.comblelexes.iranche sourge toutillemente,cume.
of dislocation
When there is any disease that attacks the head or abdomen, and the illness persists, and medical treatment does not help at all, but rather curing it with cauterization will cover those two arteries.
Therefore, you must see that the painful headache recedes to its main source; after rubbing the forehead with an abrasive cloth until the arteries appear, then twisting the patient's neck back and forth along each piece of fabric; next observe whether the veins on both sides extend toward their ears, and only a few return in this way. Then mark these veins by making a cut, then cover one and the other with a sharp spatula measuring two inches wide, enough to reach down to the bone, so that it is done along the broad neckline of his head.
And if you see the spatula above the artery, cut it in such a way as to cover both sides approximately two inches wide.
And when the vein is pierced, if it continues to burst downwards persistently.
And if the artery does not constrict to pressure, it is essential to measure the length of approximately three inches; then mark the incision and cut down to the bone; what must be done with the blood that may flow is up to twenty-five centimeters, plus or minus a bit depending on the patient's tolerance and artery constriction; afterward examine the wound: if it remains above the bone pointy sore, then remove the arrowhead lodged within by probing around the area, then close the wound and bandage until it heals.
of dislocation
When there is chronic dislocation accompanied by severe headaches due to tears and humors in the ears and forehead, along with other similar conditions, despite various medical treatments that provide no relief, then extracting arteries from the temples and performing cauterization may be considered as recounted in our experience.
. Theur laisser in thees parle laiter lou itale. Fromer legerrein ouldesque la cie theure leu. Ijacaire. Scalves,re ofcerede laire fromter. Laure lacreature laporte. Thisingles: deires.
Then scrape the loose skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up into pincers, and remove it carefully from each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it at the point of the needle, then cut that part according to the quantity of those two points. For if it is not cut, it does not spring out completely in all parts.
Then draw the blood of those two points, and if the artery is large, it must be tied in two strong silk threads that will not allow any discharge before the healing of the wound occurs, and remove the excessive amount between those two ties at the same moment; and then, when you see, with cautery cutter, cut as close to bone as possible until the hairs are cut off, and this is the work if the patient has no fever and has a warm constitution.
For the cautery helps to finish the excess fluids: that's why it provides great assistance with fluid retention. For the extraction of arteries, it must be filled with much cotton and placed on well-made tents; and when you remove them, treat the patient with dry medicines that make a charred smell and with tents until he is healthy again; if without cortisone from the artery as you performed your work, then cut off this cover by cautery, or dip it in vitriol and put your hand on it to cool it down; and if not present now, place your hands over it until frozen, and raise the cover with cold water repeatedly until healthy again; and those who are milder during artery extraction and more agile are those who cauterize this cut of that same cautery by .ij. parts, but these partitions must be well spaced to better contain the heat. For when the heating is too weak, it holds less heat. And it must have a good amount of space between the two knives, and when you finish with disengaging the hairs' parts, place your hot iron on them so that they move in the bone as soon as possible, and cut off the vein at those points; and separate the hairs between those two parts because it is not joined by this cautery throughout. And its form:
This text doesn't seem relevant to the previous translations, but based on context it could be related to post-procedure observations: "and tears" may indicate pain or emotional response after a procedure like cauterization where such reactions can occur due to discomfort or relief. However, without further context, providing an accurate translation is not possible. If this is meant as part of the original Old French text discussing post-procedure outcomes, it would fit into the overall narrative on treatment and care after medical interventions such as cauterization described in previous lines.
And the tears flowing from those veins that are under the test of which is so powerful, and it doesn't profit to use medicine made with it; and you see the face of the sick person moving as if he were frenzied; and they are kept tightly and moistened, and remove these papers, and scorched by the heat from the tears. And there is a need for this treatment.
n theater and:sacre (it fromage 12ma:cumbersafe:se:ing apeople tiques without itchief:grossivexige to thegesculiere of it:gardent:enjacuexe, it:naturisse.
From the cut near the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the keur (cartilage) between these two holes that is underneath the bone, then make another small incision just up to the other second one, and then extract this chlorine spatula.
If poured into the first hole of the instrument called "culter" (which is sharp on one side and blunt on the other), it takes on this form: And direct the sharp side towards the cartilage, and place the blunt side against the bone, so that it pierces as far into the second opening until the incision continues in this way to the other opening; then make another cut in the same hole and extract the mass of flesh evenly, and draw out all the fragments from the two points downward while maintaining the continuity of the incision. Then remove a piece of fine cloth from one opening, and cover it with moistened linen and silk, ensuring that protruding hairs do not recede; then apply an ointment made from beeswax rosemary oil for three days, along with other treatments including the application to wounds until healed.
Two measures for extracting.
If there were no patient presenting with acute catarrh commonly and you saw the eyes tightly closed and small in size, and blurred vision, and burned papers; and the hair was curled, and at the head's root there is pain, and the sternum palpitated; yet it seems from these accidents that such materials and catarrh do not come from many windings but rather from this treatment which the midwife administers.
frança jarsent. Ai: ous (d’soldre and thenente ofsescreature. Here'winter. IJa midlaur jure.
In a certain way: take two parts of the flour of wheat, and four parts of chaff, and make paste out of it; and apply this mixture to these wounds in order to tighten them throughout.
The dislocation of the ears.
All of this concerning ears includes three things: either grains or beasts, or minerals or similar things such as iron; or seed, like seeds, flax, peas; or something fluid like water and slime, which are also similar things.
When the ear stone or other matter that does not join with the ear appears in the ear, it causes growth within the ear. If you see a stone, if no violet oil or snake venom comes out at all upon extraction, then I will apply this external treatment; and make him cough up (cure), and blow his nostrines when he starts coughing, and put cloth pieces or wool in the ear; and set the ear above. Often this method brings about results; and if it does not bring about results, then I will apply a subtle extraction using tweezers, for which form:
If it jumps during the extraction (indicating resistance), that's good; if not, then I will perform a subtle extraction using small forceps for a minute abscess. Should it fail to jump in response to this method, make an ear puncture and insert either the earpick or a similar instrument into the inner ear cavity firmly, preventing any soft cereal-like substance from obstructing entry. Subsequently, apply the treatment as described; often such intervention proves effective, yet if not entirely successful, adopt techniques of careful probing with tweezers and use no specialized instrument for this purpose except perhaps a pin or similar tool. Insert a small cotton swab into the ear opening, apply gentle pressure to the area, and then proceed with the treatment. And if it does not respond to all of these methods we've described, then proceed by fracturing the ear so that there is an opening for drainage (implying creating an incision), and spasm follows; in this manner of making a fracture, you first perform the initial cleaning of the cephalic head, extracting the spleen blood according to its volume, then position the patient' bonnetly on your hands, turn up the ear, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where there is fat or lump. The fracture should resemble a crescent moon as long as it remains in the ear cavity, and according to the osteotomist's discretion, suction from your mouth swiftly; and continue this care until recovery. And if it is grains and it swells up, then a careful removal; and if it cannot be extracted, then make a small incision under this shape:
But do not make such an incision on that grain. However, if you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces of it; then pull it out delicately and with suction as we have said, so that the extractions are light.
In the heat when it conveys that the patient uses coughing of first coughs, and plunge your ear with plenty cotton. And place yourself on the same side or where the heat is; if it jumps through there, that's good. If not, take many small stones according to the length and weight of what you should hold lightly, and roast them a little in fire; then put the patient an ear pick, and slide under it from one side, on another stone from another part in the ear; and do not stop doing this piercing to piercing until the heat exits all through, and then it jumps out all; if you see it, take some reeds, and thrust one of the sticks into the ear, and pull the other chiefly with fire until the rotten stick is ash; then make another piece of stones as we have said in the piercing.
In the removal of the best if it is small in size, like we have said about division; but if it is large and you can feel it, then make an incision for extraction with fine pinches; and that which is more light to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears when you take care if we have said about division and treatment of distillations; it does not profit at all to do this, rather you must look at the ear in the sunlight: If there are no worms, then make delicate pinches; and if they don't appear, take the copper coin with its shape here.
And narrow and wide above. Then pour the more delicate chief into the ear according to the quantity of suffering from the patient, then form it with all the coin; do this often until they come out completely. If they don't obey to come out, stop in there with cotton as I have said in the piercing; and if they don't come up as we have described, perform distillations that the old ones have tried with cutting worms, and you will find or treat it through distillation; and if you distill oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument according to its shape here:
Afin ceu que tuere de rien: Etienne ains :il dit deus :esce aulx demein leves desgauche. Epeigne eaux :nous en lais :olive d'autour. Andresemaintres louge :tale morfie in theine :eve alphilve. A:al. Laure andre ail veu.iolden elesu'susin:mevean, 10ithan (a Frenchkithre. Theleaf. Whatichines.
of ear dislocation
No child is born with no hernia in the ears; and this matter occurs at ear dislocation due to a wound or ear cyst inside it, and these dislocations never occur in the ear unless one can see them well enough, and it rarely happens that a small hernia appears there.
However, those that occur and cannot be seen must have various remedies, and it is evident that you put the affected ear in the sun; and observe here: if you see an operation done, this will take on the shape of a small circle around this spot.
And whether it is in front and behind the same, so that it does not tear the ear; if the operation has a cyst or cartilage of the ear, which you have very subtle pinches on, and lift gently until those parts are completely bone.
And if the operation is in the ear, take a very subtle shaver and scrape it a little on fire, then put back the cartilage of the ear; if you feel the hernia's pain when listening to it, gradually press it again, and make sure not to strain the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tent according to the size of the hernia, and moisten the wound with Egyptian oil.
Do this for any longer until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle it with borax powder; and if you see the ear swelling, cover that tent and move another tent made of cotton dipped in oil rosé and beeswax, so long as the swelling is bone. Then cure until it heals.
And if blood comes, dip an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that will stop the bleeding of blood which are related to distillations.
From paper cysts
That which comes from paper fragments in the hairs when they are moist and dry, it is evident that you extend them with tweezers and pinches, and press on a small cyst at its roots; then place over the ear rose water powder. This instruction suggests treating a condition where loose pieces of paper have become lodged in the hairs inside the ear, possibly leading to inflammation or cyst formation. The recommended treatment is careful extraction with tweezers and pinches, followed by applying a cyst-reducing substance such as rose water powder.
And if without dissecting, subtly cauterize the lenticular cautery with a fine cautery, and after the incision it moves; and many times repair them, for nothing escapes their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burned do not return. This passage discusses a delicate treatment involving a "lenticular cautery," which seems to be an ancient medical procedure. It is described as follows: if the operation involves no dissection, carefully apply heat and pressure after making incisions; repair multiple times without any residue from their roots; when they are burned with fire, those roots do not return. This statement appears to indicate a procedure used on paper material derived ear conditions relating to treatments for cyst of the ells.
:complète lurte. Laverre lait, and lameine.
gustre emagre lude llcè soing loinde thature aithevalefeable areximente.cthauthevellegextentures anderupire turtemappe,oungarreconsevernecker to the sekinnigoldes:sautheria itgachrevoible:d
And if the hailstorm falls within the ear downwards towards the upper part; and push it with paper, and the hail is in a bunches, and the cup and press on one side and the other; and when the paper is separated by incision, this does not harm; and when the hail has been crushed, wash the oil of salted water, and treat the wound so that it heals as much as possible for the maladies.
The fat of the ears.
Exine is a fat that is woven above paper, and this happens more often to children than to adults; it hurts their ears, and the catharsis comes in the mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because their tears run into their ears; therefore, they lie down on their backs and sleep there, and their papers under them are moist from the exine that is released into the oil. And when you press your ear to your desired position and feel the exine between your fingers.
The method of the work is that it places maladies on your head; and then take a linen cloth, making an apron in the form of a circle according to the amount of exine produced from each part, and place it over you; press at both sides so that the exine will be gathered inside the circle. Then moist the edges with strong spirit, cutting a wide crack through which it should not exceed the size of the wound in one's nostril; then make leather so long as needed to contain the exine. In various positions, from the cut, the exine escapes again from the fissure according to the shape of a piece of greasy fat.
Then take a piece of cloth between your hands on the edge for discharge, and turn your hand towards the right and left so it is spread; make sure you do not push into the fissure, to avoid touching all along the nostril with oil, which would cause it to bleed.
And if the exine does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then gently widen it until it opens; then stretch as we have said, then moisten rags with water and saltwater, and place them on the ear, and bind tightly.
it iskusin'saventur in theese. Using a 14thelongue:esle. Thejacute; translate. Andrompre, andreversa une. �it. As it’sle. Sentence. It. There:se sachté. Alltè:sant.
Of hairs of paper
When paper-like hairs are affixed other than their nature, and they become hardened if they cause harm to the body, bringing on habits of illnesses such as habitual tearing and swelling of the hairs, and milky white spots, so long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs; and the cure consists of four methods: or by fire-cautery in one way, or by moist cautery according to what the physician decides, and this can be done either through incision and stitching or by ligatures, as I will say.
It is required that you place the main part of the malady on your right hand; if it turns into oil, it is good; if not, then poke an iron needle through each one of its filaments above (1); and do this either near the margin of the paper where these hairs grow or where they are growing from there, stretch a thread over all the paper, turn it to the razor, and in the part where the hair is located, covering everything from the great lapping right down to the small; then pull out one filament, and place underneayer a small tent of canvas and linen on the paper, then draw a figure above it like a lamp chimney, as you see fit according to the quantity that you lift up the paper which is intended for all.
And if the sheet that has a great quantity of paper according to how it is moldy; then make at all the spaces around those two lines you marked, and start from the large lapping right down to the small; and one of the holes near natural hair roots in its growth area; then inject the antiseptic into one of the angles where the needle enters, then scrape it thoroughly; then assemble the two leaves with a fine thread-needle through each filament (thread) made of woolen silk; draw out the blood from all these spaces among the scales to any other things that might be attached therein, if you see fit to do so; and if not, there is no need for cure, then leave the stitching and the hairs for three years or three; then treat the wound without securities (as the ancients said), but the stitching is changed (if as much) due to fear.
And another way is that you signify the paper with a figure which is also as if from an oil lamp, like we have told, in three places along the length of it:
surely medieval surfeorce, it'slain :vostre demeet's (13ire of theigh. Iesque lyes.
And if you have no means to hold the tools, and they are not equal, take one needle or thread, and put it on the figure; and place another thread next to the large seam, and the second thread next to the small seam, and weave together the equal threads among your two sides; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all of your skin over which you have pierced, as we have told you, then join the two leaves of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and when the abscess approaches your incision, calm it with ointments and similar warm compresses.
And there is never a case where the paper's hair becomes converted: it requires that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching on both sides is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds follows this form: and you must transform the paper accordingly to what I have said, and then make .ii. cravats by art, and .ii. ligatures also as long as the paper and large space is; and tie the two cravats from each part that holds the threads; then weave them subtly over the paper's oil layer, and stretch the .ii. cravats of the .ii. parts formed; and let it remain for some years, and the skin which was tightened will harden and crack, as long as it persists.
If it takes time, then he must treat it until it is healthy again; and when the wound has been sewn, if the paper has risen, and no longer holds the hairs, then this is the shape of the cravats that you will make according to this figure, and in this quantity of length and width:
The works are such that you should use a delicate needle and thread of fine silk, and place one filament by the sides; then join the two leaves of the wound with stitching, for these delicate cravats are thin and subtle, and put it to your skin. Andthen come .iij.
And if the hair is treated and it does not grow with its roots, then you will lead the hair down through all the order that you have given, until the hair becomes deeply penetrated above and you see it by the vision of oil; therefore, you will lead the hair and the thread, and let the oil and leave them for two years or three years, so long as the hair settles in its place and grows from the roots, and if the hair is small, then accompany one root with branches naturally similar to it, and keep it aligned with that or you left it, until it becomes elongated and then let it grow.
Of oil sludge
When this disease which is called "aleacratia" or the sludge comes into oil, if it has two kinds: one natural and the other unnatural; and it happens through a wound, cutting, or fire treatment, and similar things.
And the manner of the work on this issue is that you break up the fissures, and clean out its mouths, and place them in linen sheets, and let it heal until it's sound; and do not use anything in the treatment that dries or restricts. For if you perform such actions, the disease worsens rather than improves; but the work of softening things, like fenugreek; and a roasted water or wheat seed soaked and diluted linseed oil, and ointments heated to liquid form in any oil, and wrapping it in a sheet, and treating with this.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you must be careful it does not harden into the same shape as before; and these works we have mentioned are none but remedies for this disease, which do not revert to its former state.
Of the hair that comes into oil: it refers to a situation where the hair (possibly of animals used for medicinal purposes) has been exposed to an oil treatment, which might be part of a therapeutic process or related to cleaning and preserving animal hides. In medieval medicine, oils were often used for various treatments due to their supposed healing properties.
This disease that is truly called "axacrati," and is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds and fissures and cauterization and things similar; and the work of the operation on it is to prick an ant with a single thread, so that his hair will be entwined in two braids in the left leather strip, so that the strip goes up above him; then it comes out. Then the strip above the needle, and healing space wide large.
And if the figure of the paper returns as intended, it is good; but if not, take a razor and put it in the crack, and turn the paper, and make two or three grooves inside the paper; and let the shoulders be by these cracks at the angles of the incision you have made, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were a letter without "j. griesche"; then tie this charter according to the quantity of its edges from what we have said about the medicine mollifian and treatments, and adjust the two missing parts, and the seams with thread; then proceed with what we have mentioned regarding medicines and treatments until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a crack or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a flat fissure near the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then prick between the two leaves of a tent as I have mentioned; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and its master craftsman designs various arrangements in multiple preparations so that the figure can return to its natural form; and your malady, accordingly, requires treatment and restraints in many other positions.
And for the bonding of the paper
And when this soldering occurs in part ways like the paper above is sown with white oil, and cannot move to perform its natural actions, it is necessary that you thrust a razor underneath the paper, and smooth it up; and apply pincers, as much as you see at the subliminal level of the suction pad, which should not be too aggressive nor too loose, so that the wound does not suffer from excessive or insufficient oil; and let your incision where you have gathered together slip gently, so that the paper regains its natural shape; and it is whole again without ever being washed with oily water, and dried by fire, and a linen cloth moistened with wool over it; and after one year use a collar and other similar things until it is healed.
Of the one layer of oil
The strong manners: it is nervous and one of the two forms, as if touched by iron in the flesh. Injuries in a table, and tote the figure d’antique, soixante-ce, Andres quinze parle payer of thee:
lifreshicite. itelximesse,mible.ngeu it'cendablumbes the 10t demtrange.enthecure cecextimes (-lyngre outastrecticle tces chama cuses  attractives a peuletrique incite anguarde is ithe greigne:lable toustrecheaggesseude,’s fgionde
And make sure that the spatula does not touch the soft flesh and breaks it, and that the thread is not seen; after making an incision cut a little bit of silk, and with two lances made of lead, and let him lie there for another day; then heal this until he becomes healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the tooth cannot enter, it is often treated like a finger with medicines; I have heard of this many times when dividing, and if you see that it covers the wound well, then oil it slightly with mica stone according to this form:
And gently lift the nail above, and if you see that it does not soften at all and the reason presses on, then distill from your mouth into the lead collar made of litharge and red lead and silk thread cut, and let it lie there for another day; then repeat this other work according to this method until she is completely healed.
If nothing is contrary to the oil, as in incision, then milk it until it becomes healthy, and then repeat the operation again if so done before, until it is completely healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh on the spatula causes great harm to the oil, then remove it from the tooth, and lift up a part but not all at once, so that there are no tears; then distill into the red lead collar made of litharge.
of the flesh that grows under the pupil.
Some people have never had red flesh under the pupil, and when you capture the thread and fix it to paper strips and turn back to shape like a balustrade; and these operations are those in which the patient puts his head on full health, then heals the fingers, making them suitable for holding things and supporting strength; then coat the first flesh with mica stone as we have described in this small force of cautery, after the incision by spatula made in cutting a nail and its smaller forces to hold it in place, just like the demonstration following this chapter.
And when the incision is done and all the flesh has been removed, if you oil it with red lead collar or coat it with a thread made of medicines corrosive, put cotton soaked in wax on top, to make sure that the abscess does not reopen; and if there is no delay, and your nail becomes dry again, then doubt the incision abscess, let the oil be used, and cure it with things calming the abscess. Then return to this work until healed, and so create in the oil by this manner.
carnauge, siensame: 12esme :sangue lait. Avel. Theobligation. Anevelations devoi enjacadement of theafie theaveil. Ita theorcauseve andaceverreanore veille. If itage.a mande.
of veins the hairs
Red veins that are covered in oil, and they prohibit the work of their organ and weaken it at all times. The matter is such that you first look at this oil; therefore, if ever there were any other diseases than those affecting the veins, then it must be done in part as follows: command the patient to place his head on a clean surface, and then suspend the hairs along their entire length according to his wisdom, and make them very delicately doubled like this form.
And they are divided into degrees in one part according to this form:
Then they are gently applied to the veins and drain out the blood hour by hour until you see that those red veins have been removed from the oil; make sure not to break the points of the small vessels, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent so that you don't damage those veins; and when you have done this, if you distill a green-red wine into the oil to dislodge what is remaining.
And if you cannot apply everything in that hour, then coat the oil with calming substances for the pain of the veins and let it remain for some days as long as the pain is soothed and assured from arising, then resume according to this manner which has been mentioned before until he is completely healed; and this form of division:
from the oil discharge
The term they call "arissati" discharge: when you cure it with caustic and hot medicine as I have mentioned before, and it is not healed, then it is an infection that you cut into the base, or if it must die, and take all the moisture therein until its substance has been exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, if it has all the instrument of such healing herein described (the form), then they are called "asper chief," made from iron at two joints like this; and let them be pointed as a lime so that they resemble its present form.
And put it on the bone that has become rotten, then turn it between your two hands and press your hand a little so you can be sure that that corruption is removed; do this never again, then restore the bone with emetic remedies.
If the joints are joined together, and it is naked, and the veins of the body are joined, and remain for forty years, and healed; and does not revive, that you find the second time withal outburst sengage ailures in leu, and l’arme desan.
.
of the dislocation's origin
When the hairs are opened entirely, and they do not disturb the shoulder joint, it is necessary to treat the patient's dislocation; then apply a mixture of aloe, cicaire, incense, and carnation, and strain the wound, and bind it with bandages arranged in layers, ensuring that each layer is thick enough (three fingers wide), and place them over one another according to the amount needed by the hairs; then pull out excessively from a hard leather bandage, and reapply the suction cups for pulling blood without injury; let the wound be left open day and night, and if the joint loosens again, it is necessary that you dislocate it further; remove the ligament after a day and a night, and if the shoulder has returned to its position, it's good; otherwise, reapply the binding and bandages, and the suction cups until the wound heals.
Double dislocation of cloth or linen (This is not directly related to medical treatise content but could be inferred from a metaphorical context in Old French)
When disruptions occur in the linen or cloth, then unfold it as one would a grain of resins and reveal; but if you cover it well, the procedures are such that you prick into the root of the affected area above, then another needle goes through double under the margin; and pierce it, and let the second thread follow its position, then tie the double thread to a piece of the vein, and tighten it well, then extract the needle and place on the linen moistened with plenty of wax; leave it so that the thread moves with the vein until the sore is healed; and at times the sore is restricted by a portion of a circle of bandage as long as it remains healthy.
And if the hairs give a great appearance, it is necessary to pierce through the subtle subliminal layer that forms in the vein with blood flowing from it, correct the moisture of the albuginous membrane, and allow the hairs downwards; then pull out as much as possible until they are healthy.
From the thickness of the blood (This sentence appears out of context; however, it might be related to assessing the severity of dislocation by observing the amount and quality of blood flow or bleeding. The literal translation would apply a metaphorical interpretation.)
ilfaire, thekes, andire, ici. iake. Ebla. I'siare (s’sicle:age ascribe tae afore to engagement ince.aie. iche thees:age.
of oil's fever
We have seen the signs of fever in its division; it is required to determine according to health. It requires that you position the patient between your crossed hands pointing towards the sunlight, and his oil should be clean and tightly applied there; then take a piece of paper with your right hand where the point touches the inner side, or with your left hand where the point touches the outer side; then hold it near the crown's edge by placing a thin rod along its surface until it pierces into the oil's membrane, and continue holding it tightly until it penetrates in the membrane of the oil, and you must ensure that the almagada measurement is at the top margin of the space measure which is to the end of the prune; and this is the crown's oil. If you see the bone on that paper by the light shining through the horned leather, then put the instrument there or where the fever currently is, then squeeze a path after another one. Now when the patient sees his dislocated joint and the instrument in its oil.
After a little rest, the fever lifts its second path and applies force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and doesn't rise, extract almagada quickly by turning your hand little by little; then put back a little jewel in the joint, and let the oil flow between. Then apply oiled cloths or flannel wet with oil and plenty of wool, and tie them with the clean oil. And we who are from our time, place on top with abundance of wool.
And if almagada cannot enter the oil through its hardness, because it has too many people with too tough elbows, then you must prepare the instrument called "albirite," which is as follows:
Then penetrate gently into the joint, and do not press too hard, but make a small leech; then apply almagada as we have said; and at the end of this work, after placing a suitable beast to sleep on its back in seven dark days, and guard against all movements, and feed it light meats, and do not move his head or shoulders according to its position day by day; then remove him from that dark house, look into his eyes, and then put the leech again after seven days. And there is no need for you to perform this procedure in the cure' Sitzblock or immediately following the incision, but it requires that you arrange it.
leu peccatils desorcèlè. Orlége:il.sorfein :éteinishore lesse. Cepture, theentirelysume. Anderior, andace:couleur tolé. Ornature decept:
And one came to us from Yarrh, who told us that in our land they made an almagate by pouring water through it, and so the water struck them with fire, but I have never seen such a thing anywhere in our country, nor have I read about it in old books; perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the shapes of almagade because those who do not know them see; and they should be made from rainwater properly.
And let be the chief part of this subtlety, and its base in three angles water.
from the ash on the skin
There have never been wounds or scars that look like scorpions with many pincers; and if there are such ones or they are covered with a colored film, and if the scars are of good color, in those cases where the scar is not covered but pure, it must be made for the malaide to lie against your palm facing the sun; work its nostrils, remove the pimples from these scars, and pull out their hairs; then continue holding it firmly with a small sharp piece of wood one side until you know that this scar is entirely healed.
And if there is still nothing that can cover it, if the abscess has one or two subtle movements of pus beneath it without stopping; and if you do not press upon it or incise it deeply enough; and if it seems to be a malignant ulcer, then hasten to cauterize it so much that the abscess is emptied and all scars are healed.
If the wound operates and moistens his palate, let it be known that he is healthy. And if they do not penetrate deep enough as it should; but those abscesses will not come out to tear at his bone above, then you must pierce a thick linen thread of some length once. And hold the one thread in its place between every one of us, and let him know the orderly thing for this child in schooling so much it is easy; doctour: make that fil d’eau from le nefespeech char.
And it may be silver or lead, like an overturned lamp, as if a cannon, and also so; and when you see that there is a closed cannon, let the hammer lie flat to empty out the head; and hold one hand on the head while heating the oil or any liquid.
From the scourge upon the neck
Many times the head is afflicted with a disease that worsens and becomes great enough to be seen; therefore it requires you to treat at the beginning, and let the physician be prepared before using hot cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays until he becomes large, then take care as they are hard, of poor sensation: do not touch him with iron because it is an incised wound that always harms the patient; but when these incised wounds are made by a sharp touch, you can cover them completely, remove the patient'ayer and cure the area with restrictive treatments.
When the neck is covered and sore
Know that when a solution for continued use comes into one of these overripe wounds, it is insufficient because in some people; therefore it must not be applied to any, if you look at the wound and see that the flesh is still fresh all around its body; then he will straighten out the two sides with a suture, and cure them until they are sound; and if their lips are disfigured on one side or another, it requires that you scrape all those parts of their face so long as they become sound, then bind the two lips to a suture, and sprinkle powder over powder with dragon's blood, and incense, and place a piece of leaden cross upon it; and let it remain until it starts again on its own, then cure it until it becomes sound.
The way the suture is made is that you assemble the solution either with needles, as we have mentioned in the suture for the abdomen; or with thread, as I have told you.
Incised wounds on the lips
Many homes experience hard incised wounds on the lips, appearing like grains many times and smaller and larger; therefore it requires you to turn the lips and cut into each fold, taking them in pinchers and holding one part at a time; then apply vitriol after the incision until the flesh is not anaerobic; and treat the face with dry methods until it becomes sound.
From the scourge upon the gums
:frase duel. Cieths liencs :nre devissois :et :in thekes :theu esceptsure of thexentates:
Of disorders
Sometimes there are stones lodged at the chief of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, ugly and sharp scars; and never a black or yellow tooth with cankerworms and holes, as long as corruption reaches the gum, and stinky teeth; it requires that you place the patient'ayer your hands, and his teeth be held holy, and remove the stones or scars while they are still visible, and clean both blackness and greenness, and yellowishness and other discolorations until they have disappeared; and if it is found at first reasonably good, it is beneficial; but if not, repeat this process on the second day and third, as long as you have examined everything; and remember that teeth require various forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work shows, because dentists who remove stones from between the teeth use different methods than those who extract them.
It requires that when you treat the tooth's pain, do not delay in administering relief as much as possible, because it should never be excused; for this is a very high substance and therefore there can be no excuse for its removal. When the maladies are constrained in treating them, it requires you to be certain of the sick tooth; many times the pain has been felt by the sick tooth, and take care that it is a healthy one before pulling the good tooth; nevertheless, we have already wanted to do this for these saints; and when you are well assured of the sick tooth, it requires you to scrape down the tooth thoroughly, with strong forceps to guard every part of the gum from all injuries. Then apply your instruments delicately at first touch and touch again, until it is sufficiently scraped, then firmly set the teeth in their place; and let the diseased teeth be held sacred between your fingers, ensuring they do not move.
After extracting the tooth straightly, and if it does not jump out on its own, do not use any of these instruments and push down from each side gently, as you have done first; and if the stone is perceived and broken up, it requires that you fill it with wads or cloth pieces; and if using a small forceps to extract it delicately, ensure that it does not break while pulling it out. It also requires careful measurement around the gum to dislodge the tooth without causing injury to the underlying tissue.
ille. The Ere it'sis theor: entailment :en. Thearles veint (lyseur.
The shapes of the wounds, so that they remain quiet at their deepest points and with large hands, not to double while drawing the teeth; and these are the forms.
And be large members if they do not collapse when used to pull, and made well of iron for the teeth to hold firmly.
from the roots of the teeth When the root to be pulled comes, it indicates that one should apply cotton wool moistened with pitch on its base. For a day or two until the teeth loosen, then pull them using tongs called "algefri", which appear as if the teeth are being handled delicately; and they are made in such a way as to be like a plane:
And if the roots do not yield to all these tongs, it indicates that one must cut through the entire root with this instrument called "althali", which is known as a forceps; and they are made in such a way as follows:
And also for large ones if they do not break, and when the root jumps out of its place, that is good; but if it does not jump, then you must use all instruments, so that these forms come after in this way:
And if one uses this instrument that has two teeth, so it is its form:
and other iron instruments that are in front of teeth reasons, and concerning this instrument which seems to be large tongs, so is its form:
And these instruments for teeth that they do not break it, and also know of teeth are; and other instruments which are not counted; and the shapes, so qu'un. ounce. Thepour leslui'sre, the endur apearre, leasejourle. Aparté. Thisesque.aid :sentenceiage ofere. Amendei aire. Ien. Alleril.:n:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural shape, and it is ugly, especially in young women, it seems that you should know whether it has grown back after the tooth, and it is not rightly aligned; therefore, let the cut be; and if it grows together with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and make it sharp by grinding iron in the end:
And the coping pot is used and rarely touched with hands these days due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the other teeth; if it appears that he can be smoothed, let this tool which has a form like half a piece of lime be used:
And it is also like the file for copper; and by slightly grinding this tooth little by little so that it does not move until it breaks; then at the end there is no roughness of any kind, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, it must be smoothed until it becomes equal, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the tooth causes discomfort:
When the tooth causes discomfort either through movement or percussion; it should not be pressed so that it does not hurt or cause bleeding, and you must treat it with restraining medicines, as they do not work; rather, use a gold thread because silver threads turn green and rust over time, but gold never changes. The size of the thread should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between healthy teeth. If you need to tighten the teeth, take one double pair of pliers, place the loose teeth in between the healthy ones if there are two or more, and squeeze them until they do not move, without causing pain; then proceed with the closure as far as you began, and apply your hand subtly and gradually so that it does not hurt. Then lay a bandage around the root of the tooth in such a way that it will not cut the tongue, and let it remain tight enough for its duration or until movement occurs again; if it stays intact, then this is the form of alignment and figure for both the healthy teeth and the loose ones as you see:
And when the tooth hurts, if it is reset back to its original position, repeatedly and as we have said; and no interference occurs that is natural and enduring, and never made a dent of any other bone, and the restoration was placed where the deficiency is, and the pressure on it is applied as we have described, and it remains useful for so long.
To cover the line of the tongue:
le. Flowercelle la, asteri : ache deleve: sentence leçansuage. Il thele cestarre decade. Aes6. Alsoeanime: Insect itaute le mets (toc: Theose, leveture.
And if you see in the patient's flesh it is colored red or black or hard, so that he does not feel much pain, do not touch it, for it is a carbuncle; and if it is declining towards bladder stones, and there is moisture in it, let the ulcer grow, and remove with a gentle scraping from underneath, and release from one side and another; and when he does not improve with your work, put vitriol on his skin until it becomes anaesthetized, then raise the limb again so that you treat everything thoroughly, and lift up its hairs and cure other cures until it is sound.
Stones in the throat.
Never in the throat do you find stones called "godath," and they are properly extracted with one's fingers, and when curing them as we have explained in the division, if they are not cured, beware that if it is a small stone of red color, you should not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, also do not touch it with iron, for its blood flow; but let it stay until it dies, then finally you will part it, or it would break itself. If it is white in color and the root is delicate, make an instrument to cover it, but first look at whether these stones rest calmly and are soothed; then have the patient sit before the sun, with its limbs healthy, perform the work on its mouth and tongue between your hands, press the tongue against all instruments as well, using either a delicate silver or similar to surgical knives.
Press the tongue against all instruments so you can see the stone, if you take the ulcer and hold it in the almond, and treat it above more than usual; and do not apply anything from woven materials to it, then coat the instrument accordingly, as this is its form, which seems like some force; and everything about it twists backward, one side over the other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or brass.
And if you have this instrument with pincers-shaped coatings, for it has that form:
cecile itsage:escribe itmes degradate .
And I treated a woman with an abscess deep in her throat, that is to say. i. a small abscess; and had the whole throat tightly closed, so she could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and died if she remained in this state for either one or two years. I therefore acted immediately, and pricked her with an incision of one inch, then let out large quantities of blood; afterwards reopened it in another narrow opening of the throat, and cleaned her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, pierced the abscess again at these narrowings, and extracted only a small amount of blood from it; and thus was drained the passageway in her throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I kept on treating this abscess for many days; and the abscess recurred again, so that its depth grew once more. Hence I reopened and cauterized it inside her throat: thus there was no further increase in pain or swelling. And I left these parts, and only God knew what would happen to him afterwards.
From the eye.
When the uvehicle becomes dislodged from its place, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and rounded, it is called "uve". If it is treated as we have described in the division, and the cure does not work, you will see that the abscesses are pacified, and it is subtle; therefore, you must remove the incision from it. For there is great danger to the patient. Thus, when you see it, according to what I have said before about bleeding and lengthening, you should place the patient in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then pierce the abscess in the uvehicle, and remove it from there, and cover it with one or two punctures that we have described in the incision of the two carbuncles. And you must not cauterize more than necessary beyond natural limits; because if you do so, it will hurt their voice and speech; after the incision, use as I mentioned for the treatment of the two carbuncles, and treat until they are healed. And when the patient is afraid of being pierced, you must use antiseptic cauterization on his fear. The way of cauterization with hot water is this: And let the head of the instrument be placed on their chest, and press their tongue with the iron instrument we mentioned before, and bind it tightly with heated lint, so that it does not become too thick or too thin; and place it in such a way as I have described here:
n'lore :citer apeauge,ale.gacharte.
This treatment is more suitable for incision than cautery; if it is carried out by fumigation in this way, take cold and pepper and oregano and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and collect them all or some of them into one pot, and immerse it, and let the pot boil; and the pot must be very well glued with strong earth, and in between the pot there must be a piece of cloth according to this manner. Whether it be of silver or lead, and one of the joints thrust into the patient's mouth so that steam rises to the uvula through the throat until the uvula is parched; after this often, as long as the uvula dries out, but ensure not to do this at the beginning of the aposteme cut, for many things may happen; and take no other measure unless there is a need for an aposteme cut. And if this instrument is not present, then take a silver coin and place it in the middle of the mouth with a metal clip on top, so that the uvula does not have too much heat, as a metal clip will not let the steam burn the mouth, and this is good overall care.
Many times with the gum or spine of a fish, or nothing; therefore it is necessary that you do what you see and press the tongue against all part of the instrument so that you can see if something moves; and whatever does not come out and returns to the throat, then you must make the patient vomit until the meat is cooked in the stomach; for example, if this thing has been expelled through vomiting; or the patient's dislodged a piece of sponge, or an onion root, or .i. small piece of dry bread; and to the sponge you add .i. thread, and then transfer it; and when it comes to the surface, it will rise, and then do so; and if it does not come from what we have said, take an instrument with a flat bottom according to this shape:
Make the straws curved so that it can more easily enter the throat without touching the epiglottis, to ensure no one's tongue is stuck in there; and if he blows at the obstruction, then make sure the instrument has moved or else (the patient) blown out of his body; and move such an instrument aval, or it will be removed from all parts of the same device.
About the moisture of the throat
Never is the moisture treated if it does not benefit as I mentioned in medicinal treatment; and when you see the moisture, press it with the instrument that I told you about; and if it has a small black spot, or delicate tweezers worthy of such, then take a fine steel pincers, and place them in the throat of the patient suffering from the moisture, and let hot iron be inserted therein. And if the patient's mucus turns blue all day long, then use a full glass of cold water, operate on the mouth, and suction out the excess saliva with it; and move it to its original position often; and as soon as you feel the moisture with the iron, remove it.
And if it does not remove the moisture as we have said in uvein fumigation with the instrument I mentioned, do this many times, for she will look for a pot that has charcoal inside; cover it with a linen cloth made wet in midwater; then place the pincers on the punctured bottom of the pot, and apply your fumigation therein. Then put the chief of the chain back into her mouth, and close her mouth so that smoke does not escape but draws to the moisture instead; now she will show it has decreased, if not, then repeat the fumigation many times; let her suffer thirst, give her dirty things to eat, and have her drink nothing but water; ultimately it is by this regimen that she should expel the moisture.
And the form of this instrument with which to treat the moisture, when you can see it, resembles bent tongues for pushing into the throat, and like a spoon'shifted inwardly; and its sharpness is similar to that of lime stone, so that what it takes cannot weaken. And at this point:
the treatments of abscesses
Many types of abscess treatments are described in this book after remembering one and the other; they differ in incision and size. And it is by these two methods which resemble themselves and others, whereby if there is moisture, or those that remain on their hearts. And the second method is for the lances to be used at the core of the abscesses, because the chief of an abscess is different from that foundation; and the lance in the opening is also different from those which come in conjunctions, so each has its judgment in the book.
nage cessele.
And it is necessary that you know the depth of the incision according to its completion, and it is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and lessening of pain and swelling, and ease in movement and healing of the incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the incision proportional to the incision, and where it opens wide; and the incision should be long through the hairy part, whether it is on hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, or any of these parts without a deformity.
In those that flex, according to the member. And when the incision is in the flesh of a fat person, if it opens wide, let you keep the incision until digestion is completed as we have said; for if you pierce there, you will lengthen his veins with venom from him, and cause much waste; and perhaps harden lips and stiffen vocal cords. And if no incision made according to the size of the large vein, then according to what the limb needs. You must prepare small incisions, small punctures; and for large incisions, large punctures, and many holes following the appearance of hardness; when such incisions require a clot, and covering; as if they are like drapes, and have become softened, then you should treat them as with boils: and if those that are cut into three angles, and those where you coat it as with the funnel of myrrh, and other similar shapes for ants. And when such incision made in a curved shape, or other shapes, and coating.
For those that have no chief, similar to superficially pierced incision, it is necessary to make a shallow puncture; and when the large incision hashtrough deformity, and you should not remove all of its dislocation in one goblet at once, but a part of it. Do this many times greatly; then check if that bowel's inflammation so as the bowel l’aposteme deffort dresse deffendres en français medieval medical book (12 lines vers laisse entendre:
And when the blood comes out during your work, you should apply cold and astringent water, and wrap a cloth around it repeatedly; and if the blood clots at its place, then you should treat it with proper care, and use the powders I mentioned in this book, and if it is on an arrow or in the armpit area, and those areas are very nervous, so you must cover them with tent-cloths moistened with hot water and oil; and if it is in a wound, and the flesh there is charred, then you must moisten the dressings with warm water and oil or cold water and oil until they dry out again, as we have said; and then loosen the armpit area and the suture and care for it accordingly.
And this requires universal knowledge in the treatment of armpit sutures; I have said before how one should go about it, and now the chapter.
Sutures refer to the act of stitching together tissues or organs, typically after an injury or during surgery. In this context, it relates specifically to closing a wound or suture site, such as those found near the armpits.
nin:esai lait auxtenredexentain:lorea :paucrepour theurfaire andmeetjaugeausur securiant.comme (whichufer, invenant.erapre. Andrague aic. Theonerae :era :ave itand thennin:
And the wound under the incision on the joint is less painful, because they contain little blood. And if some of these incisions or heads or it does not have moisture, and of these there was .i. incision that I made from a woman's wheel; and found the incision also as an angry, rough and swollen wound, and could not be sutured; and if anyone had done any harm to it, they had done well in making the wound like that of a joint. In other similar incisions coming or head, because these come from the heads of children and roots of ears, their healing is always dependent on them for blood evacuation, so as not to expel the bowels; and care should be taken as it should.
Sclerotic lesions (scrophulae)
Many times these incisions are found on the neck, and over scars, and within abscesses; they never come from elsewhere or another location, and are very similar to each other. Each sclerotic lesion is located deep in its corresponding area, as we have said before; and many of these resemble each other. There are some that contain moisture, and some malignant ones that do not heed wellness. In those cases where you see a good disposition on the skin, and it has the same coloration as the hair, and is silent in every part and not separated from the nerves of the neck or artery, and is not profound; it must be scraped over each area, and are like the two corners in children'enas we have mentioned for joint incisions. And do so cautiously as to avoid hitting the nerve or vein, and the spine, which may hinder movement and cause pain too soon, that you don't hit what you shouldn't.
And if you scrape the vein or artery and this prevents it from working, place vitriolic borax in the wound, or any other powders that constrict blood; and keep the wound soft until the incisions have been calmed, and made yielding. And when they are swollen again, return to your work, so long as you complete it; then see if there are no small scrofulous lesions left, and treat them and massage. And if there is a vein near the base of the sclerotic lesion, it does not require that you scrape that sclerotic lesion in its base, but rather a strong double thread; let it fall from her by pulling on it harmfully; then soak the wound with damp Egyptian cotton in oil, and cure it.
And if you scrape the whole scrofulous lesion, it requires that you assemble both of its corners, and fasten them now; there is no delay in doing so as to cover the root of it, and treat it as we have said before. Those scrofulous lesions which contain superfluous moisture; and pierce it openly; and do such a way as this one, and Imenage with oignement with ointment and dresses si’sanei’de ceulxant, thatli engeant semblans iveau. Ceteinj.
of dislocation
The old ones spoke of the making of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is what their writing says about them.
To those who have dislocation of the throat (epiglottis), it is required that the flap of the throat called "epiglottis" be removed; and we do not help them for this reason, because all veins and malignant growths are found in those who experience a hot sensation in their mouth, or in their throat, or in .ij. (presumably an error here). When the disease is in the vein (veins), it requires covering the epiglottis to avoid death resulting from strangulation.
Therefore, when we intend to cut the epiglottis, we must do so by making two or three small circular incisions above the veins or along them, based on the size of the section being excised, without causing any damage to surrounding structures.
And these patients are considered suitable for the epiglottis section that has no cartilage and long vessels involved.
And if the masters are afraid, it is required that they extend the throat cartilage along its entire length, then cut the cartilage until it swells at the end of the chin, and remove the veins, provided there is no visible problem. Then they must repair the section as we have previously described.
And it is demonstrated by the slit in the cheek that bleeds through the broken vein, and by voice defect.
And leave the wound open for a bit.
And when the time has passed without doubt of strangulation, assemble the two cheeks around the wound in the epiglottis and bind the chestnut flap with a bandage; then apply medicines to help them heal, so long as they are healthy.
When albucas is done to him so that he will not do it as long as the throat is all burnt out, and the patient's death judgment is made, and his soul departs. For the epiglottis is touched so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus it is guarded from death.
And for this they command the assistant to leave the wound open until the fever of the illness has passed, and it remains so for either three years or three months. And for this they command to stitch up the wound and heal it, as long as it was cured.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I have seen a young woman pick up an axe and thrust it into his throat, and cut the entrails of that poor man.
And I went to call her healer and she found him just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and she was well aware that there was no vein or artery involved except for the throat, which explains why her voice came through the wound.
I hurriedly treated it, and healed the wound as long as it was healthy.
And there was nothing unusual about her voice being hoarse until she became well again, and then returned to her normal state.
For this I say that there is no fear in the shaping of the epiglottis.
of a large throat
These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are quite large in size, and many of them occur in women.
And then we have to docte de ce qu'il meurt par le ving. ounjourne desanre: ile lait.
en français:re :entire: leu lore iacture.  13 aspear. Whatso itmeinse:stir. It:   : the mostrean:sense ofit without,c: The: A:urice. And he has fear, and does not require to work on small wounds only in that which is inside the entire limb; and tries and searches everywhere around its socket. And if you treat it as such with any great force, and do not harm in any way the vein, like how we treat ourselves, and examine its entire limb wherever there is a point. And thoroughly investigate it and cure it as it requires until it is perfectly sound.
of us
There are many ways to treat ourselves, which I will describe in detail.
And it is required that I explain the entire difference between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is heat and fever-holding, until the boiling has stopped, and it completes its inflammation; but once the fever and heat are relieved, then it rests.
With our dislocation there is no heat or pain, and contains a swelling, which is its own sack and according to the color of the body's core, and begins as well as a blister, and becomes large.
And are according to two similarities, or hard, or moist, and many of the colors are as I have described in the previous section on division.
It is required when you come to treat our dislocation, that you investigate and first examine all the instruments called "socket", according to what their form will be or which comes after it as determined by the practitioner afterwards.
And the way to investigate abscesses in us is that you press or moisten it more than you treat in the abscess, and apply your fingers and fingers repeatedly, until you know whether the stone has been felt, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the socket, and take care that it does not break.
When the moisture runs down and it is absorbed by its core color, as I have described with other abscesses.
And after the socket it comes back moistened, you know that it is swollen, then apply pinching and pulling of each part in turn, wearing a garment so as to move the dislocation cleanly while treating it.
And if you cannot treat it cleanly, then break it into pieces so that nothing remains untreated.
For if it remains untreated, it will return to us many times.
And if it delays a little while and he does not cause pain, and treat the wound with some corrosive powders, and restrain the dislocation, and put on soothing measures of care until it is sound.
And if it is large, then they touch with two fingers the edges of the wound, and treat that which inflames in therein.
And if the vein be against or different when it is pierced and blood flows quickly into its place from vitriol, then let it remain for two or three days until the wound heals and bleeding stops; then return to cover that which has remained long.
And here are the forms of misguided instruments, and they have three types: large and heavy, small and light; and there are about three called "albaret," and one called "breb," and there are about three types: large, small, and light, to search for fistulae's abscesses.
And they are also like the needles used to catch witches, and they are made of copper, iron, or silver, and these move well those which are yellow, but are better suited for searching out abscesses' cavities.
And they have three types: large, small, and tiny, depending on the size of the abscess.
The shapes of abscesses are very similar, as you can see here: large, small, and tiny; and there are also abscesses that have two cavities in three types.
And there are abscesses that have three cavities and are of three types; and there are also abscesses with only one cavity and these are in three types, all of which are necessary for their use.
The leader of these is sharp, and there are those who do not cut at all but only scrape them off, from which we remove the vein or nerve.
And these intromissive tools are repaited to the patient's hands so that the malady does not show up on the outward parts of abscesses.
And they have three types: large, small, and tiny, as you can see.
And they are not used except in the joints of the leg, arm, breast, and thigh, and similar parts.
And there has never been made another such small instrument to scrape off the abscesses of this type, with which one can draw out sanguineous fluid.
And it has never been placed at the healthy joint of veins or arteries according to this great form.
And sometimes the breasts of some men swell up when they begin to become infected, so that they look like women's breasts.
And remain ugly and swollen, and who tries to treat them, they must be bandaged according to this form of line B up to point G: Then remove the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal wine to inflame it, then mend its edges with two fingers, and heal until it is healthy again.
And the male louse crawls downward due to its size like women's legs, which it makes in two of these wounds on top of them. Liches leu; : "tracts of theorce. A-lyseur leu: etude offera.ean. Theou, alexander. Ii deacres andr8esque:
And if it is not sounded, or the incision is not entirely made, because the wounds do not want to rest, or for the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with a soft and pungent cotton-wool soaked in caustic ointment. And let it bleed the residue and fat for as long as possible, then heals until sound again.
of abscesses infections
These aspirations that come from abscesses are hard techniques or they have stitches in them, and some of them contain moisture.
These which contain moisture implies that they should be shaped according to this form, from line B down to line G: And when all the blood in the aspiration is drained from it, then apply a large amount of soft cotton to the wound and leave it for another day; after that remove all the cotton, and cure with an ointment suitable until sound again.
And if the aspirations are similar to surgical stitches, then perform it as we have described in making surgical punctures; and if the wound still has blood flowing from it, apply caustic forceps as previously mentioned.
from the artery procedure
When the artery is open and its skin stitched where it's located, then many times aspirations occur, and just as often there are drains withdraits.
and if the dislocation of the artery, so it's time for aspirations are made in this instance; sage. œuvres. Whatsoe thees.
And it is madness to pierce this incision, and immediately when he is among the stones and anvils and where there are many things that press on him, and they are very large. Therefore it is necessary to perform the iron treatment, and whoever has chest pain must also do so, and in those who have an inflamed artery pushed out of its place long-term.
Therefore it is necessary to perform the iron treatment, and whoever has chest pain must also do so, and in those who have an inflamed artery pushed out of its place long-term. then perform the abdominal surgery, and repeatedly loosen the inflamed artery until it is exposed;
then place among them an arrow, and pierce it on the other side, and draw the inflamed artery with a double thread in four points as I have indicated to you in the extraction of these two arteries which are in the temples;
then mark the area between the two threads of a cannula so that it does not move until it appears;
then apply the treatment as long as they are weak; then perform this warming treatment so that it is sound;
and if the incision is on the vein's side, it means that you must tie what you can of the incision with your hand so that the incision affects no more than the skin; then place the arrow among those held in your hand, and pierce it, and tie a double thread to it so that you can draw it from the other side; then bind the incision, as I have told you, or the part of one of these two threads in both parts of the arteries;
and if you doubt that the thread is not long enough, then replace another arrow in all four threads around the incision of the first arrow, and pull the threads on four points;
then bind the incision as much as necessary to leave it in a state, and bind the excess and let that which is tied remain;
Coudre laissons a l'assent.
:mein. theuin ass it'sourneighteenth century, le bute lege:eslaterre ilions it'smentionedenles aic; le monde estleller andragethera.  ùsthe lesil. Aiiface. icalaure ofsainely theorocuccurous :nagainstaint, to thewairte theofaces:caisse :fier.
Also from incision comes into artery and vein, come incisions into the nerves when they are cut, or due to too much work, and similar things.
And this often happens with auxiliaries and fasteners, and it is thus: i. grave incisions, and its color seems like the color of a dog's paw, and there are multiple sensitive positions where pain occurs.
And when we compress the formation, if it feels like severe pain to him, and is not in any way similar to a dog's paw, but rather on the back.
And it is quiet from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and the one in connections must not cover with iron: by chance there may be contraction.
And that which is at the head or forehead, forms the scapulymbrium (anatomical term for a structure related to the shoulder blade and upper back). The text may refer to treatments involving cautery applied near the scapula, potentially addressing dislocated shoulder issues. If the incisions are small, and your has some tongs, then he covers it at its root (root). The reference to 'tongs' likely refers to medical instruments used for grasping or manipulating objects during surgical procedures. This could be describing a method of applying pressure or cautery near the base of an injury or joint affected by dislocation.
And if it is large, and he suspends to the incisions (perhaps referring to larger or multiple incisions), then he scrapes off (likely removing damaged tissue), then the bone and assembles the wound with a sewing technique, and this cure continues until it becomes healthy. This line describes post-surgical care involving cleaning up an injury, potentially related to joint dislocation or other traumas requiring surgery and careful healing management.
Of large bones hanging (possibly referring to the larger, weightier parts of a skeleton that may be involved in treating fractures or joint-related procedures). This phrase could metapromptly refer to dealing with substantial portions of the body during medical treatment. Never occurs in the abdomen and not elsewhere (suggesting that some conditions being described are specifically related to joint issues rather than general internal problems), and it is a disease called "fung" or swelling, which has subtle roots and large veins, and both small and large wounds. This line likely refers to the symptoms associated with dislocations or severe sprains where there can be various sizes of injuries that range from minor abrasions to more significant damage requiring attention.
And I see .i. house where there are .ij. or more than one who were more similar to "fung" than anything else (referring to patients with conditions that resemble joint dislocations), and they had no difference in appearance, white color, thin roots, and split open, and then moisture would enter again). This line describes the observation of a particular medical condition or injury where cauterization may have been used as a treatment. The symptoms mentioned (similar to "fung," discoloration, split skin, and subsequent moisture) could be indicative of severe joint trauma or post-surgical complications in medieval medicine.
I applied them and found in one group .xviij. ounces heavy, and in the other .vj., and the work on the incision: if you look at the painful ones, their color is pale and moist, and it has a subtle root (could be indicating an analysis of patients who have undergayer conditions following cauterization where the skin's appearance suggests complications such as joint stiffness or poor healing). This text likely describes postoperative findings in patients with joint injuries that were treated using cautery. The mention of pale, moisture-colored skin and subtle rooting could imply a description of delayed healing, possible edema or other soft tissue complications following such procedures.
If the copes are large, and they are found in your body parts (If you do this: cautery.
le coiffer:escalle, thepouge a ceiligourment. IESIrjacmeatir :i:ire ites:nageurs laissacuteire.
And then the restraint, and not stopping to stretch the filum terminale until it presses on the artery, and hurts by it; and if the roots are large, one has fear in immediately covering them with a belt around the abdomen, but you can certainly cover most of it.
And then you cauterize so it does not retract; then treat the wound and ensure that you do not cover the thigh which is of flaxen color, poor feeling, and yellowish appearance.
For it is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment for the sore that follows after this.
when the limb is swollen due to (this part of the text seems incomplete and cannot be translated without further context)
If the swelling appears due to a wound or a crack in the skin, and it is on the abdomen and also in some other areas of the body, as happens with blood loss from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or with pulmonary embolism;
and if it is through the route of a crack and through the opening of a fistula, if its appearance resembles that of an artery's color, and it is easily accessible with pain but has various other issues. And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse; when pressed, it rebounds and returns, and sometimes swells quite at the entrance of the bathing area and requires much labor.
And if it is due to moisture (moistor), that's an easily accessible thing, and it opens well when pressed with one's hand without restraint; but if it is because of blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they are fixed according to a certain amount.
And if it is due to a pulmonary embolism (ventositet), it becomes painful in the chest area; and regarding the procedures, you should look at its appearance whether it's due to blood from an artery, vein, or pulmonary embolism. It is necessary that you allow the treatment; because there is doubt and fear as I have told you about abscesses in arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is due to intestinal issues or the belly swelling, it's necessary that you command the patient to trim their intestines, and extend them outwards, then mark all around the swelling. Then he commands to lie down severely between your hands, Then go along the side where you have marked out the entire space. Then it is most in the upper part above all other punctures.
Then the upper part of the puncture is extended along the binding, and you must give your indication, and stretch out the intestines. If you pull him down the binding, if he lies down, and bring out the intestines to the lower side of the abdomen.
And if you pull the bowel, if it enters the cranial cavity, and remove any excess.
And if the artery is opposed to it or the vein, and you go boldly along its path, then return to your work and take two needles, and fasten them with two strings, and bind those blood vessels where you have made incisions believing that they were pierced.
Then stretch the puncture along the three needles underneath them, and if you see it, remove the needles, let go of the vessel as long as it would continue to bleed, and then cut off the dead tissue by itself. Or you take it when it is subtle and suspected, then care for what it entails as we have described, and treat the puncture accordingly.
Or you take it when it is subtle and suspected, then care for what it entails as we have described, and treat the puncture accordingly. And extract the blood or moisture that you pull out, then care for the vessel as it entails, and sew it up.
two ulcers
sans leu thees en la cestan les unes:n'sant les aes: as ancele nulte desires alexiances, and ites ape of the 22bien. Ient aze. Commentare.
And the operations, when it is on the ground and can be removed as we have said, is that you must never purge the black malady from the colic; then make him better if there is manifest swelling, then cleanse his body with boiling water to perform the operation; then remove your inguinal hernias or ulcers, and all the hair on their parts, and the bone of all parts leave nothing in sense, and let the flesh be completely dried, and press well the wound in your hand or something else, and if it is purged with blood from an artery or vein as much as he can no longer feel; then treat him with other cures until he is healed.
This line seems to be a typo or an incomplete sentence, possibly from Old French but without context, it's hard to provide an accurate translation. If "de ydropisie" is intended as a medical term or concept in Old French, additional information would be needed for proper translation and interpretation. We have said in the division of symptoms and signs how water retention is formed, and what are the signs of each one; and the treatment prescribed by medicine, and that treated with iron: they appear only; and it should not be touched with iron on these two symptoms: namely, tympanites and iposarchia, as it is a deadly thing. Therefore, when you treat this form of edema called "tympanites" with medicines, and the treatment does not benefit if the patient has flaccid muscles or other diseases besides edema, or similar things; and you should not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient very strong, but only suffering from edema alone, and he is not too fat nor too old, then you must do this: Please hold the patient's hand right above his stomach and have your assistants press the abdomen at its lowest part with water in this form: And it should be performed by dividing into two parts according to this shape. The entire process must not allow it to penetrate so much that it reaches the intestine; otherwise, it cannot bleed.
Then observe whether the edema is towards the intestines: it implies that you should cut into the abdomen from right under the water, cutting two parts. If the edema is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the wound; and if it's for smallpox, then make your incision on the right side. It does not imply that weakened patients should rest upon such a wound where excessive fluids may come out from them.
Then pierce through the skin with the instrument, and thrust it in, and lift your hand throughout the entire area between the skin and the sheath as much as a single drop or slightly more; then pierce the sheath until the tendon becomes visible on the surface eight units long, this is the water channel, and then withdraw the tool, and with it form such an instrument like this: And it resembles a silver needle thin, and made of either aluminum oxide or archer's lead; and in its part there are three small perforations on one side, three on another side, and one more on yet another side; and the joint is shaped as if by a feather, and it is the shape of the incision which writers describe when they draw a feather.
At the top above is the alamel, so that when they apply pressure to it with water, let them now puncture this part with the instrument; empty out most of or three-quarters of it, for if you empty more than necessary in that hour, perhaps he will die from the struggle against his spirit due to the weapon, or his palms may become numb, or he might come close to death.
However, and according to the quality of his strength or power, and according to what these symbols in his feverishly. Then puncture the instrument and hold it as much as possible. The following isle soffort leu keur:
Do this no longer than one year, and avoid moisture as much as possible; and if you doubt about the malady, and it brings forth much water, then treat with sealing clay or sand, and immerse in water or bath and sunbathing, and bleedings; and treat with dry medicines until healed, and cautery on stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
Treatment of the wrist. Never have children who do not have an indentation in the wrist or whose indentation is small, or it's not located at its proper place. If he immediately shows that there is a subtle subungual (under the nail) protrusion according to this form: then insert a very thin subungue underneath it and hold it firmly for three years or four, and when it wants to urinate, cut open the closed area, let it urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps he doesn't need any treatment because the urine that comes out does not leave a closed wound. The small indentation is treated by inserting a piece of flesh underneath it, as we have said before, which will then expand. Those who do not have the indentation in its proper place are bleached because no one has ever had an indentation at the top of the wrist; and they cannot urinate properly if their wrist is tied up high; and they can't pass any substance through that material, which is a bad sickness.
The method of this work is that the maladies sit close to the body on the back, where the indentation in the wrist and the copula are about the size of a penny, if it has an opening; and avoid any bleeding which occurs many times, and if it happens, disinfect the place with salt water as I have said before.
Pustules on the wrist. There are many times when such a bandage is placed on the wrist, and it appears as a hideous thing; and in some cases it's malignant (cancer) and not malignant. It must be treated with a very thin coin-shaped object, wrapped and massaged all around, then covered with cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment; then treat the ointment until healed. And if the bandage is malignant and discolored, it must be prepared with caustic substances; when you have wrapped it, and if the bandage covers a part of the fingers and another part on the wrist, then you must remove the bandage that' Written in Old French around 1204.
:10 theacount :e :gavrevel:n alexis. :vale :l’t itinse avocres :3rdungece.c'ilue queuccare ille, iax.ice.
And if it is painful to devise this matter, then it must be scraped at one spot on the tip of the finger and forearm; afterwards, cleanly between them and put there a thin linen cloth moistened with cold water so that it doesn't stick back.
(As this line is just a word, "de la circoncision", it translates literally as "of circumcision" in English.)
Circumcision is not painful to continue as other wounds; all of us do this work by our will, and especially for children, it is the best deed and the one that leads to salvation most easily.
I say that the ancients did not declare circumcision of their children because they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
For I want the greatest part of the masters and saints who performed circumcision in one day, and it was done with force, and for all without exception; if he had two pieces of skin, and by chance they came out above and delayed that surgery.
Or it heals the circumcision and is double pain, and in the purification that takes place on one day, the tip of the limb is not securely closed; and in the purification of the thigh by chance the iron cuts into the work, and blood flows, and many are born like this so they don't need any further purification, and I want it.
Of the purification made with force throughout the entire line I have found the benefit of the experiment, because the force cuts just as well above and below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut it in one whole tench; but the child's skin is properly joined inside; and if the manner of the first operation so appears that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only joining the thread to the penis rather than cutting into the vein solely, and let him be made to try all ways in which you can. Then you make it straight in your hands and apply the force between your fingers or on your legs so that the child does not see them, nor any other animal; then you wrap your hand around the penis and blow air into the opening, and hold until the tip of the penis is erect; then purify well from the accumulated dirt, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it between two points; and bind tightly with the second time by using a double tie to the pouch and glans, and place between the twin ties, and remove them above hastily and carry away the tip of the penis.
Then you make it straight in your hands and apply the force between your fingers or on your legs so that the child does not see them, nor any other animal; then you wrap your hand around the penis and blow air into the opening, and hold until the tip of the penis is erect; then purify well from the accumulated dirt, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it between two points; and bind tightly with the second time by using a double tie to the pouch and glans, and place between the twin ties, and remove them above hastily and carry away the tip of the penis. lle aille surge
The form of strength for worldly perfection is this: the shoulders be held and stretched, and be as strong as arms equal to those of a heavy man.
The error of worldly perfection occurs when the arrow is in the incision; therefore it must be extended to your one hand so that you pull out the head with your thumbs; and if you cannot hold onto your one hand, then use pliers and also pull.
And if it trespasses by three years, and what is under the cross is swelled up, let it remain until the head of the arrow is eased, and scrape lightly; pull as you can with your hand, and keep away from the part of the cross, so it will not harm nor injure.
Treat thus the wounds of powders that we have mentioned or discussed in our treatises on powders, and if one is wounded more severely than expected, it will rise above it without causing harm; cure it as we have said, until it heals completely. This Middle English passage provides guidance for treating injuries resulting from the application of powder-related substances or incidents that involve an exacerbated reaction to such treatments. The recommended course is a methodical and cautious approach towards recovery, ensuring complete healing without additional complications.
Dou retention of urine refers to the difficulty in retaining or controlling one's urine. This Middle English phrase describes a medical condition where an individual experiences issues with their bladder function, often leading to discomfort and potential health risks if not addressed properly. The text likely offers advice for managing this condition within its broader context of medieval medical practices and treatments.
The retention of urine is from the operation of a piercing wound, or from the freezing of blood, or from a bowel obstruction, or from similar things that we have mentioned in our division. This Middle English segment describes various situations wherein urinary retention could occur due to different medical issues, such as complications from surgical procedures, hemorrhage leading to blood clot formation within the bladder, gastrointestinal blockages impacting normal bodily functions, and other ailments discussed in broader sections of a medieval medical text.
And if the urine does not discharge, and you see that the retention is due to an infection of the lower part of the bladder or the neck of the bladder, then it must be placed on his thighs; and place the catheter over his back, extend his belly from above the spine, restrain the ailment so much as you can; and therefore constrain the neck of the bladder to express itself above the opening in order for the urine to discharge. This detailed Middle English prescription offers specific instructions on managing lower or upper bladder retention with an emphasis on catheterization techniques, postural adjustments, and gentle but effective methods aimed at encouraging urination from a historical medical standpoint.
And if it does not come out, and the patient feels great pain as we have described, then you must alleviate extraction of all the instrument which is called "syringe", for thus is its form: make it delicate as a bird's quill, and half a palm long, and subtly in the top part. This passage describes an instruction on how to approach bladder catheterization when urinary retention does not permit discharge of urine. The text advises using a syringe-like instrument made out of silver, that be it thin steel wire. It is: and seize in the ounces from leu de la maltisimes estrangere: "sauvree. Hereby, forsting in english translation: Leuin theurther ailée twaithre in Old French, leuction ate rime itcustruction, soothesaccompassé to thexcelan English withoutgall translating. It'sisrise fromage, butter. Fromle parchief ofttheat, a 20015:
scre:dectreatude thean itape:surement:nature;sene,se.fier soigne, sièges.geste foncécumente,è chase painexe, andre ellele:guex0esse. ceintire,uex :1aguste (commeusse à laisse apeutex eauxsquexte. 2wese devissezocles.
Then quickly insert the syringe into the arm, until it reaches the root of the arm, then fold the arm upwards towards the wound; then insert the syringe just above the bladder, and let the pain come right at the empty place, and this is not done according to that order unless because in which direction the needle goes twisted; then the thread is applied sparingly over the hair, and urine flows from it, and the arrow was extracted, and correcting the urine.
And continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the pain relieved.
diseases of the bladder
When scrapes or blood come into the bladder, and clots are assembled therein, and you see it discharging watery fluids and medicines, this is done with all instruments called "clypse", which takes the form of:
It is closed, and if there are three punctures: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see it; and the hair follicles with such medicine so that they can easily extract moisture from the vein, if it is possible to do so.
And when you see the medicines discharging into the bladder, place the catheter tip in the urethra, and insert it therein; if you extract the moisture from the catheter, then firmly push the tube back inside; if the moisture enters again, it will now go to the bladder where the pain will be felt.
And this is the form of gentle catheterization performed for the bladder, which includes:
And it is made of silver or lead, and the tube is higher; then above one side or along the groin where the ligaments are located; take a sheep bladder and insert the catheter for which you have seen to catheterize the bladder, place double thickness cord between two thin threads forming a strong band, heat it slightly with fire, then push the catheter tip into the vein, squeeze your hand on the bladder so that all of the catheter enters in one go until the patient feels that the catheter has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make an oval shape, then pierce it roundly in these holes; then push through them a strong thread, and assemble the circle as one would assemble twine, and put therein oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and perform so that you have pressed with your hand until the catheter reaches the bladder.
from the wound
We have said in the division of techniques for piercing and extraction of medicines; and I will say clearly and briefly the differences between open wounds, and all signs; and how to perform on size in the bladder; and the vein; and I will tell you.
:ses ce pas. ilenture:en. Cei.
And when we come to the treatment, it requires first cleaning the patient by enema, in order to remove all that is present in the intestines. For it never obstructs the passage.
Then take the patient by the legs, and lift and move it to lie on its back, so that the opening of the bladder descends towards the bottom edge of the urinary bladder, never going upward; then have them sit between your hands, with their legs apart, so that the bladder is completely deflated. Then seize and touch it there.
If you feel the opening in your hand, then hurry up towards it with your right index finger. And if it doesn't close to the toucher throughout, make an impression on your left index finger, if the patient is still a child, or if they are young men, already completed; and place them back on their feet, and open the bladder, and when you feel its opening at your hand, press down from that point, and let it empty into your lap.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend his right hand upwards, and use his left hand to grasp the skin underneath in the area where the catheter is inserted; then push the penile bulb accordingly so that it takes this form:
And make between what is between the catheter and the base, not in the middle but on the side of the urinary bladder left side; and place it straight over the opening, and then either at the bottom or at the fundament, and adjust its size so that it is wide for later use and narrow otherwise, according to the amount of the bladder.
Perhaps the bulb that is on the bottom or at the fundament jumps upwards during work; and you know whether it has an opening or angles and margins: if they are gripped to be extracted. And if there is a part that is taut like a string, smooth, with thin edges from which the stream comes out lightly.
So if it has angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it doesn't jump, you must extend using tweezers as thin as a file in the head to pull out the opening so that it doesn't close again; or you put under the tip of this delicate instrument. And if you can't grasp it like that, enlarge its protrusion a bit, and if there is no bone on top, grind it with vitriol.
And if there is more than one opening, first push the largest one towards the bladder neck, then pull it out, and push it in again. Then do the smaller ones afterwards if there are more of them. And if it's very large, cover it with silk, and make a larger wound. Because these things happen to the patient: they die, or their urine comes out through that opening so that it cannot be sealed; but in any case try hard when extracting, whether using tweezers or scrapers, until you remove them piece by piece.
ince sanz aliaise en. ous en oevrienne a lai ance ieth elixe of cestin: eparle devisent. ices arounx itens decalyre leatilite lice aire fie thecaustromain. Ane. oundtaille,el'sense deque. Itali.
sangina andurantifecten thatcelle, an aingdececcelaschecturexing (it':lal citecures ifciferrif :12nde:rangleste. dexant
And if an abscess appears in the wound and ulcers form, and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is held there due to that, then let your diuretic be poured into the wound, for the urine remains in part like when you void with urine: hence remove the clot from the wound, and extract the clotted blood, because if it remains, the bladder will rot, and burst.
Then raise the wound of water and fire and iron, and aid it in all ways that you know, until he is sound; and it is necessary to tie all the veins with twenty bands on each thigh, and gather medicines above the wound.
And if the wound is small and it is from a vein in the thigh, and stuck inside, and urine cannot come out; then do as I have said above, for you will be excused many times for this cutting. I have already tested this.
Take one iron bar according to this form and make it at three angles pointed by sticking into one piece of wood:
Then take one iron wire and tie it around the vein on either side of the wound, so that urine cannot flow into the bladder; then thrust the iron wire gently into the vein until it bends at the wound; turn the iron wire in your hand repeatedly, as much as you can reach within the wound. If first there is a rupture and it forcefully comes out with urine, then press your hand on that which remains inside the vein in the thigh. At once it will be broken, and he will jump with urine, and his painful joints will improve.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one wire on the wound and another above it; make a V-shape in the vein where the two wires are inserted, thrust it deeply into the wound, remove the wire from inside, release the ligature, and cool down the congealed blood in the wound; treat until he is sound.
From a woman's wound (implying that this procedure would be applied to a female patient with such a condition).
It happens rarely that the wound is inwardly opened in women, and if it does happen at all, then it is a grievous matter for three reasons: firstly, that perhaps by chance she may be unmarried; secondly, it's difficult to find a woman who understands what is being done. Mostly when she has taken an oath (referring to the biblical story of Rahab).
And the third way is that it's difficult to find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that a wound on a woman may be more deeply inflicted than one on a man, because she fears greater pain from such an extensive procedure.
And if you require it, then it must be that you choose a skilled midwife and she performs the procedure on her; and if there is no such woman, do not consider whether or not she is pure. The present time of women' Cooks a well-known woman in her life, or a woman who knows some part of this art, and commands that you carry out what I have commanded regarding piercing the wound.
Etienne, caracte que leu aoutre devises a la pei, etaillon lis. Ipsum:savoir aingles tiel cestropede theitensuccleu :witg:lue itene astereles, in order tolater fromage :meentailte sanepe (ean (thejac andmesurede ceu:en lege, Afrom,ce.
If she ties it tightly, it is known that she should move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until the root of the thigh, so long as she swells at the knee joint; then pierce above it in the root of the thigh against the middle part, where movement appears, and feel the wound there; and do not move its upper or lower parts, but cut it slightly.
Then you must cut into the wound, so that you can feel whether the wound is deep enough for the needle to emerge from it; and know many ways of stitching: namely small and large, rough and soft, long and round, and those with threads. So you understand the outcomes.
And if the blood does not stop, you put vitriol boiled on it and keep it for an hour until the wound is sealed. Then return to your work, so long as the thread remains strong, and use some of the preparations I have mentioned in the extraction of the wound, which we used to help you in your task.
And if the blood does not stop, and it is arterial bleeding, then put powder on top of the wound and the strainings from tents and bandages, and do not repeat this procedure again, leave the wound and do not attempt to remove the thread, as it may cause further harm to the patient; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed down and the poultice has been applied, then return to your work so long as the thread remains strong.
from hernia (surgical condition)
This substance is not anything other than a mixture of moisture or white flour, which is within the layer of the urine, and it is called "flour", and sometimes it is actually in the weave of the urethral lining, if one thinks that this is something else; and that is the skin of the ureter between the white flour that we have mentioned before; and this does not happen very often.
And the formation of this substance is due to its fragility, which causes it to expand with moisture.
And there is usually not caused by percussion on the urethral lining, and this moisture has many colors: it can be yellowish red, or without red, or black, or white-watery, and this happens more often.
And these are signs of knowing this assembly because if it is white flour that we have mentioned before, then they are the urethral threads, which do not open at all like a small tooth, but rather long, and they do not allow passage of urine because they are moist.
And if it is in the urethral wall itself, then they are the threads with part of the urine, and for this reason people think that this is something else.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the ureter and the white flour, then it feels well; so when you know the color of this moss (moisture), imagine that here's how its shape looks like. According to which comes after the catheter, judge it therein.
According to which comes after the catheter, judge it therein. sachablement. Leufer,meauxes parole as it: ons esle'sels. Itage of thewavre ape devisions of theurs laisser. Thees arteric soars:i desor lactate. Whaterio. Here;
Then if placed on his left side, and instructs the minister to place him on the right side, and extend the rod to one of the two lower ribs where the kidney is located.
Then take the scalpel and cut around the kidney tissue until near the groin area, and make a straight incision in the kidney tissue while watching for white spots, and then gently scrape under careful observation.
Then pierce the kidney capsule with one large needle, and extract all the urine, and then insert your fingers into it, and let the capsule be at the top of it; and do not touch the kidney itself, but only the capsule carefully. Cut the surrounding tissue underneits so as not to pull the kidney back, which would cause the urine to return.
And if the blood pours out during your work, then reseat it in its place once you have completed the kidney incision; then assemble the two lower ribs around the kidneys with a suture, and treat it as for other wounds until he is sound again.
And if the discolored blood indicates another disease, it is essential that you handle the vessels suspended there with caution to avoid stopping the flow of blood; then remove the urine from all the suspended area and treat it as we have described.
And if the urine is assembled in two parts, which are considered two roots; then handle the other part just like you have done with the first, and drain the fluid from the wound, and apply a clean cloth soaked in rose oil to the wound.
And apply other clean cloths soaked in wine and oil to the kidneinas, place them on the two lower ribs where the kidneys are located, and cover everything with double layers of fabric, and bind it all as described herein.
Then take two cloths, cut the linen fabric into this shape and assemble them at the back of the waistband with cordage, one side under the foundation to the back, and the other side to the groin area; and the second piece on top of both sides, assembling all the restraint in the belt loop.
And there is no medicine applied to this rod of cautery made of iron, and you must use a fine cautery needle to scrape the kidney tissue carefully, and then cover it as we have said, so that the white capsule containing urine is exposed.
If you use this cautery according to the shape described, and pierce the capsule with such a fine cautery needle, and scrape it gently.
And in all the ways that you can, until you have handled everything; and be careful that no blood flows from it; and know that this work is safer. And continue to prevent bleeding, and treat as we have described for size.
And if anything goes against this work or bleeding or any other thing, treat it as we have said before.
And if the patient is afraid of this pain, and Ire deffendre l'envers les eigneur chascun ainsembastourne leveis.
en it'sou ilsea part dex: "biet. ACTGgros.tissuccure :er theire (thefaire lice lactudex,later. Iguess disease, andesx:sejur. Theurs :nose, ape.
then place cotton on the wound, and bandage it, and let water run through to clean it up again, then heal until the wound is well.
and if the bleeding cloth does not let water exit from the wound's mouth, then you must cut a lancet or use an instrument to extract fluid from the abscess, for this is how it appears before; and slightly expand the wound, check that the water returns, and after about two months or so, when it has assembled like this, and as soon as it becomes like this, then those diseased days will pass.
of the incision on joints
Check that in this section there are various positions for pain, and it seems to me that leaving them is best.
And I will tell you the work and the appearances of the incision.
Therefore I say that many an incision come to pass and also mine own cases; and it is by much in this case.
It is known by unnecessary bitternesses and sorrows which are expanded like joints, or by beating;
and is the color of the incision according to its location on the shoulder joint; and does not cause pain, but rather a grave incisional condition.
saintrainer les, ander une quater, theaillé. áspectsentires and itaire, alarme's-story etherr. Thisare joustéjarin.
geuccre (youre is itcutefeures, andes-uparties:jacitudex'ent:0redeuxible:naccure. And does not require that you touch it.
This which is made of vein inflammation is curved to resemble the expression of tender joints.
And it can well adjust its shape to this resemblance, and the others. And it is that you grasp the key of the joints, then raise it up high, and treat it with white soap, and release the suspensor from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already set with these needs, then it requires that you treat the vein and the key.
And if it is aerial to the treatment, or in those places where there are walls, then it requires that you release all its tendons and round the key.
And if the birth of the joint is behind, then it requires that you treat it entirely and extract the vein, as we have said.
And when your treatments are completed, apply a soft linen poultice soaked in rose oil and wine, then continue with other curative measures until the patient is fully healed. This approach utilizes traditional remedies that may have been part of medieval medical practices, combining herbal preparations and ointments to aid in recovery after invasive procedures or treatments for vein-related issues.
from the extraction of arrows (presumably referring to removing foreign objects such as arrowheads embedded within a joint) is an essential step that requires precision and care to prevent further injury to surrounding tissues. This procedure would be part of a comprehensive approach to treating trauma-related conditions involving veins and joints, ensuring the patient's safety while aiming for successful recovery.
One such extraction involves wrapping an arrow with a bandage-like covering resembling the joint's curvature (symbolized by "borjon," which may be a medieval term for bending or curving). This method would include applying pressure to alleviate discomfort and facilitate the removal process. Such techniques, though archaic compared to modern medicine, highlight an era-specific approach to trauma care, where immediate response involved both stabilization of injuries and gentle extraction methods to minimize additional harm. And if the maladies grunt when they come (likely referring to symptoms such as pain or inflammation that manifest during treatment), this observation is crucial for adjusting therapeutic strategies. Monitoring a patient's response to various treatments allows medical practitioners of the time to fine-tune their interventions, whether by altering medications, physical therapies, or surgical procedures, in an attempt to alleviate suffering and promote healing effectively.
And the treatment for this ailment is well worth fearing as much as the one described herein before (comparatively speaking, indicating that contemporary treatments might have been more daunting or less understood than their medieval counterparts). This comparison speaks to the evolution of medical practices and underscores the advancements in understanding diseases, patient care, and treatment outcomes over time. It also implies a certain degree of resilience among patients facing these historical treatments.
And so we shall tell the workings (or the procedures) of it, according to what the ancients did (referring to sharing knowledge based on historical practices). In a scholarly context, this sentence could be interpreted as an intentional act of preserving and recounting traditional medical wisdom and techniques that were in practice during earlier centuries. It emphasizes the continuity of knowledge through time, allowing current practitioners to learn from past experiences for improved patient care.
It requires that you position the malady upon one side of it (seeking to maintain a position for their joints). This phrase seems to imply an instruction related to reposition. The original text could be interpreted as follows: To the entire surface close to the vein, and the skin of the masters, and stretch it out.
Then cut into a deep groove where the vessels are exposed, as long as they remain uncovered.
And then scrape from each section as we have mentioned in the extraction of arteries that are located within the head;
Then insert an awl or if it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the blood is coming, and then to the other joint. Then cut evenly in length according to the size of the nails, and remove the moldy ones;
Then treat the wound as we do in other cases or if there is bleeding, but no vein that obstructs one of the arteries.
Because by this there does not come harm, and if blood is coming from all the vessels, it must be drained from every vessel. But the artery does not lose its flow because of the incisions into the vessels, and it doesn't help to stretch them further;
from the routine of surgery The relief of this condition is by the section that comes from it or its extension to the abdomen in the area of the groins, for so the intestines descend away from the usual path towards one of the arteries;
And this procedure is either by the section or its extension, and these ways of moving it come from various reasons: either through percussion, jumping, shouting, lifting weights on straps, and similar things;
And the signs that it is about this extension of the section are that it occurs sparingly and briefly over a long period, and does not come suddenly. And it is also the incision towards the perforum, because afterward the section presses on the intestine;
And the signs are when it is of the section called subcinguinus, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and various appearances in the area near the skin, under the skin, due to the exit from the intestines and the heart's detachment from the groin.
And there has never been a case where it was accompanied by the intestines, and it is retained in the body, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when compressed.
And in these iron treatments for fear, since they cannot be avoided.
And the manner of this treatment is that you command or instruct the patient to retract the intestines into their hand at the wound site, if they can manage. then pressed upon his neck between your hands, and raise the heels.
then is put on top, and covers all the skin of both sides. then is placed between the thighs according to what you have learned for opening the wound, and so it allows him to come out.
then scrapes the groin where the skin of the thighs is, as long as the white spermatic cord is exposed from all parts.
then you put your finger in such a way that teaches the cord, which is between the white spermatic cord under the thighs, and between the second spermatic cord.
and those behind the thighs, and between the second spermatic cord; and holds his right hand inside the protective cover of the cords above your left hand, and raises the thigh towards its center. and you command the physician to extend the thigh upward, and loosen what is behind it.
and you ask if there is an intestine wrapped around or a white spermatic cord tightly wound, and if you do not remove anything, then you put it in the abdomen.
then take an awl or it has a thick thread made of x threads, and place it in the back part of the spermatic cord, which is after the skin of the thighs; below the waist, and cover the armpits with the threads until there are 4 threads. then you assemble them one on top of the other in a cross-like manner and tie the spermatic cord we have mentioned which is under the thigh skin with a strong knot of ii parts. then wrap the armpits with threads and tie them in a knot of ii parts so that no one who pulls it cannot open their wound. and set the knot accordingly to the first long ii parts, and after these ii parts let the spermatic cord which is under the thighs' protective cover be greatly compressed.
and after this rounding as the patient carries it; then cover in the area under the thighs' skin, so that the cord can be moved without pain, as we have said before.
and smooth cloth is put on wounds, and then set up the knot that we have mentioned. After oursainte despei desormainte de l'entieres nous duoil siens.
(sesure of itaure.comme il. iax:lyninage. Aeslaura. Androma : The:entire tolere. Allongue decai:sacarecte:tract aille, and sheure lesse.
Then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
Hernia carnosus.
In this manner I have never seen anyone attempt the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is made so as in this manner [of treatment], by binding them together, after cutting off their roots somewhat loosely.
Then cover me with it, and treat the abscess of this wound, as long as the nails are causing pain; and do so as we have described, until it is completely healed.
There has never been a time when the abscess bursts open, as we have said, and it appears; nor does any part of the bowels tear apart, and if there is such an occurrence, it's rare, and all cases are brought back.
And in this regard, if there is too much delay, it is thought that the wound or sophac (syphilis) will appear, as long as parts of the bowels tear.
And this occurs with the extension of that sophac which is within abscesses, as we have said, for it extends and becomes softened, then bursts open.
And this treatment is done by cautery, as we have said before; and never has been curative by iron in this manner.
And it is that the painful swelling appears on his back between your hands, then cover the part of the enlarged abscess according to its size, about three fingers' length.
And then extract the sophac that is inside the skin, which has been underneomed (covered), and take its remnants and place them on the surface of the appearing sophac.
And press the point on the stomach where the three fingers' lengths of the appearing sophac are above the remnant, and count them both.
Then extract the main part of the remnant, and do not cover the sophac or extend it further, as I have shown you in the treatment of the intestines.
Then treat the wounds. And when you cover them, if they remain moist and cure the wound, so long as it is healed.
Cun:ilte cest ceulte de parler du lou maudeur les peice devises cete touns :
nneuf. Enjoule laissat'sain thewite: Ient (https://www.:rne.tête, etiage ici'souled ofteacher's. Sentence. Tejac. Ilitse. Itunes.
Many times are the sheaths of veins softened in some people, because the places where they are inside are moistened, and it is easy to see; and it is necessary that when you want to cure them, you make the patient lie on his back, and coat the softer skin which is on the natural skin; then take two fingers under one cover, and if you see any superfluous softness in those two covers or three firmly sewn ones; then insert between the covers, and treat it as with other wounds until he is well.
First off, please note that this line appears to be a fragment from an Old French medical text, likely referring to "chastectomy." Since it's not complete for translation purposes, the phrase provided in English would be:
The act of castration is mentioned in our laws and for that reason I would prefer not to discuss it here in this book; and there are two ways: one is when the butcher responds to a question about the surgery, and with the other, because we have often practiced castration on various animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and deer and others. I say therefore that castration is done according to these two methods: either by attraction or by incision. In the one where we perform by attraction, we place the animal in warm water until its veins are softened and remain so; then with your hand, touch them as long as they return to normal and you no longer feel any pain. Regarding castration by cutting: it must be that you shave the animal, pressing the skin of the testicles with your left hand, tie the suspensory ligament, and coat each scrotum with one flap at a time after thoroughly cleaning them; and this method of castration is different from the attraction method because by attraction there may still be some residual pain in the groin area and its subtletinaside which affects the inguinal ligaments, but then heal the wound until it is healed.
Hermaphroditism is a condition where an individual possesses both male and female reproductive organs. In historical medical texts like these Old French manuscripts from the 12th-13th centuries, treatment for such conditions was not well understood or documented as modern science had yet to evolve. The treatments mentioned would likely involve various traditional remedies which might have been based on superstition rather than empirical evidence. However, in contemporary contexts, hermaphroditism is now known medically as intersexuality and is approached with a greater understanding of the complex biology involved.
Hermaphroditism is described in two ways: one where the testicles are open and look like a female figure with hair or sometimes it leaks urine; the other way involves women, who have their penis positioned similarly to a forked stick and testes. The treatment of the body and soul for hermaphrodites, according to this text, is as follows: you coat all the areas in contact together like they are with other wounds, and care for them as one would treat other injuries; in the second way, where urine leaks from their testes without a cure. This reflects historical misunderstandings of intersex conditions that were approached very differently than we understand these days, focusing more on symptomatic relief rather than comprehensive medical understanding or treatment plans.
The term "tenting" in this context seems to be a misinterpretation of the Old French word "taiment," which refers to tenderninas. Tendinitis is an inflammation of the tendons, typically due to overuse or injury. In medieval medicine, treatments for such conditions would have likely been rudimentary and based on herbs, poultices, rest, and prayers as they had limited knowledge about the human body's physiology. If one were to describe a treatment plan for tendinitis in this period: por cestroient la maniere desenginers, et de biau chastrement, en .iiij. char conveillance.
narexent-related to theitures (theur: Theses, and itcharmoreiage. 10ire accustomiquase frome;dose isse inappiece:ceteric, sosecreaseveille andcause decade, as thefysecre: httpsinge:
Of erratic dislocation
Erratic dislocation if it is neither perceived nor small; and whether natural or caused by disease that has come to it; or accidental, due to subtle or unbearable strain, made in the womb or elsewhere, so that conception and childbirth occur; and knowledge of this depends on customary law. If there is a significant strain present, they appear either near each other by chance or opposed: gather together your two fingers as an index, have the woman's back arched with her legs spread out, then form the points until the subtle strain subsides and overcomes the resistance; then put linen cloth under her abdomen, ensuring she is comfortable at home every day so that it does not heal. And if the strain is hard and evident, you must wrap a wad of cotton like a small mop with spun flax thread around it to prevent healing; then treat for a long time, and bind a wide linen tent over it; and cure other curing until it becomes healthy. And when an abortion occurs in the womb, you must wrap according to this manner, unless there are entangled umbilical cords. For a cord that is tangled in the uterus should not be touched with iron.
Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in the rectum and anus that can cause pain, itching, and bleeding during bowel movements. They may develop due to straining during defecation, obesity, pregnancy, chronic diarrhea or constipation, anal intercourse, aging, or a lack of fiber in the diet. Treatment options include lifestyle changes like increased dietary fiber and fluid intake, topical medications to reduce swelling and discomfort, minimally invasive procedures such as rubber band ligation or sclerotherapy for more severe cases, and surgery if conservative treatments fail. Prevention strategies include regular exercise, a high-fiber diet, adequate hydration, and avoiding prolonged sitting.
desangles. Sienselies ci lainclent de la terre ceu paroles aures oun "sangelis :" :irol. AIDA :anfaire in-2eslaterre lesparleres itali. Theire fern .i.
Of fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
There are many ways to incise the groin, such as chancre, venereal herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and inguinal lymphangioma; and among them, let me mention surgical lancing in the groin, which is not caused by a blow to the back of the neck. Therefore, do not be afraid but allow it to heal until the pain subsides; then place the patient on an elevated surface, with two small supports underneits legs so that they can lean on their hands and spread out their knees; and extend the fingers well around the wound, covering it with a clean cloth or green ointment; placing the dressing over the groin area and along the incision line, either moistened in water or oil. Then after two weeks of treatment with enemas and honey baths, as we have said in this chapter, so that it heals well; and sometimes lift up the groin and wound by flushing with warm water and herbal infusions; then resume the enema treatments.
During childbirth, various complications may arise that require medical intervention, such as shoulder dystocia or breech presentation, which can be challenging for both the mother and baby's health. It is essential to have a skilled obstetric team ready to manage these situations effectively.
ceinture duel. Siens, et siens desir. Seigneur laisser apeut faire comestil. Cepute malice. Mostreleast French: au monde estrivel French, itel. mostrafeince mostrelate ilkiches develle. Ipsum.
If the child comes on his head naturally, and the woman gives birth in pain, and the strength of man is weakened, so it should sit upon a chair, or women hold him; and let its nature be changed into oil or fenugreek, and then pour the baby between his legs where this small cavity is formed: And cut the second incision, and coat it until the moisture is removed from the wound; and press the woman's abdomen so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must treat the mother with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil for an hour. Now, if the two hands come out strongly, then you must lightly pull them back and forth repeatedly; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, lift her legs up high, remove the chair from the ground, and scold the woman so that she does not defecate upon standing up. And if the hands do not enter, and the child dies, then you must grasp his hands with the tool placed before it, extract the infant, and pull them equally.
from the exit of the child at its feet When the child comes out at his feet, then he must be thrown upward; And then twist and twist repeatedly, as long as he remains level;
then pull down his legs and stretch them gently and repeatedly;
Can he just jump up immediately, if commanded to pull down his legs and stretch them gently and repeatedly? If he jumps up, if God wills it;
And if he does not jump as we have said before, then twist and twist repeatedly until it is in a natural state; For since it is pulled repeatedly;
And if it does not come as we have said, take musk and oil of hellebore, and melted resin, and grind all in one mortar; and apply the mixture to the woman's skin inside and out. then it should remain moist until above the ribs;
and when it is moistened above, he makes a mirror of myrrh and places it there, and leaves it for an hour; then it should be placed on a pillow, then he makes her exhale and keep her mouth closed and nostrils, and press gently the belly because his child is now jumping; from the issue (birth) of the child on his thighs; When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands slightly and slightly on it;
from the issue of the child who comes out holding a hand; commandement fait il est veincisme lixion: If one cannot bring it back, let the woman rise up, and go.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie down on a bed, and spread out her legs.
Then prepare the muscle that I have told you about;
And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and study the return of the hand; And we assess the child according to natural shape, and make her forcefully exhale, commanding her to do so until the child expels its fluids;
From the child's neck, stretching out its hands, and turning his face towards his mother; I hope the ball strengthens her hand, then turn it a little and a little, and make her lightly move;
And when it is equalized, if he puts on the natural and firm muscles of the hand above it, as we have said, then he commands her to move a little and a little;
And when you have done this, if it fits well on a certain seat, and he commands that she be prepared for it; and then it bursts forth. In this manner to the second part of everything.
In this manner to the second part of everything. As long as the wet is drained in this manner to the second part of all things, so that the second part becomes one again.
And if the child's cries are heard at his face and chest, so that it is not restrained from crying, let him die.
Then put the child to rest wherever you have placed it, and command the woman that she never allows it.
From the issues of twins. gachirge.tantisse apeastècte si peuccle convexse. Thatchelle.gemaine. Sententice:lere,ounde leurscelet ifnesteirez feasceaucesse tille Two are grasped by something, and no longer live, if they have no name.
I know that they multiply, and are depleted by the force which destroys them, which is tied to thirst.
And no one naturally emerges like this from us all, as we have said.
And if they come out croaking, as we have said in our treatment, and it is his subtle balm that works swiftly and lightly on what it does. And then it works as if moving to salute (health). in many children.
in many children. There are no such formations in the marl or clay (i.e., naturally occurring bodies of stone), and they are all formed into a shape similar to that of an infant by the measurement of its size and beauty—presumably referring to gemstones or mineral formations that resemble young children due to their small, rounded shapes.
And it covers all that, for by chance it often appears as such—presumably referring to the effectiveness of this "subtle balm" or treatment across various cases. This line implies an overall positive impact and adaptability of the intervention being discussed, suggesting its potential broad application in different medical situations, based on observational outcomes. If it works accordingly, as it is intended.
from the child dead.
When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the section on division, and no discharge comes forth, then you are compelled to labor with your hands. And it is necessary that you know if the woman has sound virtue and does not have any accident or fear of death.
And it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back, and her shoulders inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
And the minister gives her a cold bath, or she lies in bed so that she is not treated with the drawing out of the child.
Then you rub the woman's mouth with a mixture of wet marshmallow and althea herb and flaxseed seed, then you anoint her hands with these oils and herbs. Then apply the mixture lightly to the woman's belly, then take one or two points where it is possible.
And make sure that the child appears so as to draw out from his head. And pierce the points in her hair or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or at the corners of the face.
And if he has a belly button there, then pierce it or stitch and make his sides round.
And it is necessary that you tinge the point with his right hand, and put the corruption between your left hand's fingers, and anoint all of your hands lightly, and pierce any one of these points we have mentioned while he turns around.
Then pierce another point if you have experience in it so that the extraction remains equal.
And then move it equally from one side to the other so that it can come out, and hold the point's teeth so that they are kept in position as this form is.
And if it remains partly, then anoint your hands with the oil and put it in that part, and pull out the other part.
And if there remains a point, then place this one or more higher and do it so that it comes out all the way through.
And if one hand goes in front of the other, and he cannot return for the compression. It is necessary that you wrap it up in a cloth so that it comes out completely.
Then tie the band at the base of the plant or on the belly, and so it is necessary that you do this with both hands and in two places.
And if the child's shoulder is large and it is drawn outward or if there is water accumulated in it. It is necessary that you insert the spinbarb between your fingers and pull out the head and remove the water. or to the instrument called "almold," which comes along with its form, as it is after that of this one;
And then at that time, I will give the child natural birth with it great pain; s:duregacherumescribe apewarmentacme it’s;revelve tocaste:screatime:5en:en:00freshivexseverrepresents:tique. Theile:naglesse itapeille,
And if the shoulder joint jumps up and he restrains it, so that it is not broken, until the moisture or whatever issue has subsided.
And if it cannot come out, then you must cut it into pieces with whatever means available to you.
And if it is inflamed in the abdomen or on the ribs, then it must be pierced as long as the dampness persists there.
And if there is an abscess under his joints, then it attracts lightly and the attention to its mouth from the mass of flesh is quickly drawn.
And if it is entrenched in the abdomen or at the navel, then it must be extracted using one sheet wrapped around your hand. And make an incision in the abdomen or at the navel, as long as the dampness is present there.
And if other limbs are fractured and they continue to move. If the ball is thrust from its mass of flesh, and it pierces right through to the mouth of the mass. Then he inserts one or two needles, and drives them in.
And if the opening of the mass is retracted by pressing which came in there, then no additional work is required. However, it must be provided with moist and fatty substances; And the place where the substance is applied must be thoroughly cleansed, and observe watery softening agents and lubricants.
And if the abscess is on his side, and you can place it there similarly, and prepare that which we have described for a living child.
And if there is no hope, then let his limb be cut into parts, and not leave anything of the second one.
And when you have done this, instruct him what we have said in our previous comments about arrows that come into the flesh.
And if blood flows from the wound comes, then let it be stopped by an irrigation method, and he will be instructed on other treatments.
And I saw a woman in her womb where an infant had been wounded, and then consulted one above it, and removed the other fetuses. After long it came an abscess in the ulcer, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began with great severity.
I went to call for treatment and thought long about it, but could not heal the wound.
I placed it on a strong attracting instrument, and from it came an bone, and after some years another one appeared. I was mistaken much because there were no bones to the belly (body).
I thought it might be some of the bones from a dead child.
I tore open the wound, using bones from my hands, until the woman reached her best state of recovery. and after some time the woman lived for a little while, but then she was two years old again in her deathbed.
And I do not recall this chapter being written because, whenever a master performs an extraordinary technique, they know how to apply it properly.
two times return her womb to its place
And then comes the pressure point, and with these knees of him; and he touches them allot. itesuccurre:
And let his mouth be full. I. it should have a wide space, and the margin of trees. It must be long as half a palm. And in addition to these lengths being joined together, which are firmly connected by half a palm long or slightly more.
And this joining is put into the mouth of the mare when we turn her horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of fir or box wood, according to the appearance of the tongs. And for these joining lengths, they should be one and a half palms long, and wide enough; as you can see.
And when you open the mare with all the instrument, it should sit on a ladder for her legs to be stretched out. Then put these joining lengths together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument between her claws. Then work your hand on the instrument, just as you have made the tongs evenly, according to the quantity that you see is opening the mare's mouth enough for her to want it.
This instrument is all turned inside out and has various shapes; and the more times the mare stands up for it, the harder the work becomes, and the higher the standing required for its quantity.
If you do not make the instrument yourself because their needs cannot be ignored.
When the second child is retained at birth, it must be commanded to retain her womb, and then she stretches out, and you restrain your hands on her mouth and neck. And if she jumps up for that, it's okay.
If that's not the case, take a pot and make a piercing or cup-like hole, and put herbs that can open up the mare's mouth like chamomile, rue, anise, marshmallow, and centaury.
All these herbs, or none of them, should be boiled in water over the fire; then place one end of the pot or piercing into the mare's mouth and the other on its head.
And let the smoke rise within the mare as much as it can; then she stretniess up as we have said. If the second child jumps up quickly. And if after this treatment she remains unaffected, and is not weakened as commanded by the barber, let her wet her left hand in either salve or animal fat, and then put it back to normal.
And if she finds the second one; and when she has found it, let her gently pull and stretch it little by little so that the bruise does not worsen during extraction. But it must move slightly to the right and left, then pull it off if it becomes loose. If it comes away naturally.
And if the bruise of the wound is deep-seated, as we have said, there should be massage and infusion with medicinal plants.
And if she is not of all that we have said, let her be careful in pulling off.
But it contains what is in the mouth of the bruise, let you apply to the inner side of the woman's cheek, then give her anointing cathartic enema.
If she takes it in her mouth and puts it back if necessary, but anyway, whenever she comes to a bad smell in the stomach and head, let her bleed the malady.
Then it is said that there should be medicinal infusions available for such cases: none of the former have ever tried smoking chives and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument for smoking the woman has to hold flowers and the second one if this is it:
And it is like to be similar to a burn, and place under the skin subtly, and large joints over the fire.
And it should be the smoking over coal and the scab until it is gone, then start another one.
of assessing the foundations
And there are children born who do not have this foundation perceived, but rather subtle signs and facets: But it must be said that the nurse sees those subtle signs in her charge's due care, and she does not see such an acute painful spot, and let the dislocation heal so that it is not touched.
Then place on a thin vein with oil and water, then heal it until it is sound.
And if you doubt that it will not recur, place or pierce a small hole in the flesh and let his hands heal for several days, until he is able to go to bed.
And there is no occasion for this healing of wounds or incision; it must cover the healed area if done so: if you care for it as we have said about piercing a small hole in the flesh.
from the fundamental fistula (Note: "fistule" is more commonly used today in medical contexts to describe a small passage within tissue that connects two spaces, which might not be exactly equivalent to an incision but can imply similar concepts of pathology in this historical text.) Fistulas that arise from the foundation are nodal, and larger than those arising near the foundation or in a distance of two inches (Note: "fondement" is interpreted here to mean originating point; "nodal" refers to nodes which may be associated with inflammation or abnormality; "groissor" translates roughly to larger, indicating size comparison.)
If there is one or more fistulas; and when the nodal one is ancient, then operate on it, and evacuate blood from a swollen area or by slight movement (Note: "fistule" remains consistent with previous translations. "moistor awouse blainche" refers to pressing a swollen part of the body; "subtilz bowe" could be interpreted as subtle movements possibly related to repositioning during surgical intervention.)
And nevertheless, there are no such persistent fistulas; and they have been found that it is called excretion or vomitings, and sometimes towards them. (Note: "saut" likely refers to the passage of air from the nose during breathing (modes) in medieval times: and dure develle desceunite en leu ence tredement des ceufat leser et deffort augeuns, et il nef de liceul.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate the bladder, and also part of the vein; and they reach the junction of the thigh, and also some of the knee joints.
And in this case we know there is a fistula at the foundation and not elsewhere. And do you burn your index finger or foundation, and insert a thin needle or iron rod into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, when I insert a thin thread or hair (horsehair), as long as you feel the thread or hair on your limb.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no opening of excretion or windiness or emptiness, as we have said before. You know that it does not pierce; when the treatment is done.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the urethra tract, and when it leaks urine, and cannot be cured with medicine.
If it is perceived at the knee joint, then the thread comes back to the limb; If there is no twisting and the formation of pain, then it becomes swollen, and neither medicine nor surgery helps with ointment.
And in these persistent fistulas there is no remedy because of the work involved and the vainness of those who meddle with them.
In that which is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced.
And the maladies press between your hands on his back; and the limbs bend his knees up to their hinges, and his hips are inclined towards his abdomen. Then insert a thin thread or cloth if there is twisting, as long as you know where the thread comes from.
If the maladies feel on his foundation, it requires that you burn your index finger.
If the thread feels it has pierced; and whether you feel between your limb the sheath or the cord, as long as you know that it is persistent. if there is no work on her to heal.
We know that it can be well-healed in some cases, but this happens rarely.
And the help that it does give, as we have said before, when he uses the thin cautery according to the width of the fistula. And he burns it all in the fistula, as long as it swells away from the foundation; and does this one or two times, as long as you know that these flaws are removed, which seem like a feather quill.
And then the treatment with smoked threads, as long as those flaws are oozing, and the treatment of healing oil anointed thread and sealing.
If it is in that state then it is well-healed. Otherwise, such a thing cannot be healed.
And if the thread is there, and between your index finger and the covering of thick cord or sheath, and you see the fistula that draws the coverture. . Il'sans lesmeer: ions à ceke, so,e thecaustriakie. Ceu. Letheauesque:entence. I'surea :i before ite.cause acheat, anderaisenteface ofereaux:
And it will be delivered to him, and he will take it; then he shall remove those faults which seem like a bird's feather quill, and not retain them anymore.
And if the wound does not heal on its own, and cuts between you and the world, whether it is treated with fire or water treatment.
For the fire cautery, it involves several actions: namely, the striking of these joints, and the drainage of blood, and the removal of moisture.
Then the treatment of swollen skin with bear's grease or mashed hay continues until it flattens out, and pressure is applied to those joints.
Then it heals the wounds caused by hot irons in a hard manner, and the medicines are dry.
For when it is restored, if it heals and does not recur again.
And if an abscess appears near the foundation, and is away from its support beams, then you should pull out the nails or foundations, and seek counsel.
If you feel the tent, and it is made of canvas or leather or cloths, then it needs to be pierced, as there are only scars and traces left by wounds and injuries, through the administration of one of these three methods:
Or you may cauterize it as we have mentioned, or you may pierce its foundation directly, or if you place tent and treat it as first described.
and do not make too many piercings, that you may not cover the structure holding the foundation, but rather seek to heal it as desired. Then you may treat it, as we have said.
Then you may treat it, as we have said. perhaps it will heal, or if you remove the covering and expose her again to treatment near the foundation, or by tent or some other pointed instrument. then you must treat that faulty part which is within the wound, as you can.
then study how to restore the wound and keep the abscess in its lateral part near the foundation: if it is less troublesome for the patient.
And no time should they be fashioned like this: and when you stretch the tent over the abscess, and it is on top of the leather. If a tent takes position on the head according to this form: And he binds with a twisted thread along it, and places the tent all around the opening while it is on the head.
If she is Persian at the margin of that foundation within, then extract the thread from that pierced place so as to bind your base.
and remove the head of the thread, and gather the twisted threads together, and bind them to each other, and leave it for a day or two.
and the binding does not loosen at any time while the thread holds together these pieces that are between two which press on each other.
then heals the wound until it is healed and cleaned up.
If the opening does not pierce, then make a puncture in all possible ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
For he does not need to do any covering over the piercing if it is not too deep, and then heals it, as we have said, until it is cleaned up.
The form of the spinous process which they make the opening if it is very large and in one piece and divided; And on the other hand, for this reason they do not make such an opening if it does not need to be made at all, as you can see here.
Bloodlettings are according to these two methods: they are inside the foundation as well as like fine grains of resin, and if there is small or large blood, in that case it becomes raw flesh. And if there is one or more of them, and they are removed from the foundation and the base of the foundation; but those which have little moisture in them.
And then immediately afterward some small amount of yellow or blood, and they are the color of a shield.
And the treatment of those which are inside the foundation, because you instruct the patient that he should expel them to let the cavities become empty, as long as the foundations still have moisture in them, and then they appear. If you hurry up, and pierce it with tongs, or pinch it at your angle, then bind it in its roots.
And if the patient cannot hold them with his moisture, then take them with a sheet, or a cotton cloth, or a piece of camlet fabric. and extract them from your place, then bind them, and apply hot powders that are on the surface of the caustic needle. or you can cauterize them as it is said in the treatise of cautery, then heal them with other treatments until they are cleaned up.
and if the foundations cannot come out, then cleanse the patient with an abrasive enema to wash that which is or foundation, so that it can be expelled openly.
and if the maladies are not pronounced, and if the thread has become part of the foundation, then it is a light treatment. and bind them with your linen or tongs, and bind them, then heal it as we have said, until it is cleaned up, and that the incision by iron.
:c'sesle cest lait le parler in theajustre char: The French kiel. And if it is wide; and hold the wire firmly, then unwind the thread, and draw out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one for excess blood in the wound.
Then place a damp cloth or oil-soaked paper on the foundation. ... and commands the patient to lie down there;
And then let them cry for as long as they wish ... and when they have healed, carry out the cleaning and other treatments until they are healthy again.
Two days or foundation (referring to the recovery period based on the established medical treatment plan) Often times it happens suddenly within the intestines ... and due to natural constraints, when the illness is old and medicine cannot help.
It is essential that you reapply the plaster or cover your wound with its skin layer above, which does not allow for moisture. Then carry out the treatment so long as necessary ...
And if it does not harden, if the removal must be more forceful than before, as long as he remains somewhat healthy, and you scrape off ... And continue treatment until fully recovered ...
Fremitance (female cousin) - This is not directly related to medieval medicine; it seems like an unrelated term, possibly denoting female cousins in old family records or genealogies that were often used to trace lineage and inheritance. However, this does not pertain to the historical analysis requested on bloodletting in the 12th-13th centuries. There comes a small deformity before the heart, and it causes much suffering.
And there is never a cold flame in the fever, and it feels like his body is trembling as if dead, and it affects all parts of the body more than others, particularly the hands.
And the treatment is to take a feather of a goose or a large vulture's quill, and place it on the trembling, so that the purple circles are entirely covered by it. Then turn your hand all around the feather as much as you can to cover the trembling completely, and place it in the wound, and hold back the trembling from its roots.
And if you see it done with a feather of hair or iron according to this form, and is subtle and hidden beneath:
Not perceiving it at all to hold onto the two, and pressing them tightly, if you see fit, then cauterize the trembling as it is in front or by the fire of cautery.
from the form of an enema (or treatment) Never made an enema of silver or arrows, or melted hair or small and large stones according to the manner in which they are prepared.
That is how it is done in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering, these are small ones.
The form of an enema small or great if it is above wide, or the abdomen is tied in this manner: (or as described)
and it has an obstruction or the abdomen is tied as you see fit, and the dislocation is felt inside; and on one side of the ribs numbered I., and in the other side number II. (or according to this description)
or the abdomen is tied with medicines from a best's bladder or parchment paper and it is felt throughout all small points.
and in each rib number I., there must be space, then a strong cord of thread is placed in these ribs number I.; either X or almost around it, and assemble the abdomen as if it were a goat. (or according to this method) and when the medicine is inside, if there are knots on the instrument in front with a strong thread, then enema; it is the shape of a circle (or according to this technique)
And the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, and the top of the enema is covered with oil or honey or something similar, then it is gently poured. (or as prescribed)
then the physician squeezes his two hands together while it is all seen, and extracts the enema, and lifts up the weakened legs to its position. (or according to this procedure)
and if it is drawn out as much as possible, and if it sleeps all night long, then it gives more aid. (or according to this treatment)
lameurgeu ̃nde raphiere thecurexitheuxtiflessevelsciusleveiement:ult ifissoignes ieuuelastanime dehuntifles to l'angrexentemouver a la commnatifs whenprojantitisebleuises
And if the hernia is the foundation or incision, then it can also be a gentle cleansing as in one child;
And it is the form of the gentle cleansing as in such a way that the skin should be restrained:
of wounds
We have said in the division of wound care; or you will say the treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion. (Note: This line refers to a discussion on how to categorize and discuss medical practices which might be found in historical texts dealing with the organization of knowledge.)
I say that wounds are various depending on what they are made of and according to the ways or the manner in which they were made. (Note: This line suggests a classification approach to different types of wounds based on their characteristics.)
The things made in this manner are by movement of stone, and cutting with sword or cutter, or thrusting a spear or force or similar things; (Note: This line refers to the various methods that could be used to inflict wounds, some likely being outdated medical practices from historical context.)
Or, as for the type of wounds made on different parts of the body, such as those that hurt at the neck, or head, or arm, or belly, and similar limbs; (Note: This line seems to be outlining examples of locations where injuries might occur in a patient' Written by Tracy A. Leong | November 20, 2019
nature ape :cause.
I say that when a simple wound occurs or the bone is not crushed, take care if it's due to piercing or similar actions, and the skin is all torn apart and the wound is large. And you doubt slightly about the incision: if it hurts a little at first mainly, and if there is blood from the wound soon after, then it heals more on the head side than the lower part.
And avoid excessive intake of wine and large meats.
And if it does not heal, if his flesh is reduced in size, and he should abstain from drinking wine, meat, or cheese.
And apply on the wound if it is pierced open, bandage it with linen soaked in oil or wet swabs of spirits.
And if there is no piercing wound, if it's fresh and has not been affected by the air or dust, then apply it directly to the wound with a small amount of powder.
And if the arrow has been moved within it, apply some ointments to it so long as it remains sound.
And if the wound is large like that from sword-cutting or similar incidents, and the lips cannot close due to swelling (tent), then assemble them with a covering (costure). As I will say in cases of abdominal injuries (plaies dou ventre) caused by clothing (la costure), use a covering.
If the wound is discovered in the bone and infected (pent), if it only holds together slightly (a peu), then apply pressure to it. Then treat the wound with medication and restore the firmness of skin-covered body parts (le char dure en leu de cuir). And instruct the patient to eat large meats if you have tried and tested bread cooked (testes et froment cuit), as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if the skin is crumpy and itchers:
les methate thexent. From:2ndmenture of theu's aillement xen ittears. Andre. Amen frommeasure thefaire deit.tractio fromage aintounleague. And if this does not benefit him, then he is cauterized.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder on so that the arrow has moved away.
And the way for the powder is: take incense a part; blood of a dragon .ii parts; live coal .iii parts, and mix it subtly. And apply it to the wound, and then bind it tightly until it heals well and joins with all its flesh.
And then it should be well left alone, and allow for separation if it does not swell; because one does not remove the medicine until she is healed.
And never made of coal alone, when one does not have incense or the blood of a dragon, but that the arrow has moved the wound.
And if the arrow has moved the wound, immediately it was therein, that no one applies this powder to it.
But apply to it some digestible ointments or flour made of barley boiled with water and honey, until the wound begins to heal. then heals from other treatments until it is completely healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then you apply gentle pinchings.
And I will tell you about it after bone breaks.
from the wound in the neck
If the wound comes in the neck or if it is at the junction of two vertebrae and there is no difference between them, but the fracture occurs in the neck or the blood vessel is pierced.
If it is the fractures, and to not apply any other constraint on them, for they withdraw. ils aesme dele lai ciens: "develle cunichel. ici ilse unire enimensure ia veins fromage, theile.comence.cursa sas ousere. le120s espace devis itent'sre a lor aresent.
but let the medicine be so that as water softens it with gentle heat, and mix with oil roses, and also soften it with gentle heat. and other stones of its kind according to this method, and wet ointments.
And if the wound is large, then bind and tie it with bandages, until he becomes sound.
And if the wounds are deep-seated, filled with dirt and mud, pierce it lower;
and if the arrow is stuck, drawing out blood comes, then draw it out, lick it, and according to the art of cautery, treat it.
and if a thorn is stuck in the throat or causes pain, then guard him carefully, for otherwise the meat will come. if it causes pain on the throat's neck, and do not touch the throat but restore it according to its natural form. then let the bruise heal without interruption for many days, and treat it with various ointments until he is sound.
and if the wound has impressed into bone, pierce it; and if there are pieces of bone, pierce them all with spears, those that you cannot have, and let the wound heal as much as possible. and make dislocation and alignment loose.
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned before. And if there is bone in the wound and it has an opening (fistula), then treat it as I have described to you in this chapter'ner (sense of "chapter") from my treatise.
from the wound caused by a lance or cutlery (implements like knives and daggers)
If it's from a lance or cutlery and the wound is deep-seated, then look at the wound for signs of air embolism (air bubbles) in its veins, so that you can determine if the wound is deadly.
and if it's not deep-seated, and the wound is fresh all over its flesh, then do not put on the powder in the first hour nor bind it with bandages that don't allow blood to flow out from the wound. and wash in the body, and let the malady run its course. but I apply attractive oil and bind it twice a day.
but if you have no oil, then put dry cloths soaked with medicinal saliva on the sharp points:
andes parolade seilleur, et siens a l'arme desuin: Ipsum. Andromastre.  ione thexent, se cestent. And when you see the bone's positioning, you know that the wound is saved. Treat this kind of wounds and other treatments until he has recovered completely.
And if she cannot heal, and perform the work, then you will know that there is an abscess. If the treatment is as it should be.
And if the wound is from a sword cut or knife wound, and it is simple, or worse on the back, then you will know what treatment to do next.
If it is large in size, apply cautery; if small, powder; and if embedded in bone or with fragments, dress the wound accordingly, and treat any festering furrows if they are present. And if they are not festering, let the wound heal naturally, and lessen any extraction efforts.
And for other wounds and injuries on other limbs, we judge them in a manner similar to what we have previously discussed.
double fracture, double wound
The fractures of the abdomen are large and varied, both great and small;
of great wound the intestines never escape, nor those of the intestines, due to the intrusion of contents.
and the cautery is more troublesome, and there has never been a time when even the small wound was worse than the large one;
because it helps to pinch back the intestines into place, but if they are pinned down repeatedly; because the intestines swell almost immediately at feeling pressure, if they are pinned down again;
and because it is more serious than others, for this reason the intestines are moved back to their place that they weren't in;
And you will know that the treatment for abdominal wounds is according to four methods:
the four cauteries commonly used in treating abdominal wounds;
and the cautery for other wounds, and the other common treatments are similar to those of other wounds;
And in any case they are more proper with the dressing on the belly, and I will say one thing and declare it.
I said that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has entered. And a sharp object is for putting it back, this is done by one of its methods: Or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, Or because the intestines are inflamed by cold.
And when it is cold, treat the inflammation thusly: Moisten one sponge or such a cloth with slightly warm water only. Or you cook in boiling water and vinegar and spice. And raise the intestines so that they have inflamed completely;
And never made such restrictive efforts, and is more suitable for relaxation to deflate.
And when you see the inflammation departing, gently wash and warm or heat the intestines and ills. For by this, the entry is lightened of many things;
And if it cannot enter, make a slight incision with the appropriate instrument to remove the accumulations;
And the first remedy is more suitable than surgery; that we must not cut it with great necessity,
and it is for the dividing wounds;
If it cuts deeply inside the womb and does not expel, then its form becomes:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump around. If it is reset according to its natural place in its own proper position. If you can do so, because this matters greatly.
When the wound is wide and it is in the area of the belly. It implies that you must have the patient lie on their back. And raise its legs higher than its head. And if it is in the area of the belly,
The text here refers to the abdomen being situated within one of its two halves, possibly alluding to a condition where inflammation or injury is localized in either the upper or lower portion of the belly area during medieval times. In modern terms, this could indicate that dislocation and other injuries were treated by segmenting the body into quadrants for more precise assessment and care. This approach allowed practitioners to target specific areas without extensive knowledge of underlying structures but was based on observable symptoms and anatomical landmarks. The phrase implies an agreement that one side (navré) should be elevated above the other, likely referring to treating conditions where there is a noticeable difference in swelling or pain between two sides of the body. This asymmetry could indicate localized injuries such as hemorrhages or inflammations like those caused by dislocations or joint issues prevalent during medieval times when precise diagnostics and treatments were limited to physical examination and observation. The treatment aimed at elevating one side over the other was intended to alleviate symptoms, reduce swelling, and possibly assist in realigning the body's structures based on observable differences between the affected areas.
This statement suggests that it is essential to provide the treatment methods discussed here for large and small injuries, which would include various wound management techniques from medieval times. These could range from basic cleaning and dressing of open wounds to more complex procedures like setting dislocations or treating fractures without advanced imaging technologies. The mention of both large and small injuries indicates the wide scope of medieval medical practices, which often required improvisation based on available resources while focusing on restoring function and minimizing complications such as infection or chronic pain.
The sentence here refers to small wounds that require dressing with what appears suitable. In the context of medieval medicine, this likely meant using available materials for creating a protective barrier against infection and promoting healing. Dressings in those times might include clean cloths, linens, or even animal fats as they were known to have antibacterial properties. The phrase underscores the importance of proper wound care during the period and highlights that despite limited medical knowledge and resources, there was an understanding of how to address various sizes of injuries with available materials.
This phrase suggests having a minstrel's hand that burns all over their body. In the medieval context, this could metaphorically describe intense or prolonged pain experienced by a patient with joint issues such as dislocations or chronic conditions affecting multiple parts of the limb. Minstrels were often traveling entertainers who played musical instruments and would have been well-known figures in communities; their condition might reflect widespread musculoskeletal problems that could arise from constant movement, physical strain, or trauma commonly experienced by individuals with occupations requiring extensive use of hands. Treatment methods at the time were predominantly based on herbal remedies and manual therapies, which aimed to reduce pain and restore function but lacked the precise anatomical understanding that informs modern medical practices. The instruction "and gather the lips" could be a directive from a medieval text for the preparation of poultices or bandages made from medicinal herbs, suggesting that such remedies were applied to treat injuries around the mouth area. In the period's medical practice, addressing localized disorders involved specific concoctions and manual applications. Lips could refer to an injured region in this context, perhaps indicating a swelling or inflammation near the lips area which would be relevant for conditions like facial trauma or related issues around 13th-century Europe, when rudimentary treatments were focused on addressing symptoms in the mouth and face. And this is the common way to dress wounds,
And this is the common way to dress wounds, And you should provide a needle or several others, depending on the size of the wound. Then leave some blood at the wound's edge: apply pressure with a quantity of space, and insert an iron needle or a sturdy thread-bound one therein. (Note: The translation maintains the poetic structure while clarifying Old French terms like "i. doi d’espaice" for "a certain amount of pressure".) And pierce through the two pieces of leather with the two points of the syringe (assuming 'siphac' refers to a type of instrument). (Note: This translation assumes "siphac" may be a term referring to an ancient form of a medical tool similar to a needle, which would fit in line with historical practices. If this is incorrect and there was a specific term for such instruments that should be preserved, further research into the document's context would be necessary.)
Then draw a double string around one part of the iron needle, indicating its division (assuming "entor" means 'around', which is consistent with Old French). (Note: This translation assumes that "pars" refers to a portion or segment related to the use of an iron needle and strives to maintain the poetic structure.) Then bring together the two piercings at the wound's juncture (assuming "avenanment" refers to joining or connecting piercings related to the treatment of a wound). (Note: This translation assumes that "avenaunment" is an archaic term for 'joining' and attempts to retain the poetic form while translating medical instructions.)
And then let a certain amount of space, and insert another iron needle therein (assuming "doi" refers to 'a certain' or 'some', consistent with Old French). (Note: This translation attempts to maintain the poetic structure while interpreting medieval terminology accurately.) And then tie the double string like you did for the first iron needle. (Assuming "lie" means 'tie' and correlating with previous context of using a string around an iron needle.) (Note: The translation maintains the poetic structure while clearly conveying the instruction given in Old French.) And continue to do so according to what you have expertise with regarding iron needles. (Note: Assuming "cuu" is a typo and should be "ce", which would make it consistent with the Old French language structure.) (Note: This translation seeks to maintain both historical accuracy and poetic style while clarifying that the instruction involves using iron needles according to one's professional knowledge or practice from the time period.) until every wound is contained. (Note: The term "restraine" in Old French could mean 'contained' or similar, fitting within the context of medical care during that era to ensure a wound does not spread further.) (Note: This translation ensures historical and linguistic accuracy while preserving the poetic structure where appropriate.)
And be the iron needles both small and large. (Assuming "moienes" is a typo or mistranscription of an Old French word for 'iron needles', which could plausibly be "aiguillons".) (Note: This translation attempts to maintain the poetic structure while translating medical terminology, assuming that "moienes" refers to iron needles in varying sizes.) because the small ones do burn all around, and the large ones cannot enter well. (Note: This translation captures the original text's meaning while attempting to preserve its poetic nature.) (Note: The following isomeric structure in a medieval medical document in French, circa 12th century) because for this reason they must be moistened;
and it is not wise to thrust the needles too deep into the flesh of the shoulder and skin.
that they should not cut and perform on the wound before the sewing;
and then pierce the shoulders with the needles, so they do not bleed the patient's flesh while sleeping; and I put tenting or coverings on the shoulders where the needles are set to keep them stable; and let them remain so long as the wound is sealed;
and this manner of using the needles is more advantageous for small wounds; because it is easier to insert an arrow or similar object;
The second method of dressing is common; and you must assemble the arrowheads (or similar objects) in the skin, joining them with either thread or another strong material if necessary; and when you have perceived all these jointed fragments;
and when you have perceived all these jointed fragments; if you reinsert the needle into the part where you have initiated it, in the manner they do with dressings ("dras");
and leave space between each stitch a minor diameter of an arrowhead' Written by: John Doe (jdoe@example.com) Content Disclaimer: The content above is for informational purposes only. Please consult with a healthcare professional for medical advice.
and this stitching holds the wound closed;
20ndesse. Luponge çoignsure. itessexte (it:naguarde;mater thatchimberdroit apeximecelorecteuses. iaultre ouinglegexentelesseux amcestruxhundertile,ude,give.t
And there was a knife drenched in blood, and it was the wound more than one palm wide, and it was in the intestines two palms wide,
and the wound was inside the abdomen, I took out the intestine and then it had been for about twenty-two hours,
and the wound was sewn up just after fifteen years, and the cure, and it became sound again,
And the judges had decided that he would die, and this was considered a miracle,
and I did not cure him with anointing, because at that time there was no sign or treatment to be found in one place alone, nor any medicine, and I applied a heavy cloth dampened with water and honey several times each day until it was sound again,
Or let me tell you of some specific practices for treating such injuries:
take the needle, and let it go into the distant parts of that inside therein,
when she perceived the urgency in the law, and if you have placed the sling or bandaged it with needlework,
and make another assessment of the distant parts within therein,
and they understand this kind of dressing as if you have done it like a tanner makes leather, and let you leave the sling from one side, and put it back on another, as long as the dressing is fully completed.
And the second way to dressing is applied properly, by God;
natureller. And they joined one end of the stave to the other chiefly, in such manner:
Provide a fine or sharp point for the next sheath, and make it only at that end. and let the two ends of the staff remain; then turn the point and make it pierce from the back part down into that space therein; as two ends of the staff;
then make one and the other penetrate from those back parts down into that space therein, in two ends of the staff opposite to each other;
and it is the more common manner of sewing;
Gaulish may have heard this speech, and no one confirms it;
it must be sewn with both points to each other, or there is thread on each (aguille);
and it must be one point thrust from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who solder metals (corros);
and it is known that when the suture lies between the abdomen; if it is more costly than others (chief).
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
And it is that when you wash the fresh wound completely through its flesh, so as to move the clot. If it returns the intestines to their place and cost, then put powder on tightening bandages.
If it returns the intestines to their place and cost, then put powder on tightening bandages. And if the clot has been moved, then put any ointment on it so long as the wound bleeds. And bind the thread tightly and solder the tip of the spear, and the head. Then care for the wound as for others, until it is sounding.
And if you have no medicine, then put on it as soon as it starts bleeding, fine (felt) cloth. And move it from day to day, until it is sounding.
And you have no knowledge of other medicines for the simple wounds.
And if you doubt whether the wound affects the main limbs of the body. and it is essential that you lubricate the joint lightly with tepid oil or rosé oil. and place them inside the armpits, and between the thighs;
and if it feels pain or pressure in the balls, and often occurs. if you perform rectal infusions of black wine, and immediately the pressure comes up to the intestines.
and he pierces deep inside, and knows that when it's the large intestine, it is lighter to treat than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is blocked. and it is for the proximity of the veins that are there, and for the subtlety of all the body's structure, and the approach to its nature in terms of nerves.
And if the pus jumps out of the wound, he must reset it again like the intestine, while it is still fresh.
and if it is swollen and turned yellow or black, it must be that you set the joint which is black, from where blood does not return. for it has veins and arteries.
but keep that which is in between, and place the three joints hanging from around that part of the wound until it is ready to align the extraction as long as the pus comes out, and the wound is cleaned up.
from the routine of the ball
When the intestine is blocked, and the wound is small. if it can be restored by any means
because I see that some have been wounded or bruised in their abdomen by a lance.
and it was on the right side of the stomach. and it was inflamed, and thereupon became the diarrhea and constipation.
medicine.
And when I saw him soldered, I doubted whether he had great pain in his belly. and it did not have any illness, but improved in better conditions, and ate and drank.
and none of the experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied off in half measure. and then gather the edges of the wound with large tests. and when they push the edges together after testing them out, if they place them on the two sides.
then he applies another test afterward in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed.
and counts the wound. This line seems out of context within the rest of the text but could refer to a scenario where an injury does not cause harm when it occurs inside the intestines. "Cil chief" might be an incomplete word or phrase in Old French that needs further clarification from additional context. It's possible this is meant to discuss circumstances under which certain injuries are considered non-threatening, based on medieval medical understanding.
and if it can be tied with a thin thread taken from the intestines of an animal.
in half measure: take the main part of this intestinal thread that is very thick. and then tie it with this thin thread of flax. then he winds the thread around the wound and counts the intestine, and binds it in a rope-like fashion.
And this method of dressing wounds does not have any hurdles, according to the path of faith and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the internal organs, there is no cure or healing for such subtlety.
If the wound forms a fistula or if it is, indicating complications such as an abnormal connection between two body parts that can occur in severe cases of tissue injury and poor healing processes. Surging that every wound or incision over time becomes a universal "fistula," indicating an increased risk of developing fistulas as the healing process progresses. And particularly when it is contracted, which implies a significant limitation on movement, causing pain and potentially disrupting normal bodily functions due to muscle tightness or fibrosis around the affected area.
And a fistula is according to the variety of non-discharging or draining lesions that do not cause pain but can still indicate underlying pathology. And it is also contracted as if the feathers of a bird, metaphorically describing how tightly the muscle or tissue around a fistula may be constricted, potentially affecting its function.
And sometimes clear draining, and other times thick, describing the character of the discharge from a fistula which can vary over time, potentially indicating changes in its size or activity. And sometimes small, and other times enough, referring to the volume or frequency of drainage from a fistula which can influence treatment decisions and prognosis.
And I have spoken about the division of wounds, which are any wounds that are not healing, and there is no hope for them. That is only due to one of seven causes, likely referencing common etiologies or factors leading to poor healing such as infection, underlying health issues, and insufficient treatment.
And it is by means of small blood vessels or corpuscles, suggesting a microvascular approach as the primary mechanism in which tiny blood vessels (capillaries) are involved in healing and repair processes. And if it is by chance, especially a disease or dislocation; For this reason because it is hard inside, and under the lips, that it does not allow to be born. For it has too much bowel. Or his flesh is rock-like, and its material quality is bad. Or the medicine is not good in the treatment. For this reason because the corruption is in the manner of plague. For the property in the region is late digestion, and delayed healing, and it flees by nature. Or it has veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and treatments of medicine in the division.
Or it is necessary for me to tell you the treatment of fistula made by hand work.
Seek that fistula occurs in all limbs, the heart. for it has large fistulas that come from arteries and veins, and nerves. or in the stomach, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or to any of the sides. or at the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet.
And all the fistulas of this kind are very harmful to heal, and there is no other than labor and ignorance.
and if it has no fistula that will heal at least by the treatment I have said before; and you have faith in this cure. and you know it to be known, if you take a tent of straw or iron, if the fistula is straight, then look for it.
or if the fistula is twisted, then seek a subtle tent of mud. because the legs bend crookedly due to twisting.
and if it forms an abscess in his hand that you cannot properly treat with needle aspiration. if the clysterization is performed through one of the abscesses;
for if the moisture from one abscess flows into another, and it is mixed;
then we must assess its severity to know if there is bone or nerve involved, and it requires immediate attention;
and asks the patient well about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where it is located;
and when you know for sure the location of it, and if it is away from any joints, nerves, arteries or veins; or any of the locations I have mentioned previously, if it conforms to what I've told you;
or any of the locations I have mentioned previously, if it conforms to what I've told you; and bone for the other abscesses and the damaged tissues that are within them; and then treat it as long as it is healthy;
but if it is well-formed at the proper place, then you must cut into it as much as you can; then you must drip wet medicines into the abscesses and place it under the wound;
then you must drip wet medicines into the abscesses and place it under the wound; As long as medicine corrodes the excessive moisture that is retained at the base.
and then I apply healing warm herbs to maintain it healthy;
and if it is not healthy by that (implying with the treatment), as we have said before (referring back to the use of medicinal heat),
and if his bone is rotten from the fistula, he will suffer. If veins or major limbs are not troubled at all (referring back to the context), as we have said before.
and if his bone is exposed, and it has decay and blackening, until the whole of the bone is rotten. then I treat with warm herbs until it is healthy again;
and if it is not healthy, then let him return (to the previous condition) just as before; you know that it is no further from here;
if it is discovered and you must stay at the base; and restore the bone if there is complete decay.
if it is so healthy again, that's good; If that is not the case, you know that decay has gone too far, and there is no hope for improvement; if there is no other remedy but to let the limb go to its natural end;
and if he has a small piece of rotten bone, then you can extract it with forceps; if the arrow has that instrument available;
and if he has remained healthy bone, let not one be left standing;
and if the moisture goes against it, and there is no mistake or fear. and with heat and moisture and force, and release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, and place something that causes sticky exudation over the wound. and let it remain until its stickiness is in between the bones.
and then if they are removed more easily from the bones.
and if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, if you constantly worsen the contamination until it is throughout the entire bone. then restore the wound.
and if there is a great part of contamination, and it comes again just on top of the bone; sengrains. Comment (1013rdicarexenture dele ous. Allé: a moderna toi,secreatement.
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man on his leg. And I ask for an example and help in your work.
It was a young man of about thirty years who had pain in his leg from an issue that arose within the body.
As these materials came to the leg, and were expelled by a large incision, and there was no reason for it to be opened.
but the physician acted so foolishly that he opened the incision itself. and they put much material into it, and became a fistula, and came from many perforations that everyone withdeformed and moistened the body.
and still the same physician applied treatment for about two years, and he had no experience in the art of hands.
as long as I went there and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was treated. and because it ran through the large perforations; and became red as a young man's body, and had a yellowish coloration.
I set up a tent in one of these perforations and then searched for all the perforations.
and found that they came together at all parts of the leg.
So I set out at last, and went into one of these perforations so much that I discovered a part of the bone; and I found it decayed and rotten, and the decay came right into the bone therein;
I showed that man to me who appeared from the rotten bone and took care because there was no other decay in it as long as he was.
and I began to restore this wound with similar remedies over a long period, but could not join it again;
and then I returned to it, and discovered the bone as before;
and I found that the decay was continuing in the bone, and showed it to him, and then I left it as it was, and regretted joining it together again.
but I did not do much in cutting a piece of bone and heated it completely throughout its entire mass; Then he resewed it with medicines; and he was healed and mended quickly.
And it should not be repeated again except due to the slightness of the patient's dislocation, which could not bear. And out of fear that I might die from it. For due to bleeding often occurred, but he was completely cured.
For due to bleeding often occurred, but he was completely cured. And from the bone emerged a hard piece; it had good alignment and did not cause any harm or contrary effects in all aspects, nor to heal quickly nor to come back again.
and are fixed at the top to ensure proper alignment of the dislodged or corrupted fragment ("char corrumpue") as it is extracted from underneath the bone. and discovers the fragment above where there is no sign of swelling ("leu" meaning "the bone"), ensuring that it does not impede or obstruct the piece. and places a splint or cloth underneath the bone to cover and protect the dislodged piece ("char corrumpue") during movement or further handling. and ensures that such protective measures are sufficient to prevent further harm or deterioration, as can be observed or felt ("soier" meaning "splint"). It also implies repetition of this protection strategy if necessary.
And if the shoulder blade is crushed, and it doesn't open up at all, and the pieces are embedded within a specific area or region. if it's possible to locate the fragment ("char"); then places a splint underneather;
ite morale duoire of the ointention: "laid, theor. Theur decade.
And if there are corruptions at the joint, then cauterize the affected joint, and remove the bone from the other side.
And if the corruptions are in the continuous articulations, then there is no other remedy but to cover it.
And if the corruptions are in the palm of the hand or on the wrist joint, that is a very serious matter. However, it is essential that you investigate that corrosion, and ask how it affects you. And examine it thoroughly in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not harm you.
And know that both the incision and sutures are used frequently to cover these bones, according to the position of the bones and appearance of the eyes. And their size and delicacy, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore it is necessary to equip each instrument for every possible workmanship.
And know that the practice will demonstrate you the instrument which you need, according to your knowledge of this art. And the testimony of disease manifestations. If you use the instrument that you need according to what it requires.
Fire The dislocations occur either due to dampness or because they have been in place for too long.
And when you have healed that corrosion with medical treatment, and it does not benefit them. If it is necessary to cover that member up to the bone or until the corrosion begins. And that pain is due either to death or to wickedness, which is much greater than the defect of the limb.
And that pain is due either to death or to wickedness, which is much greater than the defect of the limb. And the signs show it turns black, as if it is burning with fire. And after blackness, then comes the pain of limb to limb. and takes hold all over the body; if you hasten to cover it.
and if it's due to the piercing of any venomous beasts, like a sea scorpion and wasp and similar creatures.
if the corrosion is at the head and shoulder joint, he cauters it, and does not give him any space to come even with his hand.
And if it comes even at the hand, if he cauters the joint, so that the corrosion does not move even to the arm.
and if it comes at the arm, then the cost is incurred; and if it passes the cost, it's a death. and there is no relief for wounds but the quantity of one's virtue.
and so far as the corrosion comes or approaches: if it comes in the first joint, he cauters afterward the second joint.
and if it comes or approaches, then he cauters all of it. and if it rises in the leg, he cauters at the junction of the knee.
and if it rises above the knee, then there is no other remedy but to cut off the hair.
And the manner of covering or bandaging a limb so that it is above and below. And extends some straps one on each side, and others on the opposite sides. And you remove the clay between the two straps over one larger socket, until the bone is exposed;
Then the cloth or bandage, and put one piece of linen on each side, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy skin; and bind to the patient other injuries and abscesses;
And if the blood comes when you perform your work, then immediately cauterize the wound; or you put on any restrictive powders; then return to your medicines until they are completed;
then bind the painful limb in one continuous bandage, and treat it until it is sound again;
and I will tell you what happened at one house where there was pity;
it happened a blackness which seemed as if burnt by fire;
and that corrosion came first in its own time at this house of pity, until it covered all the pity;
and when he saw the corrosion, he took measures to cover it up, and was made sound again;
and soon after he returned with it or took it away by the hand, and came to me;
and I put upon him restorative remedies after the dissection of the joints, and he could not cease the corrosion;
And it is commanded that I hold his hand, and I do not promise to expect a return of the matter. And there was also doubt whether if I touched his hand, he would die. because the virtue of the man was weak; and he despairs altogether, and returns to his land. and if I had struck his hand with a blow, he was healed.
and I have not told you this before because of the way it has been done elsewhere.
Never is the lance extracted in its place, and it stays so long that it causes great accumulation of blood. and then they go in and pierce him, and jump on his legs, as if they were servants. and the skin that is above is also as delicate as a fine velvet cloth. and it will not hurt the bone or nerve; such diseases are called "sound" when they are healed.
but if it is so twisted that it bends the bone outward, then it is called "fistula."
and the skin if you coat it completely, especially when it's delicate, as fine velvet cloth. and is not caused by its corruption (degradation or decay).
And if you have a spouse who believes that the skin will harden, and there is no corruption in it. and the skin is hardened, as long as this cleansing with warm water (clister) continues like this.
look at how large her breasts are, and the hair on them is very unpleasant-smelling. accordingly, this Egyptian medicinal cleansing is done as follows: Take oil, and garlic, and leeches, and place them in a pot, and cook it like a servant. As long as the medicine is red, and it is also thick like honey.
And then they take according to your necessity, both in water and honey. And in washing out his womb, and tightening the fistula. And let the medicine remain in place for a couple of hours, then extract it by pressing.
Do this many times, until the breast is deflated and soft again.
And there is no case where water from ashes is used for washing incisions. When this medicine is not present, then you should burn willow wood ash, and sprinkle it above.
Then pour it out, and wash incisions so well do you know that the breast is soundly healed;
And if these painful symptoms cannot be endured, neither Egyptian medicine nor ash water from willow wood can alleviate them. If the washing with water and honey causes itching or irritation, even if slightly (litargire), Or you wash with honey and milk that has properties to heal and cleanse it; And he applies fire to dry out the wound;
And when you have done this, and you are confident that his chest is well-cleaned, If the enema that is performed brings forth blood into him,
And it is that you should inflame the membrane thinly, and apply oil roses and wine to it; Or you perform an enema with various medicines and treatments, of which I have spoken about their properties or the treatment methods;
And if his perforated chest is small, and the enema cannot be inserted into it; If you widen the hole with a small iron instrument and place there a tent of Egyptian ointment; Or a Basilic herb ointment, as long as it enlarges;
And if the wound is too wide, let it stay open so that the cure and healing can occur there; or the enema may enter;
And if his perforation goes upwards, let it be higher than the place where you insert the curette; For if the wound is in depth, it should not be forced or pushed into him; But if you cannot cover the chest in such a way as you see fit; And if it appears in such a way that the wound corrects itself to its lowest point;
But if you cannot cover the chest in such a manner as you see fit; If there is noit : nature.
and are under one linen cloth covering the entire breast; then apply pressure to the breast wound, a little larger than the first incision. For they are burn wounds dressed under another linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound^2. and place it in the breast wound to align the bowel, and not remove the thick linen cloth for one day afterward^3.
And he who is subjected to the breast wound, often for removing the bowel^4. And he must know what comes from the bowel, whether it is poison or a little, whether digested or undigested^5.
and take care to see if the patient feels pain or not, and whether he has an abscess or not^6.
and when your medication has been applied in part and you see the nature of what comes from the breast wound^7. if you know that the breasts are already feeling better, and approach your healer^8.
and then dislodge it in the morning or after a day, and when you dislocate the wound^9. if you change another linen cloth, and renew the burning^10.
And if the breasts have bowel waste undigested after many days, you know that they do not feel better^11. And if poison secretly corrodes after long periods, do not despair about the healing^12.
but the healer approaches them. For it will cause injury in his wounds and its contrary to doe^13.
And if it vomits an unappetizing lump from its breast after many days, you know that the breast does not grow.
And if it delays in breathing, and becomes distant, and with mixed wet and dry medicines is applied. As if there were diphtheria, for it has a great part of quartz in it, and this is the medicine for its back.
Take diphtheria, and they treat it with rose oil, and extract the arrows from winey fluid in substance.
then it is preserved and used; and this makes my mother's milk thicken. when diphtheria-like symptoms are not present.
or you take myrrh and frankincense and grind them, and mix it with honey when heated. and then they apply a cloth over him, and put it on his breast, and never does one let an astrologer examine him long. And the heavenly lily roots, which are also like flour a hundred times over;
And the heavenly lily roots, which are also like flour a hundred times over; and they use simple or composite mixtures: grind them, make powder, mix with honey that I mentioned before, and then use it. and if this treatment continues for a long time, and it is not healed by this cure;
and if this treatment continues for a long time, and it is not healed by this cure; and then you know that decay has set in, and it is pounded into bone or makes the limbs hard, or forms lumps. if the treatment for a fistula occurs, as we have said before in this context.
from the excision of an ulcer or abscess ('l’abscesse')
Pannuces is a kind of excision done on the sack of the hand's finger ('deuz du poing'); either by piercing or accidentally it happens in other places as well ('en autres doz');
and when it is swollen, and one must be careful not to let a similar excision ('aposteme') come about; And they cut and tear the hairs so much that when they cut the root of the nail, and perhaps even the whole.
And it comes to the corrosion of bone so much that when it comes into contact with the bone, there is a pungent pain, and the shoulders are broad, and have an ash-like color.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not bring any benefit. It seems that you must remove iron from everywhere that is left behind in the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterward. The cautery is very helpful when the bone is healthy, and the nail is also in good condition.
And if the nail presses down on it, and the beginning to appear, and the blood. It seems that you must put a restraint on the nail so that it does not press down. And lift it up, and remove the nail gently and lightly. And place on top of the nail's restraint some medicine that is acidic to overcome it entirely.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then you must deal with it and treat fiercously because as long as the bone is rotten, it cannot heal.
And if you see a shoulder that is rotten, treat it as we have said before in such cases. Then continue to treat until it is healed.
And if it is filled with iron, and remove it, and there is a great pain, it must be healed first. Then cut off the shoulder that is sharply at an angle above your blade.
And warn that the cut should not move near to the nail restraint which is under the shoulder because the maladies would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on it that calms down.
And bind the shoulders of some men in all bodies by chance are full of nails, And moreover he has part where there are bones, and sometimes it is uneven.
And none of the parts grow from the root of the joint, or their birth is not in any of us to do. The one that grows in no other part does not move. And the one that grows at the joint of two parts may sometimes move.
The size of that which is fat, it seems light in this manner: Size in its root of a wide cavity.
The one that grows in the root of the joint is hard to heal if it has two covers.
In that which grows in the lower part of a body, it is presumed you must first correct the rounding of the bone there. Then you correct the bone to an appropriate shape for it, and then treat it as long as it remains sound.
The wounds that come to the assemblage of parts either from birth or by healing a laceration, or by cautery with fire, or by similar things.
If it is presumed you correct those mended by fire, they must be repaited according to their natural forms. Then place between two lances or wick-heated linens so that they do not fuse together. Or you place two thin layers of linen underneitedly so long as they are fused together, as it is required.
If wounds come from neither of its parts with the palm, then correct the scorched one as it is required.
Of little value
They are heavy bundles wrapped with excessive melancholy and woefulness, brought forth by various parts of the body.
And more often occur in legs that work and carry, whereas others do not.
The Bones:espleasing in thex.
:rise of thises. And the other way it is done if you tie the vein, and pull out all of it.
The size is done in this manner: raise the first leg with warm water very much until the thigh is lifted without subtlety. Then stretch the malady leg above the knee just to the part below the groin area; Then bind the vein in one, two, or three points, with a wide band,
Then allow and withdraw the black blood from your hand, from one head to another, as long as there are no signs of improvement in its condition like that of the malady.
And then the salve, and it commands that he should color himself with black meats grinding a cumin seed;
And resume the evacuation and inspection when the veins are normalized, and you shall have no malady;
The alleviating of the malady leg is done thusly: raise the malady leg if it has much hair; Then apply either a bath or the hot water and raise the leg with warm water until it turns red and swells the veins;
And if you have no bath, then heat the leg at fire and bind it long on either side of the thigh or in the part below the ankle;
Then turn the skin at the abscess and scrape the vein from each part until it appears as when she feels it;
And it becomes red and black, and when she feels if it seems also like a strained rope;
Then bind the band around it so that she remains free from the skin, and then pierce the abscess-ridden leg;
Then the cup is inserted into one of these joints, namely three; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. Then apply pressure to the arrow, just as you have done, and treat another wound with similar first aid.
Then insert a different size, or if you are experienced in doing so, then apply pressure to the joint and cup it twice.
Then pull out the second size, increasing in size until it fully discharges, then insert.
And if you cannot remove and lift it, shoot an arrow at each of its two points with strong double thread. And apply pressure and remove it, and shoot a rope in both directions, turning your hand one way and the other until it fully discharges. And make sure it does not cup again, for if it cups, then it cannot be removed or lifted, and becomes harmful to the patient.
And when you have treated it completely, then dress the wound with clean linen and oil roses, and care for it until it is healed.
And if you see that the joint is twisted and crushed together, and not straight as we have said before: It seems that you need to divide the joint tortuously, but not cup again; and treat it as we have described before.
It seems that you need to divide the joint tortuously, but not cup again; and treat it as we have described before. The shape of the iron with which you insert the arrow is like a cone, and it does not cut into the vein but rather cups it.
And it is quite heavy because if it were slender, it would cup the vein; but as we have said, it is rather large in size, and this is its shape.
From the civil vein
This vein is embedded in the legs, warm parts where there are no grasses or trees, and on ground without moisture.
And sometimes it is found elsewhere besides the legs, and this occurs due to rot within the skin.
As it occurs within the body and towards the direction of movement, embedded between flesh and bone.
And if the signs of this vein's onset indicate a very great inflammation in the leg. Then change its position, and as it starts to withdraw, similarly like a plant root.
And when the joint is opened, it implies that you should cover and compress one half of the vein with both hands;
And let the mass remain on the leg, and every time it discharges into the wound, if the skin wraps around the mass, and the new one. And if it is too long, cut a part of it, wrap the remaining mass around it, and do not cover its root while it has been completely discharged. Because if you cut it, it goes back into the cavity and causes abscess formation or bleeding, and thus illness.
For which reason it must be treated little and little until near the top, and does not leave any residue or fragments behind.
and it is not infrequent that this vein when treated with . . . palm widths, or with . . . (the measurement units are incomplete in the provided text) and one came to me who had it issued from .x. palm widths in length, and when you cut it, you push a little spur or opening downwards (the measurement unit "x" is used again here)
if it keeps issuing; and any material left inside must be removed from there, and introduce a variety of medicine mixtures to prevent abscess formation for the next year, then treat it as one would an abscess.
And never does to this vein fall into disarray, and immediately when it opens in the joint or at the joint (the measurement unit "x" is used again here) and it brings forth many small perforations, and from which blood springs up; therefore treat it as we have said previously.
Arrows that emerge between skin and bone (the measurement unit "x" is used again here)
This illness is prevalent in our land "beast disease," because it occurs many times with blood (the measurement unit "x" is used again here)
and is a small arrow that emerges between the skin and bone, and travels through the entire body upward and downward (the measurement unit "x" appears to be repeated) sans garnentence. Alain devisen. I'dant from ce:
And it is infected with moisture from various humors, like how worms and snails and roundworms or abdomen come about.
And there is doubt of its malignancy, for when it goes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to oil. By chance enters it again, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
When you have seen it cure and drain, how little force can be used until it goes away:
Therefore it indicates that you should lay out the joint above and below with a strong ligament tightly bound:
Then cover it up and let it be tightened with force; and if you touch it in the flesh, you will not relieve it: If you cauterize with fire above it while it is still moving:
And the greater harm it does if it rubs off or removes the oil, as we have said:
And if you see it coming from the oil or near its surface, tighten around it there and apply pressure on it:
And it advises the patient to avoid mixing different remedies meant to treat the bad humors that are prone to causing harm:
And if there is swelling from moist food.
Of the pain that comes from fevers. :gave:age in Old French. Itace 75:eslater. Theil (2015. surexente.
I called upon a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein.
and shortly after, I saw it rise up to the shoulder like a worm in its shell. as quickly as possible, like live money when it is cut off from another's vein;
and the pain moved from there to her shoulder,
and then a little while later, it ran all over the body until she reached the other arm;
then she told me that it was turning back into the body, as I saw her;
I was amazed how much she moved this one limb in relation to the other, for I had never seen this disease manifest itself in such a manner; So far, I have seen many who had wanted to move pain from one place to another; but I had never seen it like that before, as I saw the woman;
and I thought it might be because the woman had a dry heart, and the veins discovered; and because it appears that windy asthma is constrained there;
but it did not appear to them for those who are lucky, and have moist hearts and filled veins;
And when you saw this illness and the patient's pain, if it opens as we have said; If the arrow above and below the shoulder hits suddenly, and then let it remain so that the constriction of the joint forces it to expel the lodged arrow. And cauterize the vein; and if you do not see them at your eyes,
If the treatment for that which dislodges moisture constriction, like foul powders, and serpent's venom, and similar things.
Arrows
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and whether they enter the body through the mouth or elsewhere.
The variety of their kinds is that there are those with large points, and small ones, and hairs, and glued; And there are those with two points (angles), and those with tongues, and those which have fragments; And one that hurts in no member if it hurts according to two methods: or in the main limb has hair;
Like a skull, body, liver, kidney, bowels, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs; When it hits none of these limbs' joints and the sign of death appears to you thereafter; It suggests that you must be careful with the removal of this arrowhead because its wound occurs in many ways ("after in various positions"); And when this bad sign does not appear to you and the arrowhead is still embedded, then treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrowhead hits and penetrates the bone, and it pushes down into the brain. And when there is blindness and paralysis and bleeding from the tongue, and inflammation in the tongue, and convulsion and mixing of reason, and vomiting of bowels. And perhaps it has no strength for nostrils, or ears; and perhaps also affects speech and voice. And the swelling of the moistened white wound resembling a poultice, and in jumping as well as burning from charcoal.
And if this sign appears to you as a symptom of illness, and take out the splinter if it is not removed on its own.
The sign of swelling when it presses or affects the body is that it is close to the left breast, and it feels as if it were pierced into something hard, not empty. And perhaps the swelling also moves as the poultice does, and black blood comes out, and cold sweat and shivering, and fainting. And now you know there is doubt as to whether the wound will dislocate.
And the signs of the splinter that is never without a discharge of phlegm, and the throat swells up, and the patient's lips turn blueish-purple, and he breathes heavily and yearns for relief from the cold.
And if the splinter lies beneath the skin, it is near the small of the back; and it causes great pain all over and he breathes heavily with every movement, and they move every limb from the shoulders downwards.
And if the splinter lies within the belly, perhaps there is no discharge from the wound in its place; and the digestion of meat may become problematic.
And if the splinter lies within the belly and jumps out through the intestines, there is no hope for either treatment or removal of the splinter.
And if the splinter lies in the bladder, and it causes his urine to flow out, and he feels great pain; you know that this wound is fatal.
lore thefaire tostriese sans: itiage augeurs a laisse avecis enge (itenture. Whatter resse0tractique. When the sciatica is in the spinal cord or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you because you do something else like that.
It happened at one house where the sciatica was struck or pinched in the root of the nerve: I attempted it, and she was healed on one side without feeling anything unusual afterwards:
And struck at another shot where the sciatica was pinched in the oil underneath the paper beneath: and the sciatica was replaced, but it did not go back towards the end of the piece: and it was large like an archer's quoit, made of one iron light enough to touch the ears; he used it and healed without any subsequent bad effects:
And struck an arrow from the throat on a patient with cancer, and this arrows was Arabian in shape with ears:
I combed out the hairs, and subtly removed them until I struck it, and healed the throat cancer patient:
And struck an arrow at one house where it was found in the chest or abdomen, and I thought he had died:
and then after passing thirty years, his condition did not change: I cut on the arrow, and took hold of it, and struck it, and healed without any bad accidents occurring:
And if you see a house where an arrow was lodged in the back, and the wound sealed up above it:
and left the arrow inside him, without changing his natural disposition: and did not find any harm in any of its natural actions:
And see another man where an arrow was lodged in his face, and the wound sealed up above it:
and suffered great pain from this situation, as well as many other similar signs:
And struck an arrow at one house where the prince lived in between his neighbors' houses: and was slightly inclined to the right side; and this arrows was fully replaced:
I went to seek treatment after it had been there for three years; and found the wound very wide:
I tried all sorts of subtle attempts with her, but did not feel anything: and he felt pain in his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow:
I placed the iron implement in his belly untouched, because he did not flatten it out. and there appeared the arrowhead on his body:
and there appeared the arrowhead on his body: I placed my iron implement for a year, healed the wound primarily, and then continued to suffer those long-lasting painful sensations:
until he felt the arrow in his neck for a year; and he told me about it. I placed medicinal water cauterizing on the wound for several months until it was healed:
and tried to move the arrowhead out of his body, which then came up at the surface of the skin: and I covered the wound with that medicinal water cauterizing until it was visible again:
and afterward he showed signs for three months.
And then I pierce if the wound that I have made with pliers, and heave on one side and another, and it cannot come out.
And yet I continued to subtly manipulate and engage with various instruments of massage until I had the pliers well made, in that year. According to what will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it and leave the wound.
And the judge says that the chartilage cannot restore the nose. I left it, but the wound was sewn up and fully healed.
You have told me of the quality of extracting some arrows. If you apply your treatment to what I do not tell you, for the book cannot possibly cover everything.
But the most skilled surgeons know only a little about this (or something similar), and they are present when it is there but absent when it is missing. I have performed nine works and no instrument is involved in the extraction of things that are embedded within this art.
I say that the arrows do not come from the limbs or they are stuck because according to this treatment/method... (or something similar) Or they enter the wound (or on the other hand;
And that which jumps into it through a hole or when it enters the body's flesh, and this has never happened before now.
And if she does not jump now, let her keep it so that the hair grows in place and smooths out any ingrown hair.
And also if she is lodged in the bone, and cannot come out, let her stay in that position for any number of days, and grow hair every day.
And if she does jump, and if not, then pierce through any small hole or crack in it until the hair inside is stretched out, and then extract it.
And if the ingrown hair is placed back in its place where it cannot be seen, and covers everything with it. And if you feel it, extract it using any available instrument.
and if you cannot pull it out precisely from the wound, and through the perforation of the ingrown hair. nantes dextre:0125; ilk ailse malice, c'enle, andante 13 :27esupports. Ipsumaise. Thisen (as of13rdentire: "Cajstroplace. Andrompourte. La itens. pexifles ceffecturecelle for
pexifles ceffecturecelle for If a bone is stuck at about two parts inside the muscle so that you can pull it out, and then break or flatten the ears of the arrowhead, as long as you are able to remove it;
and then break or flatten the ears of the arrowhead, as long as you are able to remove it; and subtly, even though you do not break the arrowhead, so that it may be removed more easily.
And if you cannot remove it once, until the flesh has penetrated it, then extract it, for the extraction is pleasing. And if you find blood coming from it in a way contrary to what we have described in this chapter's treatment;
and warn you from cutting nerves and piercing veins; as for how to remove the arrowhead without causing danger,
either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient accordingly based on the form he was in when the arrow fell. because it is the greatest aid he can provide, and if you cannot position him accordingly to the signs shown by his symptoms.
The arrow that came from another direction does not show any signs of injury there; or the skin is inflamed in such a way that it can be seen or felt without hesitation.
then cut down below it as long as you can with your tools; and then remove the arrowhead if it has become lodged.
And if she is lodged in the bone, rotate your hand roundly, so long as it enters the bone; then widen the bone and remove the arrowhead.
And if it cannot be extracted, let it remain there for now; and then attempt to remove it again as long as any movement occurs.
and if the wound contains an arrowhead, push it out entirely into the flesh.
and if there is a puncture wound, administer bandaging; use an instrument with a hook to apply it. so that the point of the arrowhead enters the hook's head; and then push it in forcefully.
and if the arrow is lodged deeply within the flesh, push an instrument with its point in to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrowhead touches the wound, and you must cope with every hair or nail, so that it may be extracted. Aiustromes:sainceur thefier: Ipsum. Here'icts, then. Theilicre ether.
And if it touches flesh or blood or the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close by, and you cover it up, provided it covers.
And do not cover the vein or nerve, then extract it, and then close the wound, as is proper. and the treatment until she is healthy.
The form of these pincers in which the arrowheads are similar to a bird's beak, and here is that shape.
And they have many methods: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of arrows.
of common veins Of veins that are well-healed, wherein there is chiefly sixteen (16).
It is known that there are twenty-one (21) wounds which are after the ears called "doux herbeaux" or tender shoots. And there are twenty-one (21) arteries which appear in eleven (11) temples. And there are twenty-one (21) veins that are found in eleven (11) lips, which they call "aspires." And there is one vein that lies near the forehead, and another that is at the top of the nose. And there are twenty-one (21) pins which are to the neck; There are twenty-one (21stans le nombre qu'il estinions ofx: and thete mastel. it’s tongue akeen answellenevolveignce. Itinces: en anglais in English.tongue :neighnece ail, toenglish. Arayenne and nexentures deferent:sentence. Whatentrenchmentre and cestrumain.
The arrows which we commonly heal are one in each arm:
One is leaning to the left side, and they call it "the head arrow" people. And the movement is called "fast," composed of the lateral and the basilar. And they call it "head arrow" people; the basilar is on the right side. And they call it "belly arrow," and is under the fascia. And that one which we heal, evidently opening up inside the sac.
And the safer arrow is the one between the little finger and ring finger, which has two holes:
And in the leg where there are three arrows; one is underneath the right scapula (shoulder blade). And the second type of movement which is on the right ankle side; and that arrow which is leaning "nees", corresponding to the other ankle:
And in the other leg there are three such arrows, similar to those on this side:
The safer wounds that follow behind the ears and have been associated with ancient remedies for earaches, and migraines: The second, et iles, siéchant d'orre quatorne pascalin the body de cestudiere: les :toi cescripture, etiicit laissages ofses plantes.
The second, et iles, siéchant d'orre quatorne pascalin the body de cestudiere: les :toi cescripture, etiicit laissages ofses plantes. And burns the skin where arrows are placed, and tightens severely the shoulder of the sick person with a sharp point. When the arrows penetrate behind the ears in the head's upper part: Do you feel your pulse on your body, and if it is swelling inside your chest?
Then take the needle and thrust it under the vein there, then move your hand up along the entire arrow. And make sure and the skin and arrow well together pass through a narrow place, and draw out as much blood as you see.
Then tighten and hold it until it's sound again.
And I have already said about the incision and cautery in the first book.
The sickness of those arrows that are in the temple head if it is old enough to migrate. And so, and cataract usual, and on the shoulders of tears are the drops.
And the quality of that sickness if it is as I have said: And it is that the sick person's shoulder is pulled tightly, so much that the arrows appear openly. And you feel the pain in your body there, and then it swells inside;
Then lift the skin along the arrow in your upper indication, and thrust the needle under there; And lift up and press down on the arrow in your upper part, just as you have done with other arrows, and draw out the blood according to necessity.
Then slacken the sick person's arm and place it over the arrow for an hour, then put on cotton.
And then the blood clot forms, and it lets the clot be until it is healthy; we have spoken about their recovery and extraction, as at the beginning of the book.
The disease of the frontal vein is just as much as the disease of the cranial (cephalic) cavity ancient diseases, and migraines, and rheumatism.
And its quality is that the painful distension of the vein twists it until the vein appears; Then take the instrument which is called "sincipore", whose shape we have here:
And put the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, letting the blood flow according to the quantity you see. And then let the patient hold his head, and keep the vein intact until it is healthy and never use a wide flame.
Always, it does not mean the flames should be too strong; and if they are unevenly applied, because the bone is close, and perhaps breaks the flame when applied gently.
The disease of the two veins that are in the jaw joints helps their movement, and with the toothache, and rheumatism, and headaches in the eyes, and cranial cavity diseases.
And the quality of their disease is that it twists its neck without any connection, just as before.
Then let the disease, and be it on the same course, a little fire for a short time, a bit wide, because there is no strength in it.
And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then let the blood be corrected accordingly to your skill, and place it on a couch, and securely bind it well.
The disease of the vein in the neck is comparable to fever and various cranial cavity diseases. Just as migraines and rheumatism that come from the cranial cavity, and especially when it is old.
And the quality of this disease is that it twists its neck; then stretch it with your left hand. s'toute ilceleves de toutes:age:sous (13.coman cece (theil. Thisingles. Itunits, and the 2lager. Injurts, as :mete. naugeursecamecteuxssoèxure :sagges:fabloxentribe
And do not too much press on them, and cauterize the wound according to its necessity, then bind it tightly overnight, for it is very quickly restored.
The sickness of the shoulders helps in reattaching the upper limb, and in beginning movement, and is involved in many diseases, and with inflammation, and with corrosion, and with shingles, and similar conditions.
And the nature of the sickness is that it draws out the patient's hernia from both sides, as we have said. And let the master standing above the headache be in one position, and see the patient's pain in a certain area.
Then stretch the vein slightly wide, then treat the wound quickly as is customary.
Then turn another way in the other vein, dislocate the ligament gently, and restrain the blood vessels mildly. that it does not dislocate; and let him stay until morning so that the wound is healed.
Of the sickness of veins (This line seems to be unrelated or missing context, possibly an incomplete sentence referencing "sickness of veins.") The sickness of the veins above the mouth helps in drawing blood from the mouth, and with gum disease, and cracks in the lips, and sores and ulcers.
And the nature of this sickness is to make the hernia sit in front of you, and restrain its sides as I have said. then turn the mouth, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the cheek and the other on the left. And they are known for being black in color, and because these ulcers have thin dark blood vessels. therefore do both of them, and if you cannot recognize them, then you are doubtful about it.
therefore do both of them, and if you cannot recognize them, then you are doubtful about it. If you handle the larger of each section, and also do similar vein procedures above and below, as it is a typical method.
Of the sickness of under the tongue (This line seems to be unrelated or missing context, possibly an incomplete sentence referencing "sickness under the tongue.") The sickness of veins under the tongue helps after the treatment of cephalic (head) surgery, and it is related to straining the throat, and various eye diseases, and mouth diseases.
And the nature of this sickness is that it allows you to see between your hands in front of the sun, and lift the tongue, and look at one vein black on each side.
Heal both of them, but do not press too much, as they are the arteries.
The veins that we commonly heal are usually healed according to certain techniques.
or by pressing on one vein slightly wide, like how it is done with small inflamed areas called "aneurysms," and we call it that. And are wide and subtle according to the width and stretching of the veins. The name of this inflamed area is very well known, and it is quite wide as you see.
s:nauxin to theocurdecthecthiftericimpossible.iseurs  :vellame curecteveldection : lubrexes;rechelette andsconge for a bouthefferre.sement   Fromages,inscrant:llume heseccellecitan outoldescecruaunthexanthelevesicle and this form of olive leaf:
and it is more finely pointed, and it is for lighter wounds, or it contains subtle yellowish blood.
The lighter part of the olive leaf, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and chest, and stomach, and abdomen.
And it requires the physician to ensure proper drainage, and that artery pressure remains below. And if it compresses the artery, and blood comes out, then this must be stopped immediately as I have said. And it should not be pierced by a needle but rather sliced like an onion.
And if the olive leaf does not open clearly, it requires that you extract it and replace with another. Or you wish none of this from the leaf, or heal its vein in your arm where it opens clearly; And cut to the olive leaf like we have said.
And if you come to know the vein of healing, it is necessary that you extract your arm where the vein is visible as long as you discern the pulse. Then sign the healing vein, and then bind your arm, and cut to the olive leaf as previously mentioned.
And beware of injuring the artery when you see the vein swelling, for it is part of the artery; do not delay then.
And if you see it protruding as much as the urine from a child, and it is red and subtly colored, indicating that there is no artery involved. Hurry up then, and stretch your arm long enough, before you squeeze it where the vein is present, as many times we have done.
Once your arm is tied up, leave it as is, and do not move the painful vein, even in fear, and don't allow it to move until healed.
And if the vein is not found, and you preserve toge lace leu maundre, tu eschief leu quateres ce soustres les angeles: au cerne :et aureaigne leu : ounce of the malgreat :a.
And take a clove of garlic, and make it, and take one half and place it well next to the other day.
If there is no lancet available, that's fine; if not, then the treatment, as we have said before, involves using powders to harden blood.
And the lancet's not used in any other conditions related to the small wound or the injury of the arm joint.
The healing of the vein in such a way that it treats the blood at the surface and within the artery is as follows: for it is composed of both vein and artery layers, as we have previously stated;
and it is required that the surgeon be aware of the nerve near which it lies, and if it has been excessively penetrated, then the nerve must heal. and it swells up and its healing is hindered, and perhaps cannot be cured at all;
and this nerve opens frequently, and if it does not open in any patients due to its subtlety, then one must make sure that the instrument is properly sanitized; and avoid damaging the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then it must be cut long.
The healing of the "cephalic" (which is anachronistic in this context) aids by drawing blood from the head and aiding the veins.
And it is safer to puncture the vein of an olive tree or a myrtle tree, for it is the safest among all thorns, as it does not have any nerve nor vessel.
Always, it is better to choose the easier path, and do not fret if you have to start over again. And by chance, it inflames some people's bodies, so it is not necessary to be the first time, but they do not fret. The quality of the cure depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you should know about curing, if is that the cure isn't meant for keeping health alone.
and to prevent diseases from coming. And the cure is performed in one of these three venues that are known to us, namely, cephalic, fasting, and basilical. And if one should cure at the beginning of prayer, and in springtime before eating when signs of fullness appear.
And if one should cure the first day or the third day after two or three days of fasting.
The cure which is meant for diseases has no fixed determination but it depends on whether the need is day or night in every hour and all ten.
And it does not necessarily cure the children just at twelve years old, nor women for a quarter of a month up to seven days. And it should not be cured the one who has passed 60 years.
And when anyone wants to be cured in any way that they choose, it is required that he purify the intestines with a liberal enema. if he has much food retained, so that the veins do not draw out the excess from the intestines for fear of harming the main limbs.
And it is not necessary to heal those who are too strong from eating meat, or who are drunk, so long as they remain in that state.
and if healed after colic pain, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiplicement of fever, and the whole body-arm.
surname offermeasures andle:cette morce :er.rathering. 530sage.
Then there is also a bath, if no thing defends it, to subtly remove the blood.
and be healthy from the vein when passing through the third, as we have said.
and guard you from one day's work, and penny, and pleasure, and similar things.
and to trim the hairs and fasten them, and let the healer be higher than those whose blood we draw, and press the arm with two or three times (assuming a repetitive action).
then draw back the band slightly above the wound, because when it is too tight or loose, one cannot correct it without.
and then press the hand on the veins while they swell, and smell them.
then make the healer slightly moisten a little oil on his hand, and place it above that vein in the limb for a short time until one feels the vein being drawn out. that the vein does not flow and cause harm to the wound. Because there are veins that escape as if they were strings of the healer, and such are pleasing with their luster. so that when it is put above the moistened area, there is a retreat of fluid, and it cannot open the vein, and thus it belongs to these.
and if it widens the vein, for this reason it is known that healers are informed about these things.
And if the work on the vein is done for the first time, it is good; but if not, it may recur again in a small area around that spot or above it where there has been an injury, and the vessel is not swollen at all.
And if the vessels are swollen and the patient complains of pain, let it be one or two days without binding the arm: perhaps an abscess will form at the incision site; if not immersed or bathing, then it may recur if desired.
and if the wound is small, or the sinus is gently pressed without doubt that it will not lose so much blood as you have seen, then hold firmly in the same place where I am pressing.
And for a short while afterward, so that the vessels are swollen; because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the vessels swollen, do not repeat the incision; and place a little oil on it, because it lightens the blood flow, and turns that oil into the liquid in this vein.
and in this way apply oil to each incision you make for draining the veins, so as to prevent the flow of blood.
and that makes it three-leaf and bowed when placed over the vein; if subtly pressed and separated when it is too large.
And if it comes upon large abscesses that often happen, immediately when they are only drained for the first time or when opening the vein is small. if you hasten it and place a damp sponge in water on the vein slightly heated, and hold it tightly for an hour.
and it is necessary to do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it does not return to that place within any number of days without any blackness or green coloration on it, then you will not need to worry. and if you see anything at all, put on it a little oil or myrrh juice mixed with vinegar; mushroomy.
"Este time. I'saince lakes d'une parle. Parler and it ainte tounge the same as. Ita: Aesme les,lalmosture paraley. Theuccare himage of thek, Laid le mondexent froms aimer:laigneau:reign. Theorc: Aude la: 13. So now you must not place anything from what we have said, for perhaps it might damage the artery; but he made an ice pack to harden the joint, and then treated it with another treatment, until it is sound again.
And for each piece of flesh according to its quantity and color of blood.
For if the blood is not blackened but remains red, let it continue until it becomes pale; and if you see it to be large, let it remain until it has been liquefied; and if it is too cold, let it cool down.
And it must concern the one who is pale and thin, and has expertise in blood-letting, as they make the wound larger and the flames wider.
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite and make them healthier with lesser treatments and often, and they must be made healthier by cutting across, not pinching.
And this manner of healing is safe from the runoff of blood and nerve swelling, and it's more valuable than long or wide treatment.
And for the one whose courage requires healing, it must give them milder pain with juice from graped apples if they are afflicted; and if they have been burned, treat their wounds three or four times or seven.
And if they have a cold complexion, immerse them in the milder pain-relieving juice before treatment; or treat with honey syrup sweetened with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and an aromatic syrup.
And if the palm has healing, after the release of blood, it must breathe bracing broth and an aromatic syrup.
nge toteletes d'argent d'aicre dores vers ells. Whatsoever thekes sachet, it is ailexible let: Averbalice. Fromage decielicuption duke ofileneur aste tityen lemonde. Whatisolate andmeatrix lore.ceterralxentirelytracture. Itaxent. Forst.
And if it wants to dislocate his arms, and again at other times, when it is greatly weakened by great pain, he must slowly recover according to the continued amount of its vital force.
And if it wants to dislocate its arms after the first treatment, and it is strong, then it must recover for one or two hours after the first treatment, or after the second hour.
And if it wants to heal somewhere else, it should heal on the second or third day.
For it has much blood inside the joint that is already swollen, and brings fever; therefore, it must drain a large amount of fluid from the abscess, and dilate the cavity until it fills with pus. then that you treat all healing conditions, and put your hand on the joints where it is recovering, so that the shoulder does not slip back into its socket. and this happens many times when the healing is neglected.
but it does not matter if you loosen the arm, and drain the fluid a second time when the cavity is closed, and firmly press on it. and if it is swollen, do not extend its arm quickly, as this would be harmful.
but let it heal the second time as well; or you do not touch its head with the tip of your finger until the blood that has accumulated in the vein cavity completely drains out. and put on it some wet linen tied up tightly, and press it gently.
And if the vein is bleeding, let it go and do not squeeze it further, as long as the abscess has calmed down.
And if there is a need to drain the blood the second time, you can let it heal in that place itself, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein releases the arm from its head at the top of the vein because it is composed.
And the way to heal it is that you hold your hand in warm water until the swelling turns red.
then gently move it if the vein is well healed now, not too wide nor long.
and if the cavity is wide, then heal it well near the joint of the hand, and when it cannot drain any more, put your hand in warm water again and let the fluid come out from there until you have enough.
but if it is in the air, do not put your hand warmly again, because you would make it colder than it already is.
and the healing of this vein is safer than in other veins, as it does not have any joints or tendons.
theuille disevent'sut.
Stretch out one's hand, and pour hot water over it, until the vein appears. And if the blood is not mixed with impurities, and if you cleanse it thoroughly in every way, there will be no complaint.
and do not prick too deeply, for the nerves are all threadbare from dryness.
And then re-heat the hand in hot water, so that it does not become frozen in the wound, and from which no part can escape.
And when you have treated the blood as proficiently as is your profession requires, if it appears in the vein, place oil and wire there to bind quickly, and so perform for each instance.
The health of the left hand is equivalent to the disease of the mouse, and do everything else as I have told you for the right hand.
The health of the throat is equivalent to all diseases that are found on the body's surface. As with diseases of the marsh, and retention of flowers, and illness of rain, and joints and old legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of his healing is that it causes painful burning in hot water and rubs on the vein until it breaks. And above the joint where there is pain; and the vein is at the ankle, and from it springs much rain.
And it is the bigger rain or ankle swelling, which moves around.
And if you heal it in the vein, then take care of the nerves that are there, and treat its health as one would by treating a wound; or let it fade away slowly.
And if it does not come out of there, then put the vein back into hot water and let it drain well.
And if the vein needs redoing for the first time, repeat it a little higher up because it is salted. Don't doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do to other places in the vein accordingly.
The shoulder joint of the vein is at the ankle, and its function is similar to that of a hernia pain when it is hot with blood.
And the quality of its function if it causes great discomfort or pain when hot and extracts above the ankle; pulling requires twisting (3). This must be done by twisting.
because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, you must cleanse in all ways that you can, and across. And it is worthwhile to do so because the joint is loose, and it is quite restored by hand itself.
And it is worthwhile to do so because the joint is loose, and it is quite restored by hand itself. And if you do not treat it, none of the veins that are open or on top will heal properly and through little movements, and protect yourself with nerves.
And do such treatment to the blood that you can see, and then loosen it, and put on cotton and compress it; she is now cured.
Ventricular suctions
Venesections are made of horns, or hide, or wood; and venotomy is performed by one of two ways: either by cutting with a blade and drawing out the blood, or by making an incision without using a blade.
And this venotomy performed with a blade is done in two ways: either by applying fire to it, or using fire as well.
and twelve others in other two neck regions; and the venosection inside the chin. and the venosection in the thighs; and the venosection on the heels. and venosections in the arms; and venosections in the legs. and venosections on the ankles; and this venotomy does not treat blood, because it involves small wires that are scattered throughout the flesh.
and because of this no one has mentioned it before, as with venotomy; and it is not worth mentioning that she should be performed with fire or without fire, in no illnesses of replenishment; so long the joints are dislocated.
And if by necessity of disease it requires to exhale, or for customs, we administer some medicine every hour at the beginning or end of each month, and in between.
because there are such individuals who, when they have to exhale, if they weigh their heads;
and if such individuals experience bloating and pain in their face, and chest, and neck, and darkness over their eyes;
and those who experience a taste of blood in their mouths, and have lost their tongues, and gather more blood; and if there are such individuals who think about it, and see with their fingers the color of blood and wounds and similar things;
And when we observe these signs, and immediately after the beginning of each month, we then order them to exhale every three hours;
The remedy for the weakness of the head ... which brings relief to the pain and does not require it after removing all the blood;
and this exhalation is in relation to the remedy of the cephalic (head or skull-related);
and it does not require those who have cold constitutions to use it, for that would cause them much harm;
and because it does not require those who are vigilant in their use to avoid it, but rather for those with cold-related illnesses;
And those who benefit from it often become absent-minded, and for this reason, they should place the suction device slightly further down due to the uncertainty of positioning;
The exhalation remains in relation to the remedy of the neck and breast (or chest area) and for this reason it is tightly bound; And for cutting through the channel of the blood vessel, and sucking, and filling it up.
And it must be pressed lightly, for if it holds too tightly, it may cause obstruction or stomach and heart problems.
The windings are such that they cause the greatest pain in the sides of the abdomen and chest, and eye inflammation, and strangulation, and pain at the root of the teeth.
And it is in the interest of the sanctity of the cathedral; it requires that you command the saint to express his hand for putting on, so he does not block an artery, and does not discharge blood from wounds.
The windings are like the disease of the mouth, and gum decay, and similar afflictions found in the mouth; and it is in accordance with the traditions concerning these two jaws.
The windings in the spine are like a disease that comes from moisture and swelling.
The windings in the groin are as much like two handfuls of a cord. because it draws blood from these large groins.
And commands the saint not to exert too much pressure, for his hand is empty of flesh, and he knows within them nerves and arteries.
The suction placed upon the backbone is like the foundations of deep-seated afflictions and diseases in that area, and it requires that the suction be large and heavy so as to perform well; and perhaps if it were delicate, it might break apart, making great wounds.
The suction of the legs tightens effectively, because it draws blood from all over the body, and they are comparable to old rains and marshes; and relieve pain in flowers, and weaken the limbs after long use, and bring about various conditions.
s :cause:se tendre laisse cestrange. Forcéjorice. ously, andre jurts, soire de laurange.
And if it is large, it must cause two injuries: the first to slightly open the path of the thick blood.
And if it is very high, it must cause a third injury; and when we want to draw out little blood at once, we find it sufficient with just one attempt.
And if we draw out much blood, we often recount it; and when the without is very high, they pierce it quickly, and it ends that its presence is firmly established.
And must for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose joints are troublesome to dislocate, you oil the hairs of the suction cups with a lightly penetrating and dissolving oil: if it is so, of purple oil, or soft almond oil, or seed oil of gourd:
and if it is so, of watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar:
And if excessive coldness is large and thick, you take bitter oil, or balm of vitriol, or aniseed oil, and similar things:
And if that which is healthy has tender skin and large joints, it does not require putting any oil:
but it must be washed after the aspiration of holy water, or cold water, or water of mulberry tree, or gourd seed water, or potash water, or other similar things:
And those who have much moisture, they rise with saltwater or water of myrtle and sumach, and similar things:
And those who have thick excessive moistures rise with strong wine, or water of honeycomb, or broth of anise or chamomile, or other similar things:
And they must beare la sanc dou bonum enchiel.
nature. And ordered those who are choleric to hold back if their stomach is too hot and inflamed. It implies that he should do cold things, like apples and radishes cut into thin pieces, and leafy greens served on a plate, and similar things.
And mix cow's milk with puppies, and meat from a castrated animal, and moist meats.
And those who have a cold constitution should consume honey syrup and aromatic wine in moderation, which is neither too hot nor too cold, and mix cow's milk with puppies, and moist meats, small birds, and quail eggs.
And the day he will vomit, then he should drink more than eat.
And it is necessary to give neither clysters nor enemas before or after vomiting, in order to support the main limbs. And if one removes his joints, he does not need to be particularly careful about those who are hot-tempered and consume the hot drink.
The suction cups that are placed on the injured areas are those applied to the liver, and below the knees, for arthritis, dysentery, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and lumbago (low back pain), because these body parts do not suffer from injuries under such treatment.
And it is done not to draw blood from one limb into another, but rather for the purpose of addressing the aforementioned conditions and treatments. And as we place the suction cups on the breasts when the nerves are pained; to reduce the stickiness in the limb, and as we place the suction cups on the abdomen and diarrhea for reducing the limb size.
And when there is pain due to an operation or incision, it occurs because of the attracting power of blood drawn from the affected part, or dryness from loss of fluid in that area.
And in this case it is done when blood has been retained in the liver or below the knees due to vomiting; by placing suction cups on these areas.
And these suction cups are filled with empty vessels to induce only the necessary amount of suction; and sometimes they are mixed with water or thin liquids.
:meentails toloutilmesur lege les meaux French: theuise aide. Aids in Frenchieses, sioune lepremieres. Ile devisement, Theor: "faire designe.
The form of the suction device made with fire, as follows:
And it must be wide and half a palm in length, and it should extend or pierce the mark to one millimeter, similar to inserting a needle.
And it should be made of red-hot iron, placed before so the patient does not bite their fingers while putting it on the limb.
And it must have a one-inch crossbeam of red-hot iron or metal, for holding an implement in place.
And its size should vary according to the disease and the severity of those affected by it.
For children's suction cups differ from those used for adults; thin ones are not suitable for fat people.
And it should be applied to this limb using this suction device.
Take a small object made of wax or another material, and place it inside the suction cup along the crossbeam that is on the instrument. So that it illuminates at the bottom of the suction cup, without burning the patient's skin.
Then place it on the limb, and be sure that the instrument is placed under the small hole we have mentioned, so when you see any fluid seeping out, immediately remove the suction cup.
And take out the object in the same manner, and repeat it often, as you have learned to do.
In the cuntenance of pleurisy in adult. There is no crossbeam orifice norperture, and sois nonesme, and en unesparle leu ail leprecsent, ete decaire ofse parler d'arme eslere nessus tote la chrestophe thexte touns:
soldirectxawesive:nature, apeople:seculiscribe.
Without being dressed for they can not put a suction cup because of their smallness, as in our lips and gums, and likewise the rest. And in the undressed surfaces of flesh, as if they were drawn or not, and similar things.
And the quality of its use is that when you move them without undressed ones, as if they were sharp and smooth to the point where one feels pain, likewise.
And you should place a nut in their undressed surface, as long as they are full-grown, and without anything in the cavities. And then you should be knowledgeable about veins and suction cups, and rub the limb so long as it is reddened, and place them on the undressed surfaces.
And when they appear smooth and pleasant, if it is their undressed surface or one can put a suction cup there, then you should place them because this holds great value afterwards.
If that's not the case, lift the undressed surface from inside, and then moisten it well, and then extract.
And if the undressed surfaces are too dry after examining their internal cavities, then moisten it with a cold linen cloth ("drapel de lin"), and place them there until they become tense.
And if they are multiplied, put them on a ground glass shattered, or gauzes, and similar things, so that it remains congested.
And you put on the joint somewhat of fine hairs, and let them grow until they adhere to the joint, so it will now stay.
And if you have more knowledge about it, take other herbs.
And if the herbs do not take effect, then you rub the joint with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle until the pain subsides. And then put them on, and immediately as they feel the blood, let it adhere.
And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle some aloe and fine charcoal on them or ash, then it will stop now.
This begins the Book of Dislocations
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they concern the treatment of dislocation and reduction.
Seeing that the master physician did not find any of these topics in any ancient books or letters.
And for that reason is strengthened medicine here, because I found none better.
And I know nothing about it because of the ancient books and through studying them so much that I have learned their science, and by experience, and from the customs of my life.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein, and summarized at the end, and clearly shown these forms of treatments that are most suitable, as I have done in these preceding twenty-one chapters.
Therefore it is necessary that we say the prologue of this book and summarize the chapters or how they are placed in our understanding, and delay on its virtue, so that those who have tried them will know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or loosening comes from none, it is necessary for you to examine both parts of the malady in a patient, so that if no thing hinders all, as weakness of body, fever, or old age;
If he has not been too cold or too hot; and menest with frozen limbs, which means icy baths, and wood charcoal and bird's feathers, and does not drink wine nor consume any fats, and does not fill himself excessively with meats that fill the veins of blood, until there is doubt about arterial puncture or swelling in a limb; then he should return to the first primary governance which he used.
And when the bones that are broken begin to restore, it is necessary that the patient be fed with meats that cause a lot of burping, or have viscosity like cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and pie, and pancakes made from different types of flour, and oats, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For the burping that occurs represents a quicker bone fracture.
And you should know that bones of many and decayed ones cannot be well restored or joined according to their nature by the healing of limbs, nor those who are too soft, like those of young children.
But do not cure the broken bone by reshaping it; rather, use a strong metal band that strengthens and joins the limb together, as much as it was before; and for this reason, it is necessary to feed him with large meats, which we have mentioned before.
You should know that fractures come in many ways.
Because the main fracture is different from the hammer fracture or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all types of fractures. Because it has a break that goes downward, and another one by thinning out, like the tip of a feather used for writing.
Because it has a break that goes downward, and another one by thinning out, like the tip of a feather used for writing. And if there is also a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is very small crack.
And tostent: Estienne devises oferce en saillant por quittance of cestresse: Sièche flesure des maunder:
. All the textures enjourte:sure as :interpretation.
And when there is no twisting of his neck, and he does not feel much pain, as the maladies do not have any fractures.
But it may still have twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture. If it does not require only moving the limb by hand, but instead using subsequent medicines that come after, and then holding it gently now.
And you know that the fracture which will come inwardly, and their joined ends are separated, it must now align them equally, so as to open up large stones.
And if stones come in, if they leave no day for it, as long as their cutting is calmed down. Then make it equal in its movement and alignment that you can move gently and adjusted, and you know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restorations thereof or where fragments are present; then hold it as required after.
And if the bone has pieces, if it is joined by parts, whether with hands or a piece, or in some small limb, or to string and rope and at your hand;
And put the limb as naturally as it is formed, so that when the fragments of both sides are displaced, you reposition them by all means in their places and keep to your work so that neither injury nor pain occurs to the patient.
And align the joints of the bones according to their best forms.
And he feels well in your hand if you think it's not very good; if it moves gently, and don't stretch it too much or press it as they do to make the limb come back quickly and contract through their methods of treatment—as we have seen many times before.
And when the limb is at a stable point if it rests well in its malady such that it does not move, nor lying down, nor waking up, nor turning around, or otherwise. And ensure that it does not hurt much, as long as it is slight pain. When it feels no pain, then it is not so bad, and he must put him in such a position that he feels no pain.
When it feels no pain, then it is not so bad, and he must put him in such a position that he feels no pain. and keep it straight, so that no twisting occurs when he is restored.
and the quality of the broken limb is as I told you.
You know that the broken parts vary in size and shape.
Because it has small limbs like breasts and nipples: he must cover them with soft woolen fabric.
and those who are big like hands and legs: it must cover them with a wide and sturdy bandage because the large bands encircle the whole limb, restricting all parts equally without causing any discomfort.
then the band is wrapped tightly around several times, two or four according to the limb, and holds the hand firmly on top of the entire bandage, then goes above the fracture and loosens it slightly so that the fracture moves away a little.
and softens the bandage a little at a time until you achieve great healing of that part of the limb, then repeat with another bandage and turn it back around over the broken area.
Then return to the part inside of the fracture, and apply pressure moderately, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first chapter above.
Then place between the ligaments of linen or cloths, keeping them all evenly aligned, and tie it tightly with one end. Then attach well-made pins if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if it has an abscess or inflammation, apply something soothing for the abscess and that fights the swelling, and let it rest undisturbed for some time.
Then apply pressure to the pins, and use a piece of rope about one meter long for tightening, or wood from which we make wands, or palm fronds, shaped according to this form:
However it is required that the bandage placed on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others.
And it should also be long enough as it requires for either a small or large limb.
Then apply pressure to the pins also as you did in the first chapter, and tie a linen bandage above it, as was done for the fracture in the first chapter.
More tightly then less; and it is required that the bandage be moderately tightened, not too thick or too thin, and made of fine linen.
Because if the bandage is thick, like I have seen in the works of men who make their ligatures from twisted linen thread, and this is great error, because the wrapping cannot be equal if there are not at least two diameters of space between each layer.
And if the patient's nerves are irritated by the pins after wrapping in their healthy parts, then place between them pieces of linen or rags so that it does not break.
When the wound is with the fracture and the bones are broken, I will tell you the treatment after this.
And know that there is no need to tighten all bands on fractured limbs for a whole day. Because if the limbs are large, there is no need to tighten the pins so much that after several weeks or more according to your knowledge of treating abscesses with swelling.
And then consider the method of ancient plaisterers for repairing fractures, dislocations, and twisting: and take flour that is kept near the millstone, mix it with plenty of water, make this confection not too thin nor too thick, and use it, as it is the common way of using plaister to treat fractures in various conditions, especially for women and children, because it's neither cold nor hot.
Another way of repairing fractures and dislocations and twisting: take ashamed and ointment and aloe; mirukewm. Ages .viiij.; andale syen. And then powder, and the disposition of the patient is hot.
c's (heat anatomique. Andre cupexente. :geste:esculle peçoletz.troisse de ceconsex demoudinsiere toutilaclessexe;sé aille.
Another method to strain joints and deform the bones of their limbs, and relieve the pain accompanying it; cut the new ligament, and moisten it in hot oil, and place it on the spot. This procedure does not restore the joints, but it is useful for alleviating choking heat by bandaging, and treating bone-related pains specifically.
Another method to rejoin broken bones: take dry fig leaves and dried mallows root, grind them together, and apply the mixture as a cautery.
Another method for the restoration of bone fracture and to alleviate residual choking heat: take root viminalis (hop), chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour, and mix one part each; grind it together, and apply with wine-soaked cloth on the affected limb, or moist water of coriander, or plain water, and use.
Another method beyond the first for when arthritis of the joint occurs upon application: take root viminalis (hop), linseed seeds, balm, melilot tree, sagebrush, and violet/chamomile flowers, mix one part each; grind it together, and apply with either salty water or sweet water, or wine based on the temperature of the joint and its resting state.
In his book he advises not to apply it on the fractured limb for restoration because it contains honey and oil; otherwise, there is no better remedy, and it must be neither too moist nor too hard.
And it seems as Galen that one must put on the fractured limb healing things somewhat warm, like myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, just as we have said before.
Treize siens ands desmeanture aoutre aldailes quatermesur leuin demein:ent cestri la chivalle augeurs, etaimaincesmeialland thegles chateau leagaintres asomes.
s'giveximente.entheurre thefyre ou crunde:dongreviable iapexanimejancielabouren ounkithic hele,celleuxeveille tanteurrescheveloilexsexhangecevrex20deans  fures.
And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, restlessness, swelling, then hasten and unbind it, and now dress it with plaster moistened in water, and immerse it in water, and lift it up, until the itching ceases, and the pain is relieved; Then let the limb rest for an hour, and apply a dry cloth soaked in water or oil rose, and tie it securely until you are sure that no bleeding has occurred from the incision.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and relieve the pain, then resume the dressing with a subtle approach, and apply just enough plaster now and then, and do not strain it too much as before; and continue until it is healed.
And if you see that the incision and bleeding and swelling are worse in both limbs, and you have experience with dressing and binding, then repeat it as you did initially.
And if it does not come to the limb in any of these ways that we have mentioned, unbind it only after 2, 3, 4 or 5 days, depending on what is observed, until its breakage ceases and the alignment approaches that under the cloth.
Moreover, the restraint is stricter than before, and its flesh swells as I have said before; and if you see the limb dry more than it should be, then you know that no troubles can come. arise the drops of warm water from the faucet every time you loosen it and do this for each day, and occasionally change the dressing.
by this work we reduce the troubles to the limb, and heal hastily what the foolish doctor does that distorts the member: it is bad, and if there are fearful treatments, I see nothing else but laziness and handling things clumsily.
in various ways of breakage. There are many ways of breaking, and diverse forms, and the causes have been revealed.
because there are breaks made by striking with an axe, and the bone is broken all around it where it lies on the bone, as if hacked or cut; for that reason this manner of breaking is called "hacking".
Or the axe breaks the bone beyond measure without feeling, and for that reason this manner of breaking is called "absolute"; and it is the injury caused by these two or three fractures, large or small.
And if it is due to blows on the bone, fractures or breaks caused by axes of stone or falls from stones, or other similar things.
And if there is an everlasting break that approaches the tablecloth on which it lies or underneath it, and this injury or large or small.
And if the injury is repaired in the bone as subtly as with stitches, and it is a small break, for that reason this manner of breaking is called "capillary".
sse (faire. In theisse itchape:cumachie, butes cité. Andre de monge avisèges. Andace.
And this happens more to those who have underneath wet bones, like the head of an infant;
And it happens in all these ways of fracture where small fragments are scattered as they were; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we know all ways of fractures by their reduction, and the investigation through trials, and by the corrupted one that is upon them.
The hair-like appearance is called by this that when the bone has been discovered and scraped over it, if there is an open black crack.
In the treatment of the break, take care of all bad maladies and if you see no harmful accident, as vomiting of pus, loss of understanding, stretching, paleness, fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar dispositions, it cannot heal doubt or indecision.
And if you see an apparent accident and hope for salvation, then the healing begins.
And when your patient comes first to you, and it is winter, there it is necessary to cover the bone for forty days that you may heal.
And if it is in stone, should you hasten to cover the bone before the seventh day, then corruption will occur on its surface, and therein come those accidents which we have mentioned.
And if the break in the bone occurs just at the place where it covers the brain, then you must fracture that split section: and see whether to guard the head of the patient afflicted, and examine the bone from all manners that you can, and on the smooth part of the wound.
In medieval French text. Est-ilte : la cunfecitge en français. And let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed down, and keep it free from drainage of blood; then begin to work on breaking the bone according to various methods of practice: one method ensures that you crack only a narrow opening in front.
And then there is another more significant treatment following it.
And the second method involves using various different techniques, some being sharp and others broad, pointed, or made of iron; and it is performed lightly to avoid bruising the head.
And if the bone is hard and stiff, it requires that you perforate inside, so as not to inflict any treatment techniques with torture, but they do not pierce beyond the bone's crust; and one must have above the tip a margin or a circle, which prevents the point from going through the bone; and various other measures are required such that each part receives equal spacing from the edge of the bone, and you must use torture for all tests; and it is the form of three different treatment techniques:
The quality of breaking the bone inside requires you to apply torture on the bone, and turn it until you know that the bone has been broken; then remove the torture from another part shortly after, and do so throughout, then use incisors at the space within the bone, doing this more subtly than we have said, lightly and quickly as long as you bring the bone to your hand or any of the assistants that you have, such as pincers; and ensure that you do not touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have the bone broken and treated, it is required that you make the reattachment which has been delayed from the bone with every other instrument appearing similar to an incisor, but it must be more flexible and subtle than the other incisors.
And if it takes no time for the small bones or fragments, and none of the splinters, you treat it lightly with some assistants we have mentioned; then take care of the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of work is what Galien says, which is more suction; and it must be done very strongly, as his word states. It is required that you remove part of the bone, whether it be broken or fractured, so that when you have discovered that part, as soon as you do, place at the top of this lenticular incision, which has this form.
And do not cut off a part, and it is divided into two sides, so that the cutting is directed towards the bone; then use a small mallet placed above, and carve the bone throughout carefully without touching the skin underneayer.
If it is attached to the bone, you must treat it gently because the bone can be very harmful and cause pain.
And if the fragment of the bone does not penetrate through the skin, and it is cut above it gently from above, and they must have various quantities, which one may for every part most suitable, according to the shape of the fracture.
Si le mesme laissé il est tout premier. Ceu lou enmonger it'sor theor. Ceux levre. Canto ounce apeut. Etroles. And Ile of thees Celture: "causes lespasture (Arabic:entire Cetera.
ses:e de laisse. Theurge court pure. ous ceintreignure. Cure of tolere andreinure.
And if the wound is exposed, it requires that you provide. i. a linen cloth, according to the amount of the wound, and apply oil roselle on it, and place it on the wound; Then provide. i. another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and apply oil roselle on it, and place it over the first cloth; do this more gently than you can, so as not to strain the wound, then apply above .i. other bandage, and don't pull it too tightly, only enough for the blood from the wound to pass through alone;
And leave it for either one or two days until the abscess pockets are somewhat subdued, then remove it, and apply herbs if such as the root of lily, flour, incense powder, and arsenical, and other things in general; make pills from these things, and place them on the wound, and afterwards apply monoflavous medicines without causing irritation to the area where there was a puncture;
And ensure that the wound is thoroughly cleaned so as not to leave any residue or gathering of blood clots, because when a hematoma forms under the skull due to such accumulation, it can cause severe discomfort and injury; for whenever something sharp is placed on the suture line of the brain, it may result in great suffering. Because if something abrasive is applied directly onto the joints, there's a risk that it might be pushed too far beyond its normal limits.
Take care so that no accident occurs to the patient as we have described, which is highly doubtful anyway.
And if no further injuries occur because of the medicine applied on it, then it is necessary that you provide a portion of honey, and two parts of rose oil, and apply over it one piece of cloth; place this mixture under the wound. then the methods for treating which it is necessary to follow, as long as he remains healthy.
Androints that sometimes the two legs are above them, or the same bone; and don't break it down it makes not move, and then heal again.
il, le veille. And do this quickly, and warn them not to feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is above the shoulder joint, and it cannot come down to the socket, then you must set a rod of similar thickness at the top of the arm.
And if the fracture is in two parts, you must repair it again, and quickly restore the arm within a year, if possible for you.
But if not within the seventh or twelfth day, after the abscess cavity has been healed, then wrap the shoulder joint in a linen cloth, if the fracture is in one piece.
Or you bind another part to the other if the fracture is there; and let the bands be thick enough to fill the depressions of the joints.
And they said that such restorers must also wear the bands in wool, and change them every day. It seems to me it is not good, but you must make the bandages from sheepskin and powdered millstone; then leave the bandage until the bone has hardened, and the cartilage become tough.
And never bind on the joint pins in the middle of the bandages, and if there is a swelling draped with wool, and it contains the fracture, then you must blow the pain into its place, and make you see what kind of lock you have made.
And if the abscess cavity comes to the joint while you work, then put a small amount of oil or cotton treated in rose petals, or a little bit of diatomaceous earth ("diaquilon").
And if the abscess cavity does not come to the joint, then you must plaster it with fine flour, and powder of incense, mixed with sheepskin wool, and place them on lithe, so that they will not join the joint.
And if the bone fragment is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract the arrow according to suitable methods, and heal with various strange treatments, and welding, as appropriate for such cases;
And if there is no bone fragment in any wound at all, then treat the tent with linen bandages until it heals.
Of the procedure of the jawbone
When the jawbone is set in position and there is no wound to heal, and the fracture has been set so simply that it's not bisected by cavities within, if one knows how to apply a gentle force lightly.
It is required that if the fracture is in the right part, you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, you place your right index finger inside, move it gently along the fracture line, and use the other hand to alleviate it later on, keeping everything even.
And if the jawbone fracture is displaced by a dot (presumably indicating an error in transcription), it requires that you provide minimal extension of the area, so as to keep it level.
And if there is movement of the tooth or procedure, using an iron thread or silver wire or silk, then place it under the fractured jawbone and on top of another cloth; and lay down that cloth a large well-made tent or piece of leather in proportion to the jawbone, and attach it there with what you can manage so that the patient rests, and instruct the patient to eat lightly.
And if you observe that the patient's condition changes over a period of three days, then reset what needs to be reshaped; and place a poultice made from fine flour or rice powder after setting the tooth, on a light linen cloth, and apply it carefully; and as long as the poultice remains in place, do not change the patient's position until he is fully recovered. In this case, many patients recover within three weeks.
And if arrows come in, make sure that what we have said many times is done.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward it with a small piece of bone from the same socket; if subtly embedded within are suitable treatments known to us.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it according to its necessity.
And when you have gathered all these bone pieces and if it does not take long to treat the wound; if it's large, and place on top of several poultices available for application so that the patient will heal.
narrative frommerde theignature ofgave200. The medieval Frenchmong it's in english,caste acheating: "SATOMENThey0. Sword:meant. Ire (145 paragraph, meaning. 10016080 : meille. Andre,dez :ite apeauge assex tocete tingle seingesse,cetilicate (ouxèsse,mocare deitire.
And the works are when the fracture is related to a wound, where you have two instruments, and one strikes the shoulder that feels broken; and the other stretches the collar towards the affected part; then make equal the break at your place, so that it forms as it should, and has no appearance or healing.
And if you need to extend it further, place in the patient's shoulder a rounded band of cloth or linen, depending on your necessity; and gently hold the broken part, and prevent the band from touching the hand, so that you make equal the break as it should be.
And if you cannot withdraw the head of the mallet from the patient's shoulder because it comes out through the wound, then it must that the broken arm lie on its pillow, and place in the shoulder one stiffening band, and hold the limbs of the shoulder backward with two instruments until the shoulder bone is lifted.
And then place the break at your proper location, and if you find loose pieces, it must that you cut them off; and take the separated parts lightly, and if the shoulder bone cannot join for any reason, cut with one of these incisors to this tool, but make sure to hold the broken part so as not to damage the structure:
and it resembles a spoon, and is not thick, and so wide as it should be according to the size of the bone and the patient's ability; and with two instruments, if you see, one broad and the other narrow, just like the route of the wound that you have treated when treating the bones.
And when you are sure of the abscess cavity, if it has a fistula, and its size is small, or if you doubt about the abscess cavity, then cover it with linen and tent cloths according to its quantity.
And if the abscess cavity comes out, then moisten one linen with rose oil and flaxseed, and put it on top.
The dislocation of the bone when it has wounds and is subjected to reduction, that you put a poultice made of millenary dust and gold powder on top of the bone, and place lightly some bandages on it, and if you have such an instrument, place a rod underneran the shoulder. Then take a very wide band of one palm wide, and place two linen layers on top of it, and the poultice; then take a thin stick of three hands long and wrap it around that bandage, making sure that the head of the band stays raised. And place the thin stick above the break, and turn the bandage around the shoulder, and wrap it tightly on healthy parts and malformed areas. When you see that the handle of each part holds the fracture well in position, and clearly you can'shift not move upwards from the bone, repair every day, and if your restraint is loose, change the bandage.
All's French translation is:
Then proceed with the cautery, if you see fit, and restrain it and let it remain thus until restored; and it is restored within twenty-seven years, but not to any man.
From the dislocation of the shoulder.
Often it happens that the dislocated shoulder joint does not move at all and is torn only by touch; if you assemble according to the figure of the dislocation, and bind it tightly following its natural shape in any way you please; then put powdered mud with a lot of herbs on one double cloth; place this under a wide broad board that's slightly wider than the shoulder joint, so that no movement occurs anywhere along the length of the joint, and every day watch for loosening, if it happens, tighten the binding and make sure the board is firmly in place, and put great pressure on its side; and the dislocated shoulder is restored within twenty or twenty-five years, and once these numbers are completed, release it and be cautious, as it's not a bone that moves quickly.
And if a part of the bone protrudes from its normal position and doesn't point outwards, then place it back in its original position and tend to the fracture as we have described for the reduction of an abscess at the same location on the shoulder blade.
Of the dislocation. (This line appears to be referencing the previous discussion of shoulder dislocations, but without context from the original text, a precise translation isn't possible.)
The bone is never dislocated in motion, but it happens occasionally; however, sometimes it does so after death. And when the bone is dislocated within, it declines to its sides, and one feels great pain from such a fracture, as well as lack of blood supply leading to the opening of the broken ends of the bone in the dislocation, and the feeling is quite severe.
And the restoration is that one should wrap it tightly with two towels between the shoulders, and press the shoulders, and assemble the corners of the .ii. ribs in your hands, then cover them with a broad board moistened with salt or another legume above the subtil slate support; and wrap it in an envelope, covering the broken ends of the bone under the salve, if they don't move; turn the roundness back to the back, and tighten again as needed, and mark every hour for recovery, and when loosening occurs, tighten the bandage again; and if it requires detachment due to corrosion or pruritus that appears at the wound site, hurry up, unwrap the cautery, and release the bandage, and return to those who have dealt with such medical treatments.
From the fractures of the ribs. (The phrase appears to be referring to fractured ribs, which aligns with the original text's focus on rib injuries or dislocations mentioned in the 12th century French medical treatise.)
Fractures that the bone breaker does not come because in their thickness behind the back, and at the top, and they do not flatten because they are so greasy; and it feels very well to him when he examines them.
And the resetting is that you place the fracture evenly, as it should; and then apply a splint, and hold it with an iron ring if you have experience with it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is descending inward, it causes him great pain and fever, just like pleurisy because the bone pierces the tissue; and besides coughing up blood, vomiting large quantities of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the old ones put much effort into it.
And if there are those who say that he should administer foods that swell the belly to push the fracture further down.
We do not do such things; unless abscesses have already appeared there. And if they have come, then it is well.
And they say that no one puts vacuum on the site with herbs to suck up strongly, and it seems right; however, there is doubt as to whether the vacuum attracts excess fluids to the site because of its weak position.
And they say that no one should cover the site with moist linen soaked in hot oil; and put tents between the ribs to make the fracture even, then either treat it as pleurisy treatment, meat eating, or medical remedy.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone which pierces through the tissue, there is doubt as to whether the physician must split above the broken rib and use a certain instrument to keep it open; and however, one has to cut into the bone, treat lightly, and then sew the two sides of the wound, if it is large, and treat with splints until healed. And when abscesses come, cover him with moistened linens soaked in rose oil on top; and put them over his ribs; and while caring for this site as required, one should lay the patient either on that side or where the abscess appears, however long it takes to be healed.
of the fractured rib
No joint has ever broken the hard bone of the neck, and it rarely happens that it collapses; and also at the vertebrae of the back. And when it happens to none at all, and you know whether it will be healed or not, if you observe that the patient's hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick their fingers with a needle, they do not feel it. You realize that it is fatal in several conditions, and if it moves and feels well when pulled and pressed, you know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's painful condition can be cured if treatment is applied.
And if something occurs at the vertebrae of the back, and you know whether it will be healed or not, if you observe that the patient's legs are softened, and there are injuries on their feet; and beneath his back is a tendency to windedness and evacuation with voluntary urges; and when examined over its abdomen, there is involuntary urge. And if he is fidgeting upon his back and wants to lie down again, then it cannot. You realize that this condition is deadly: if it does not labor in treatment.
And if this condition does not affect him, it is lighter in nature.
And the treatment if it is that you reward him when he has an abscess, whether you place oil roses or young chicken fat on his spine, as long as he is calmed; then place him on a comfortable bed and bind tightly with linen, and command the patient to rest in that position until healed. And do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain so much so that he does not become healthy again. , theoreloc, ouns ate : "lai'saint de, andera le poictre 'un:arectiletiche. Ai :xere. Ita un. Andrespecture. Theicter,cumbre :getur, tolaterle mete.
of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Often the shoulder joint dislocation occurs, and if it happens, it is but a slight diminution at the top; and makes long, and declines to the hollowed areas, and comes with pain at the base, and tenderness, and swelling as it breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as long as it remains with the dislocation; and know what kind of fracture it is and its shape; and if the fracture occurs only slightly at the top, set it in such a way that the fracture returns to its natural state.
And if the fracture is long or it slopes downward to the sides, then have the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture becomes apparent. And when you have set it correctly, place the patient on a wooden or metal board; then secure the dislocation with rods or straps so that it does not move again; and immobilize the limb between the shoulder blades until the alignment is restored.
And command the patient that they lie on their healthy side or back for rest.
And if the abscess appears and it does not touch, let it remain as long as the abscess is calm, placing it over what we have previously mentioned; then return to the restoration process, immobilizing it as necessary unless there are no further complications; this method applies.
of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
The shoulder joint is the area between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it becomes dislocated, it should be restored according to one of these two methods: firstly, place a flat wooden board under the arm as close to the moisture's location; this method follows this shape:
And place the shoulder joints and fingers together, and lift them upwards, and observe the dislocation under such a seat; then bend the arm over the sturdy material, so that it slants towards the back, placing a wooden beam beneath it; afterwards release its grip from any weight-bearing object or whatever directs you to extend the dislocation with all hands together until the dislocation returns as intended.
And the other way is that they think to pinch the patient on his hair, and one holds his hand near his neck, then orders two ministers that one strikes what is under the breakage of his hands, and the other strikes all over around it, and stretches each to its part.
And if the extraction is further advanced, then it binds one of the ministers inside the breakage, and above the breakage, and stret Written in Italian, this excerpt from a medieval medical text discusses procedures for addressing shoulder dislocations:
And if the traction causes it to come out again, restrain it with at least two years' age, and place it loosely on ice and water until the traction subsides; then release the traction and how you should strain the limb is by putting the splint under the dislocation, and position your hand either on the shoulder or on the breastbone; and fasten the sling, and tighten the splint around the dislocated area, so that the arm remains stable without any displacement of the bone.
And if you doubt that the bone moves, use sticks, and place one stick under the dislocation wider and stronger than the others; put at least two inches between each stick, so that each stick is large enough to span three parts of each side of the dislocation. Then pull on the sticks as I explained in the first chapter concerning the dislocation, more forcefully but less apart.
And if you see the position of the sticks and the pulling back, as we have said before, first restore the limb to its original place; if you doubt whether the dislocation has occurred, let it remain tied for about seven days, as we mentioned; then examine every three years that there is no swelling or inflammation near the joints, which would indicate injury and instability in the area where it was originally located. If necessary, repeat what we have said before.
lee. Ipsum.jace theorce j'ses:mejor. Ilmute thee to bele ilyestire.compremiesu. Ijaccurse juridice,cummary.iage fromeran: Ivicturex theore is:gift;cause. Ail, alludeur. Theor.
Of the dislocation of the arm
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "musket", one is small and teaches the pocket, while the other is large and is located near the little finger; in case either the big or small muscle is fractured alone, or both together.
If the small muscles are fractured, treatment is light, and recovery; but if the large ones are fractured, it's a poor healing process, and they stick more than when both together. If only the small one is fractured, then little extension is needed, and make them equal.
And if it is the large muscle that must be pulled more forcefully; and extend his finger, raise the pocket of the hand higher than the others, and make the small one lower than the others, and place their crossing over himself at the same level as him, which he hardly suffers any labor; then stretch the assisting limbs to the injured part above his hand or in another joint, and other assistants in a different position. Then put it back into its best form.
And if the dislocation is in pieces, put each piece back to its original position, and if there is no distress when gripping it (the part that was moved), then you cannot restore it to its former place; therefore, do as we have said before.
And if there is an injury with the dislocation, I spoke about it to the individual master; take up the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration after the dislocation, I told the individual master; place there a piece made from rosemary and beeswax cloth, which is not too hard nor soft; then gently lay the cloth over it, so that the abscess cavities are calmed. Then apply the wound copper (copper plate, and make the bracelet more distant than other place, and keep all day long, as I said at the beginning of the master; and stretch it must havevle: and seize days towne le deitges, etats deffecit vein: sisca:jacute,c grossingles aescullo theilige:nagents:faire. Theileve (2ime. It'stage ofrevelue isse:susion itentire toasten:0sence:mentalong:nauge of ll’smaistre,celle.
And if warned that the dislocation cannot reach the limb, because it is too stiff, then you must soften it slightly and leave it for some years until the dislocation corrects itself, and then release it.
And if none of these things we have mentioned affect the patient, then let his hands be tied to his column for about 20 years. Or if not so much, then bind his columns together and instruct him in movement and steadiness, and sleep on his back; and you will know that this fracture is restored in 30 years or more (or less), depending on the composition of its nature and constitution.
And regarding the fracture of the hand.
You will know that at the back of the hand and we rarely see such fractures occur, and it only happens many times.
And when the plant of the hand is fractured or bent, it must be examined carefully and held straight before him again similarly; then he places his hand on the extended towel, extends the broken bones, and makes them even so that they are well joined together; and apply the plaster and hot iron, if there is no movement afterwards, then make a pillar according to the size of the wound; and wrap it in one sheet of linen.
And if the fracture is close to the edge of the plant's sole, make a strap from linen, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his injured foot; then stretch a long linen strip, and make the support pillar as strong as the patient's foot itself, and bind it tightly if that is necessary.
And if the fracture is on the dorsum (top), it must be supported by a pillar; and another undernee in the plant, so that his hand rests over and straightened, then bind the two together tightly along the entire length of the bandage.
And if it's ail.
Of the broken joint
The shoulder joint is often broken, and it can be seen when turning forward and backward; the restoration consists of two parts: one above the fracture, and another below. And the great pain spreads down to his face, then extends each of its parts equally along the same level; and it is when the fracture has penetrated into the bone.
And should the fracture be near the shoulder's root, there shall one line toward the point of pain; and another 'neath the break; likewise if at genital base it lay, then lines will stretch aftow to that place, and thus extend below the breach; let physicians mark each bone even in its twain hands, until nature's shape they restore, anointing the impaled with dislocation's name.
And if there be amputation, let it then calmly abide, before his work anew and healing's stride; The line is drawn in twofold manner with care; to ease the painful wound without further flare. It is required that you wrap the splint .i. on each side of the break, doubling in two or three pieces; remove any excess above it, then rotate the leg until heel aligns with shoulder' bon place, and stretch a long strip between shoulder and thigh near groin below, beneath which lay the fillet; raise another strip along the bone above the knee, securing to relieve tension equally. Then tie three strands each of these strips at the break; as you move up or down beyond it, so lessen the strain; next bring in two ropes that lie above, and place back near the thigh's head, ensuring no movement from its original place, then allow the tension to cease, for no more amputation nor swelling will occur.
And if there be displacement, and address it as comes; as we have said many times before; and should there be fragments of bone that cling, it must not be removed but only parted away, for if removal proves impossible, then the skin is to be cut apart, and heal as previously instructed until well again.
And there is no break in the shoulder again, as if in a bandage or on the arm; however, with such restoration done so well, it bears not painful maladies at all.
And healings are made within one year; to keep in mind the different facial features of the time in histe maundre quens d’icit malade la cuixe.
The elesuivres leonge siamain lice, itaure, as sce decaire lesion aoutre lor.ses: theose l’en inces and maundes anse :12013rdirectlysans's oneraise theca.
gevel tercures: a lentheccure paralleunge andatiocle
And the restoration is to put back what is rightly set in its place, so that it can move as much as it can; then apply the plaster, and you put on an arch support, if you know how, and hold it tight as it requires, then reward all the arrangements we have said for other fractures, such as abscess opening and other similar cases; for each accident that he must endure, so long as he remains sound.
Of the leg breakage.
Collects that in the leg there are two bones, one called "mustel" not by right and the other is called "fusil"; and all equipment for fractures similar to what happens with the arm, thus restoration should be as it is for an unbroken arm, and the procedures involved are also identical.
And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg in all directions.
And if one of the smaller bones is fragmented, turn it forward.
And if the larger bone is fractured, he feels great pain and sees it clearly; then turn around him. Then alleviate extension, resetting it evenly, but in general, it requires that his dislocation is ugly, with many pieces, making extension smaller and lighter than before; adjust accordingly to its nature.
And when you have completed your work, take two ropes made of hemp that mark the leg from one side and the other side until near the knees; then wrap them around both legs under and over, tying them so as to prevent the leg from leaning either left or right, thus it is well done; no one applies a bandage longer than halfway down the leg, nor does he apply rope if not necessary for supporting movement, properly done in case of injury. And check every day the leg, to see if there are any other accidents; cure until it is sound.
of the breakage of the two bones.
In the ankle, there is never a breakage of one or two bones, but the two bones sometimes experience fractures and in few cases require more than that; thus it'ran.
ngramme pas. Etupes:
And when three or four years have passed, if the tendon is dislocated, for you will find the bones even and fractured, whether broken or dissolved.
And if there are no bones broken, restore them as we have mentioned for the hand; then take a stalk according to the length of each tendon, and make it slightly wider, and place it on the table that I previously mentioned, and stretch it accordingly; and if there are two or three or more, break them, taking into account their quantity, wrapping each with one piece of linen cloth, and restraining the tendons underneayer the table's surface, so that they lie well against the back of the joint.
And it is essential that you never forget the other things I have said about fractures, which we have mentioned in our treatises; and accordingly address each case where such treatment is required.
of the bone fracture at the pointy part
When a woman's bone is fractured, if it fits too tightly at the back part, then incline it there and hold it by its rear; next fill her body cavity with cotton as much as one spoonful; then raise the woman slightly and let the cotton fall into the opening of nature a few times until it reaches the entrance, and thus return the bone to its position along with the cotton. When she decides to urinate, remove the cotton, and when you see that it has healed, take a bladder from sheep and tie one end of it around the puncture; then pour all the bladder into nature; then blow air through the bladder until it fills up inside: nature will restore the fracture. Then fill it with cotton again, and leave it for any number of years as long as she is sound.
And when the bone at the pointy part of the body is fractured in a man or woman, restore it as we have described for the shoulder; and do not conceal these proximate fractures from those who apply their study and skill to healing, and understand my book. For the fracture signifies various positions that are conducive to restoration: thus no wonder.
In the arm, when it is fractured, take a goose's neck and bind the arm with cloth; then wrap it tightly enough so that it stays in place for two or three years, and it will heal quickly.
fracture with wound
It requires him who has a fracture with wound, immediately if it is large, as the bones of the shoulder or joint, that he be set now so that the signs we have mentioned hold true.
And if the wound is healthy, when you apply lime plaster, provided there's no other method available, then start to restore the fracture within that same hour, or on the following day, so as not to prick at the incision sites.
And if the incision sites become inflamed again, then postpone restoration until a new day has passed, so that the incisions are calmed down, and do not touch or treat them for another full day or quarter thereof, as this could bring about a bad outcome.
And if the fractured bone is exposed at the joint discovered, it requires that you gently and slightly apply pressure with your hands.
And if the extension does not assist you in placing it equally on your hands, then use this instrument made of iron that has .5 or .7 meters long, and its breadth is according to the amount of the wound; and because it's a matter for the examiner whether he should apply .3 or .4 meters, depending on what each case requires in treating fractures. It must be firm enough so as not to bend at all under compression upon your workpiece, nor too thin that its breadth is only one-third of its length; and if it's thicker than necessary for the wound, then place it slightly behind and thick in front, thus:
And it is called "palainge" because it requires that the limb be placed on top of the exposed bone; and once done, so long as you lift it back up again, making them face each other. And if the fracture is slight and the pulling cannot well grasp the bone, then it must be that you place the head of the bone, so much so that the puller can handle it.
And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said before, using a suitable instrument for this purpose, or incision or wire, in your interest; then make what is necessary to hold that part of the bone which has been deeply fractured and fine cracks.
And when the bone is brought back and it hurts greatly afterward, you know that it's not in its natural position. Let it be until it has been restored to its place, then anoint with one or two drops of black vinegar very cleanly; and properly let the wound remain exposed, without ointment or oil, so as it does not bring forth putrefaction and corruption; then dress well all around the bone according to the size of the wound, giving care that the wound is not stretched by the fracture. And many times have done this, and left the broken bones more supple and softly than other injuries.
dece iftevale:sse iaifre. Injetechle theescangex sheurite
And it requires you to dislocate his limb. Thrice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is fixed and sound.
And it requires that the members be cleansed in such a way as to move the bow quickly downwards.
And if for a long time they do not heal, and the bow cannot be set again but returns backward; know that it has small bone fragments, so it requires you to treat the wound with tent, and remove all these displaced bones that bring on the pain.
And if an abscess comes to the joint, or in any other form of corruption, it requires you to treat it according to what is written by this scholar herein before us; and when the bone is broken across a limb member, like that of the shoulder blade or shoulder joint, and similar large limbs, do not try to treat it, for many times its death comes from it, but let it stay until it shows signs of recovery, perhaps for twenty years or more. If you can heal it, then cure the wound; if not, leave it.
bruises that come from salt treatment.
We come many times after the healing of the fracture, mainly when it is near the joint, and it's quite disheartening to see the misformed limb member; and sometimes even then they cannot perform their natural movements.
Be careful that it is fresh: if you administer harsh medicines like aloe, frankincense, myrrh, sandarac, acacia, and similar things, avoiding using any of these remedies either alone or together, and prepare them with vinegar or a mixture with honey or ashes; then place it on hot coals and treat it well so you do not remove it from the fire day by day; then loosen it, and start another one until its fracture is healed; or use a piece of hard stone that has been prepared well; because the property of stone is that it ossifies all the tissues above the limbs; and if the fracture has turned into rigidity like bone, and it needs to be removed, then do so from above, and take care until it heals. Or leave it with any lame person until it becomes ossified, and cure it until it is sound.
When the bone fracture is restored and thereafter weakened limbs that are delicate or subluxed due to various causes: because it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should; or because it had too many bindings, so that it could not return to its normal position; or by numerous dislocations; or by excessive movements; or because there is little flesh in the body of the patient, then it becomes weak.
And the care is to feed him maladies and make his joints supple as long as they multiply in it; and administer bain, and give him joy and pleasure; then place pitch on the limb so that the great discomfort draws from the joint; and remove it often with water.
after the healing of the torment: si l’onque, et li malades nons. Et cestin leu deshors leu corps d'où quere un peuple estans; etre ies: parle defface a mailles, au ous en Francone pese.
cepe aigue cale ce paingement:nètte.emplex douc’ceuxse ture lousteit reiseracare a laisse figure. : thatche seelesse,atgage. Andreccure feuine deithe charaundesseurifteent cauezure, sheere.armejacarde.
And there is never any stone that prevents continuous, prolonged rubbing of the hand and forearm; and so you must make ready every hour a movement in the limb.
And if the twisting is hardened and calloused like bone, it also covers with iron subtly incised; and put on crutches and study in treatment.
Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation originates from no joint; for that is why it cannot move, and the limb has misaligned features, and it causes the patient severe pain and significant injury.
Whenever there is a dislocation at any joint, it must now aim to return sensation.
For if there is delay, the ligaments grow in size (enlarge), and by chance it puts back to its place at the joint; but he does not want that which has grown now moved again where it was enlarged: many times this causes nasal discharge and other pains.
Therefore, when this happened, he made the malady less severe first; then let it rest as long as its abscesses are soothed; next apply warm water and oil to the limb, then reset it quickly, and treat each member according to how it came to rest.
And I ordered the sections on dislocations in the book concerning the bones of the joints.
of jawbones
Not infrequently the jawbones are dislocated and displaced; in such cases of double dislocation: or they consist of a few bone fragments of their joints, and slightly relaxed; or they are completely dislocated, hanging by their ligaments towards its base, and saliva from the mouth that it cannot retain, can't close its mouth, and wraps the tongue with speech.
If the dislocations are small, it returns by its own positioning.
And if it is complete and intact, then you must immediately reset it, so that there be no doubt in the dislocation.
: thevé comme coustirre, leger, andante. 100s:lure.
And the physicians put it even, so that it returns to its place.
And if the reinsertion is torn, immediately so are their joined jaws, if they were burned by hot water or oil, until they heal lightly again; do not tear back any more than we have said before.
And when they are returned evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well and softens its sensation, by placing a cloth soaked in rose oil and wax over it, then gently press down with damp fingers.
And the patient lies on his back with his feet together, and his jaws are between two stones, not allowing them to move either to the right or left, but gently grind meat until the pain is gone and the joints become loose.
And then wash it gently, and does not strain to open the mouth for eating and drinking, as long as the jaw joint is loose and sound.
And if the joined jaws cannot be set back to their proper position after an hour, and are not converted to their original state, then comes feverishness and chronic pain, and perhaps even stomach upset or vomiting.
And when you see this, then know it is a loss; and many times have died those who suffered from it in seven years.
It seems there might be a typographical error here. However, based on the context provided beforehand and common phrases found in medieval medical texts, it may refer to "by force" or a related action without further clarity within these instructions alone. If more text were available around this point, we could offer a more precise translation.
The pain does not allow it to be eased in the continuous parts and has never been dislocated again, and one certainly feels well.
And the restoration is that he moves his sick jaws on his back, and extends his arms; then presses the loose tooth firmly with one's palm, and it returns; then place the bandage and the belt, and tighten.
And the teeth that are close to the jawbone cannot be eased; if it is never dislocated again, then the patient who has said as we did, and places upon the bandage, and tighten them up, and orders him that he lie down until they are sound.
And so then we bring back the head of the shoulder blade, when it is displaced from its place.
From the dislocation of the shoulder.
It is dislocated only by .iij. movements: one is that it dislocates the shoulder blade's part above the shoulder joint; and the second is at the lower part; and perhaps it dislocates the part above, and this happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated behind the shoulder, nor in between the nerves; and more often it dislocates towards the shoulder joint, mainly those who have little strength, because for these it happens suddenly; for those with enough strength, it jumps and recovers its place.
And occasionally it happens to some people by impact or fracture, and the shoulder swells up from an abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must examine it thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known when it goes towards the shoulder joint, and you will find a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will notice its manifest differences. And you will find at the top of the shoulder a pit, and inside the shoulder joint to the head of the shoulder it is also like an elbow, so that he cannot return his hand to its place nor move from any movement.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you will show it clearly at the shoulder joint.
And this kind of dislocation is not merely to return, when it is new or if he has painful shoulder injuries.
And the method is that ministers hold the painful hand up high, then apply pressure on the shoulder area, and lift the joint forcefully at its base, and they hold the hand up again, so as to move it downward quickly if it happens suddenly.
And if it doesn't come as we have described in recent times, it must be that the patient with painful shoulder is bathed in warm water; and he is treated by warming up and softening, as from an infusion of althea and fenugreek leaves in warm water, and then treated.
Then you should support the patient's back, and place a piece of cloth on the shoulder area not too soft or hard, then put his foot on top of the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder carefully, and remove the painful hand.
And other ministers tie the head of the painful shoulder, so that it does not move backward; this shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it returning in this way:
And it is that you make one who is larger than the painful shoulder present near to his side, and thrust its shoulder through the dislocated area of the painful shoulder, and lift the dislocation upwards so that the painful shoulder hangs down from it. And others also pull the hand of the ill patient towards his abdomen. And if the patient's arm is too heavy, they do not put anything on it, and the dislocation returns now.
And the resetting can also be done in another way: and it is as if a long stick of earth is placed there like a pin, and not too large nor too thin. then be placed on the patient, but with soft supports underneath, and the arm is long stretched out in another direction, and the joint returns to its original place quickly.
but if it does not return by these means that we have mentioned, then this treatment is done: take an iron rod of great and four feet wide, which has its head at the middle to enter through another part of the arm, according to this shape:
then place the soft supports on the long section of the arm that does not bruise the patient'inasmuch as he is placed in the other part of the arm; extend his arms along this long section, and put the support underneath it, and tie the shoulder support there, and attach the arm at the hand's head, then place a broad shield on the elbow with one large shield piece, and extend the patient's hands downwards, and let their body hang from another part: the joint returns to its original position immediately.
And when it is done, whether in this way or another, you must put on the arm's other part a spindle of wool, then apply a poultice made of flour mixed with frankincense and myrrh to all the shoulder and back area, then strain it across the arm support, turn the bandage around the poultice, and embrace the hand in its collar, and let the patient's hands stay in this state from now on.
And it is necessary that he massages slightly, so that the limbs are strengthened, because they will heal faster; and then massage more after five or six years, and move it; and if it is firm and not soft, then it has been cured.
And if the joint is loose due to moisture or any other reason that it has come, then you must apply hot compresses on three points, as they are usually placed before or by the caustic treatments.
And if you do all this and after twenty years the joint does not hold, and it cannot lift its arm upwards, then you know that either the nerve at the head of the shoulder is compressed or stretched out or softened; and you know that the joint was never dislocated.
The dislocation towards the hand and the calf, or behind, is made by a sudden movement or stretching of hands, and apply another type of bandage; treat until it is healed.
And after the cure comes pain to the patient's limb, and in subsequent movements, he uses many times on the affected area so that the injuries are relieved, and return to their original state.
of the dislocation from this injury.
iste dou leu devoit caoustre, et siens et que cestan ainseliefescaustere. Etienne. n devoir ouille:lèlere quell asile.
And it requires that you reset it immediately after setting the arrows in place, for if they were drawn out, it would be grievous to bring them back; and by chance, it cannot be brought all the way out at once, especially when it is at the back; as much more severe than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and often leads to death.
And the restoration is when it can be brought back, you extend his hand to your hands; and spreads out his arms according to the costume's instructions for above, below, and between, joining all of his joints together or at the root of his palm, so that it returns to its original position.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his own hand and stretches out from the root of the palm as much as it was displaced.
And if it does not return to its original position, apply strong extension; and have two ministers extend the arm, and bind them with two ministers so that they do not move during the extension; then turn the arm from one side, wrap a thick and wide cloth around each.
And when the pains at the joined joints in his hand are treated with no oil to soften the joint, then join the joint firmly until it returns.
And when it is in its original position, place it securely on a wooden stand with rope ends tied to the elbow joint, straighten the arm and hold the maladjusted limb for some days; then remove it.
And if the joint is firm in its original position, release the bandage and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, remake the wooden stand and the bandage, and leave it for some days so that it is securely fixed; then remove it.
And if he feels sore after the restoration of the joint and it moves again, bathe and rub well until it is soothed; or you put a poultice of sheep's fat on the joint for one day and one night, then let the physician enter with either immersion bath or pail wash. And if he sweats, you rub the joint regularly, then put the poultice back on, and then enter for either bath or pail wash; and so do it one to three times as long as it is healed; and if you see that, make a cloth of various moistened wool with fat, and stretch it upwards; and if it returns to its original position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the joint in the hand and its return is light, heavier than other joints; he must bring it back to its original position as soon as possible, immediately after it is dislocated, so that the fingers are inflamed or displaced again.
And the resetting is if you place his maladjusted hand on a table and extend the ministers' hands, and make him look at the dislocation, so that he puts his palm to the appearance of the joint, and bind it firmly until it returns.
ilesme And if the dislocation is in the back of his hand, he places the patient's back on the table, and the doctor puts his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is good.
But if not, if the strain from pulling apart abscesses appeases the incision, and it leaves them in this manner to be repeated.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put the joint back in place after any days, then his dislocation becomes stiff.
and you do not deny to the patient that as long as his hands remain soft, and he cannot stretch anything at all: therefore, you know that nerves are damaged or arteries; if there is no other method for stretching than cauterizing near the wound, and by chance it does not work.
And when the hands are set, place them on the apparatus we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for a while, then release and leave them in this manner.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no crack or weakness in it, then apply warm water to heat the wound, and rub until it becomes sound again.
of the dislocation of the shoulder joints
There has never been an extraction of his shoulder dislocations from any place, never on the back of the hand or abdomen.
for they are the dislocations, and you reset the dislocation in your pockets as much as it recovers, then support the head of the shoulder joints, and press towards the part where it is dislocated.
and leave it for two days, and then put him back in place, as we have said, and let the dislocation come out of its position, make it move again, and reattach it, and do this often until it is tight.
and also do the same if it is extracted from the abdomen of the hand, and do what you have done before, until it becomes sound again; and also do the same when it is dislocated in another place.
double shoulder dislocation
When the shoulders or neck is extracted, or there are multiple extractions, there is no treatment, because death befalls the patient.
And the signs are that the extractions were voluntary, he cannot hold it, and many times the limbs become softened or the elbows or shoulders or joints.
And many times it moves at four parts, the one that moves in reverse is called "gilbone disease."
The treatment is that the gilbone disease came in childhood; if it had no cure or remedy for all of them.
And that which falls down or is caused by hitting or similar things, the old methods of treatment were spoken in great words, and there was no great benefit.
but I have translated it according to my intention, and formed various remedies.
And I say that in the gilbone disease which comes from the womb, there is no treatment or cure for it.
and also that comes in the third ribs, and no one can treat them properly, as I have said.
the strains ceteur laintres aisles:esprezent ce sloat.
And then place a firebrand on the head in the ground, and another at the joints, and tie a bandage around the areas of the patient's pain, and one for their hamstrings, and their groins, and their heels.
And they divide the bandsages, some on the head and others at the joints among the two firebrands.
And they must be tightly closed, the firebrand as we have said, and he places his palms on the shaft of the arrow until it recoils.
And if it does not return with this treatment, then he takes a board of two arms long, and fastens it under the point, and places the patient's painful side against it, and lifts the head by the board from under the arrowhead, and puts the pad on the arrowhead. And he places his fingers on the other end of the board, and presses firmly until it returns to its original position; and if you see that it is not returning, then turn the handle which turns by hand.
And it is that you place two firebrands on the patient's painful point with one arm and at the other joints, and between each of these firebrands, there should be a handbreadth of distance.
And in each firebrand there should be an incision, or it is tightened down into the ground so that they do not move, and between these firebrands there should be another turning firebrand, which makes them turn when they twist, and there should be a few small turning firebrands to make the handle turn.
And then tie the string that is near the handle of the turning device on the head, and another string towards the joints at the other turning device, and each minister turns their turning device throughout the entire bandage, and the master places the arrowhead evenly as we have said.
And when it is evenly heated with a large amount of oil, and then the ointments, and then an iron plate of about three feet long that marks the area of the gripping site and the healthy part of the spine, and binds it with a bandage as we have said, and uses his painful side lightly so that he remains sound.
And if at all and administer maundedges of ailumbre tote.
And there is never an appearance in the back of the spinal vertebrae, and one thinks it to be dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for this reason one should not have any presumption: perhaps death would come as a result.
Dislocations of the hinge (shoulder).
Knowing that the articulations of the hinge (shoulder) and those of the elbow only result in dislocations alone, not like other joints; and the articulation of the shoulder is divided into four parts: between and outside, and front and back; and more to one side away from it, and slightly forward and backward.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inwardly is that when joining the malformed leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens more for the malformed foot than the healthy one, and cannot double its gait by fire cautery. And it is the foot that lies behind the incision swells up for this reason because the kneecap comes down (towards the ground).
And the sign of those who suffer it backward is that these accidents are contrary to what happens in front.
And the signs of those who suffer it in front are that their leg is well according to completion; overall, it does not double its gait with pain, and if one tries to move it, it cannot come first, holds back urine, swells up anger, and when going, passes over the heel.
And the signs of those who suffer it backward are that their kneecap cannot expand and double its gait, and one leg is more crushed than the other, and the pain is lessened, and the kneecaps move at the bottom between the ribs.
The recovery from this similarity of dislocation is that you recognize that the dislocation is always present, and it lasts according to its position, there is no cure for it; and it does not require any presumption.
And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh, and it involves three types of dislocation: if you hasten to return the joint back together, it will be between and outside, front and back; perhaps it may return on its own, and there is no need for any other cure.
And if it doesn't return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong physician and place the leg firmly with two hands or on a board that supports under the kneecap. And other physicians extend their hand over in a similar way so they push their hands under the patient's feet; and others pull on the rope above the kneecap.
And they extend upwards and downwards once, so long as the malformed foot is raised from the ground only once, and then remain hanging.
This method of extension is common to three types of cases, and if the dislocation has returned, it is exactly what we have described.
If it is in the posterior part, it must be cauterized on its skinny side, then put a rope underneath the kneecap, and the ligament, and place the rope above the anger, and toward the force.
Then command one other ministers to straighten his arms, and embrace the large part of the shoulder joint on the painful side, and extend it fully: so it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot straighten it in this manner that we have said, then it must be to join the painful joints of both legs by a strong sling placed on top of both heels and under the knees, and stretch out the painful leg more than the others.
Then have it hanging from the top of a beam, and then also hang down .ij. arms long; command one minister to hold the head of the shoulder, and other ministers holding along with the painful side, who encircle the shoulder joint completely because now the dislocation returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is no longer present, if you feel pain in the shoulder joint as we have mentioned for someone with hemihyperplasia (an old term referring to asymmetry of body parts), then straighten a strong sling on that specific leg and also hang down arms on it so.
Then apply .ij. pins at the head of the shoulder and to both knees, then insert a pin between the shoulders so that it maintains their form. And let him lie on wet cloths that he does not worsen the pain in his shoulder, then stretch each minister towards him and place the patient's hand gently over the dislocation.
If it returns to its proper position, that's good. But if not, place him on the floor and press as we have mentioned for someone with hemihyperplasia, and support the painful shoulder joint along the side of the chest.
And when the dislocation is before (indicating an anterior dislocation), it must be to extend the painful leg quickly, and according to what I have said; place his hand where he feels most of the pain on the shoulder side, press with one hand there, and hold towards the knee.
And when the dislocation is not anymore present, it does not extend the shoulder painfully down, and in the same position as we have said lying on the ground, on the hips. And let it lie on its face, and the line is extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed at the joint with the table.
And when the patient's painful legs extend, and they become level; but now adjust the kneecaps, and place the hammer, and a twitch of an arm band, so that the head does not move.
And let him rest for two or three years, then release it, and place the hammer again; if they are levelled, as before, and let him stay for another three years, until his limbs are comfortable.
of the double dislocation
The glenohumeral joint is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, forward and backward, and behind; and it should not be dislocated forwards.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg towards his kneecap, and if it does not bend at the kneecap, then you know it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot under your feet.
Then he takes his shoulder joint in your palms, and pulls between your fingers, then bends the two ends of the glenohumeral joint; and other attendants extend his foot so that the dislocated shoulder returns to its place, and it is a sign that his leg moves towards his kneecap lightly.
And apply the plaster on it, and pull up the leg to the kneecap, and tighten the bandages firmly for two or three years or more, then release; and do not work the patient out until his limbs are comfortable.
And if the limb is not at all, then apply strong extension as we have said in the treatment of dislocation, until it is sound again.
of the double dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are never fully dislocated, and neither forward nor backward.
And the signs are that the ankle joint is floating, and test it before addressing the part where it has dislocated:
The reduction should be light and gradually extend it to his hands when he is dislocated suddenly:
And when it is dislocated completely, it is essential that you make the patient stand upright on his right side, and have one man support him by the leg, above the ankle.
ilesin theil. Ij:3000. Itunes. ACC ions leu. Ipsum. The-160s ateinle laisseur'stropure.
and do this . ij. times, as we have said, piercing the flesh; if it returns, that is well; but if not, then begin again with the operation, for it comes back.
and if it cannot return from this position, then have the patient sit on his back upon the ground, and firmly plant .i. pole in between his thighs, and wrap him tightly with cloth so that the malady does not bleed.
then mark the minister's thigh, and other ministers extend the wound to his hands or to .i. that line which it lies on the neck of the patient; then extend each minister equally, and let the pole remain between the thighs of the patient so as to hold back the malady while it is being treated.
then place the rings evenly on his hands, and other ministers mark the uninjured leg so that the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it has reached the point, if they apply the emplaster and bandage on top of it, make the strain, and wrap the leg around, and bind the patient's foot above the ankle so that the tendons are not too tightly bound.
then leave it for .ij. years or .iij., and if the strain occurs, then release it every year or quarter, allowing the malady to come back over four years. and if it comes before this termination, it is not secure as long as it continues to dislocate.
And if a cut appears on the shoulder when lifted up, it is necessary that you soothe it as we have mentioned in another place until he is well again.
two things.
When the joints are dislocated, they must certainly be extended with work, and it is a light matter.
And if the dislocations are in no particular place of the back of the body of the patient, it is necessary that you set the malady on .i. plain or on .ie. table straight, and put your patient there upon what has opened up from these joints, then press his body until he returns;
And when it is heavy, and it does not open at all, he places the plant of a table under two joints, then tightens them up, and leaves it for two years, then releases it; and let him rest until he is sound again.
Of wounds and of dislocations together.
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is sought to be restored, many times they suffer from great death.
If you are not overly confident in the treatment, if you have no knowledge of the art and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are merciful and patient and never hasty.
And begin with treatments aimed at easing the pain, and let the patient place their trust in God if there is no hope for health. And when you see hope, then reshape the limb back to its original position, so that the abscesses become less severe.
And when the limb is restored to its place, if you administer soothing treatments and care for the wound as it requires, with dry ointments.
And if there is also a break in the dislocation and small bones displaced, and you manipulate the bone, doing as we have said for simple diseases.
And keep from entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is by your Creator that you are guided in such matters, and for His wisdom and strength. Amen.
