O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science along with its explanation and concluded by its expositions and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this chapter, which is part of the work on hands, namely 'Surgery'.
And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and carried out everywhere, it has been neglected except for a few details from ancient books that describe what the hands have done. And thus arises error and folly, and understanding is closed off, and wisdom has departed.
Or it seems to me that I wish to revive this treatise with the arrangement of its chapters according to exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and also come together the forms of cauldrons for cautery, and other tools of the craft with the addition of preparation as needed.
And because there are no good masters at hand in our times, the art of medicine has been abandoned. It is necessary for those who undertake this to ascend in the knowledge of anatomy, as Galen says, understanding the judgment of bones, their shapes and connections and separations, having knowledge of the bones and nerves and blood vessels and number of veins, and their movement and active and resting states.
And so Hippocrates says that the unaided hand is very little, and with effort it is even less; similarly in the art of surgery.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not attentive to what has been said before, be careful that they do not err and kill people; as I have often witnessed with some who undertake this science and abandon themselves without experience.
When I saw a mad knight who cut an abscess of scrofulous swellings or neck of a woman, and cut the vessels at its base; so much blood flowed out that the woman bled to death in her hands.
And I saw another knight who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a part of the bladder, and within three days, the man died from it.
And I had already been called upon to treat it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if he was to be cut open, he would surely die from it.
This physician took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was also an injury; and the ignorant doctor reset the fracture on top of the wound at the proper location by firmly securing it, without leaving any gap, and left it in this state for some time; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated again. It remained thus until the leg was completely healed, along with the foot, and came to ruin.
I was called upon to come to him, and hurried to dislocate the leg; and when it was dislocated so gently, he felt at peace and experienced no pain.
But the infection was already confirmed within the member and could not be healed; and the condition did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
And behold I see another physician who fells an encrusted abscess, which then inflames due to the spite of his lordship.
For cancer, when it is filled with melancholic humors, does not need to be touched with iron unless in part its location allows for the removal of what is corrupted.
And thus, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each place within this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to protect yourself so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take up your weapons with caution, and embark on the healing of the sickly both gently and firmly, using the best method so by the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised; and let go of hopeful illnesses that bring great health concerns, and remove your doubts about these weapons, and have faith within yourself so that you may come from this world to the other with glory.
Galien in some of his warnings says: "Do not take on poorly diseased illnesses that you be called foolish."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire and medicinal cauterization wounds, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; including descriptions of swellings, ferrules for cauterization, and all necessary items in the work.
The first of the cauterization and items from wounds are de laires de l’artemonginsions, and tos forms de ase.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it orders the head to the elbows, and the shapes of stretching.
So we shall remember our work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of help and the harm of each composition.
I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtle science and its secret responses; and on this topic, many wise ones speak and agree with it; but their words suffice little to me because I return in length.
I say that fire cautery helps in all constitutions where there is matter; for two kinds of constitutions exist - those with hot moisture and those with dry moisture.
In the constitution with both hot and dry moisture, some say that fire cautery is of great help, while others argue otherwise - that it only benefits diseases arising from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to treat heat-related diseases by adding more heat or dryness; and those who say otherwise argue that fire cautery provides great help for both hot and dry diseases affecting human bodies. When you examine the body of the person and their moisture with the fiery temperament, you find the body to be cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it no time through experimentation.
t e times the m and heum: ESTTrafordnez par la oulez de. And all the healers gathered and agreed on the treatment.
And know this, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of the cure, and even greater beneficence than burning medicinal cautery.
thed; Tap. ould that lesquilibtud: O.
Ardent medicines come from one body part to another by joining them together and bring severe illnesses for healing to the affected member; and sometimes it kills the patient.
The veins due to their high position and goodness of their substance do not act in this way unless there is excess.
And this is what I have discovered through experimentation and the extensive service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it lies in accordance with the truth of things; therefore, I excuse myself for the lengthiness of my words, because I do not wish to take from you the secret knowledge on which or how this work operates, and the quality of its function, as explained by the philosopher when demonstrating; consider it well in your thoughts.
And know, my son, when to perform the cauteries and praying lines.
And I say that cautery is suitable in all cases, because the damage occurring can be avoided by using cautery; especially when a necessary and urgent pain cannot wait for greater harm to come upon the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the mad doctors; because a disease cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, for cauteries are only medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humors causing pain, and it works faster than other medicines due to its potency and power of its action.
And sometimes the illness comes due to the constitution of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; they are combined in him excesses from the consumption of meats and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the site where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain relief, and other matters, so that no more pain returns; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last of medicine, and that's true; but they don't believe that cauterizations have value after medicine, their understanding is false, because when we administer treatment methods for any disease and they are ineffective, then we apply our cauterization, and it has value. Then indeed cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
The ancients said that surgical instruments of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not consider bronze as it pertains to the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the eye of a cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true as I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men; surgical instruments of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they claimed.
And indeed when you heat a gold instrument, it is not due to the color of gold, and it cools down quickly; if overheated, it requires fire; thus there are sufficient obstacles.
And therefore we use the iron cautery as we have found suitable for our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the path may be easier to find.
Olive oil for anointing and healing purposes.
These cauteries are for moisture and cold on the brain; there are two that are done because of an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors descending from the head into the eyes, ears, causing a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, as well as all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, stroke, and similar afflictions.
sirlement.
And then make him sit with a cross between your hands, and place his hands on either side of the base; afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his neck between his two eyes; and wherever you see come his nerves, let it bleed first and then cool off the cautery called "olivare", which is as follows:
And place it on the location marked with ink, and gently pull and twist your hand little by little; then lift your hand slightly, and return to the spot where you see a small bone protruding; if you do not see this, continue cauterizing until you see the bone as I have told you; afterward take some honey, place it in soft cotton inside, and put it on the location, leaving it there for three days; then apply fine linen soaked in butter; leave it until the scab is dry; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until healed.
And if they say among the elders that when the wound is more open, it purifies better; and for this reason help yourself with salves.
And some of these say that one must thoroughly cauterize the part where bone is burnt and then repair what has been burnt off from the bone, and treat it.
And others say that one must cauterize sufficiently above, and push so hard as to bow the bone as wide as the wreath women put in their hairs so that humors flow out; and one should keep the open wound for a long time, after which it should be cleaned and bandaged.
And these two ways of cauterization do not seem to me entirely good in all cases; except for certain people who have reason to fear. However, it seems to me that I should leave them alone, because the head becomes weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other limbs; and likewise when the head of a sick person is naturally weak, and the first sign of cauterization is more healing and effective for me, so I work accordingly with this method which brings together salvation.
From ankle pain to severe headache
When pain in all parts of the head comes chronically and lasts long, one must use years and pills called "cochie," as well as enemas, oils, and plasters; but if they undergo cautery as we have previously mentioned, it is not effective.
Be careful if the patient's headache is of a strong nature and not too cold; then you should apply cautery below the previously mentioned cautery, as we have described above.
; t. The 1 and so (thuser as far theirs.
Of fire cautery for the head When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and extends to its extremity, and the shoulder is purified by medicinal substances, and other treatments as I have mentioned in the division of diseases are done, but they prove useless: then one makes fire cautery according to two ways, that is to say with quinces and with iron.
The quinces cautery is such that you take a piece of alchemy mercury and scrape off and cover two points with the same substance, then make the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can replace the alchemy mercure from under the skin; and when it has been replaced properly and securely and left thus for 12 hours; and then loosen and cut along the alchemy mercury, leaving the wound like this for two or three days; then place cotton soaked in butter until pus is formed.
After the healing ointment is applied until it is cleaned; and if you see, take some of the medicinal substances I have written or mentioned in treating with burning medicines.
The fire cautery is made as follows. Heat the fire cauterizer of which this shape:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a hole or has .i. small protrusion and resembles an eye; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron slightly until half of the expected color turns charred; lift your hand so that the tissue does not burn further behind, and let an abundance of blood flow.
After placing cotton in the ear for three days, and then putting moistened cotton with butter, afterwards treating the wound with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellus', at all points, be sure not to burn the artery in this migraine which is not old.
Migraine
When you treat the migraine as we have previously described in sections of diseases, and it does not work, and see that neither medicine nor iron is effective for the cautery as before mentioned, then it must be heated with the 'cultellus' type cautery until it is white; and thusly on the tender part of the ear, draw a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and let blood flow all the way to the bone; beware lest the lower jaw moves when eating, and nerves have no regard for it but only towards the migraine until spasms come upon the patient; and be wary of bleeding from the artery once cauterized if there is great fear or equal distress to those who are not aware and untried. But I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery has been cauterized, and I will show you where it opens at that place in this book.
If you see that these cauterizations do not ease the illness and the patient is suffering greatly, caulk within the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; if you see so, administer the cautery we have mentioned or in the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has .ij. knives; this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
Of ear pain due to cold air
When ear pain comes from cold air and one has tried solvent medicines and other treatments we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then apply this caustic called "point," of which here is the form:
After pointing everywhere around the ear, where either both sides hold pain and you remove the lump near the root of the ear once it has been touched; keep six points around each ear; then treat the area until it is clean.
For oral torment
Torture that must be treated with fire is only those caused by moisture, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make a cautery for similar ones caused by pus and snake venom.
When treating this type of torture that causes swelling from venom and cleansing purges, gargles, and such remedies are ineffective, then you should apply three cauterizations to the patient: one at the root of the ear, another a little forward on the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery where the part is healthy, directing it towards the top of the ear just below the tip, and another along the length of the temple as long as a piece; leave the cautery until half the skin is burnt off, this being the effect of the cautery.
And there is the kind of scraping we have described before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; after treating them as I have previously mentioned, until they are healed.
When apoplexy is present and you treat it as we have said, and if it does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauterizations: two on each of the two temple bumps, and one in the center of the head, and one at the location that we call "vessels" as we have previously mentioned, and another near the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have said before.
Of languor
For this illness, give the patient large years and purgative pillow-moulds to cleanse the brain; afterwards shave the head of the sick person entirely, and place upon their occipital bone an astrolabe made of sinapis (black mustard), as prescribed in treatises on plasters. And this is how you perform the cautery: do so as I have instructed.
If it proves to be so, well done; and if not, then do as follows: make three cauteries below the head extending down to the neck, with two fingers' width between each one, and treat them all similarly, and if you see that they are adhering together, create a fourth cautery in the middle. And if it is necessary, perform two more above the ears, and treat until it becomes well, as I have previously mentioned; this last cautery will be called an 'olive press', as I have before said.
of cold in the head It is necessary that the head be made smooth of years and what we have previously mentioned; after resetting the head for the patient, then perform caustication in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations above the spine of the back; leave it until as much skin has grown, then raise your hand; after treating so that it becomes healthy, and let be the caustication which we have called "olivare" previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
Surgical methods should not be used on the patient unless they are phlegmatic; first, one must purify the brain with leeches and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical affliction.
And if it is a child who cannot suffer, give them gargles and mastication to purify the brain often with good meats; afterward they will have their heads shaved, and .i. cautery as we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessels, and above each horn; and if patients are very afflicted and suffering, give them cauterization as I have described to those with paralysis and softening of limbs, along the spine of the back and neck, and it shall be an olive cautery according to the method that I have said.
If the patient is a child, give them a subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted dampness and large phlegm, then the fire cautery of parts as we have told should be applied to those with paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy there are decreasing excesses leading to melancholy, and the body is moistly sick, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be cleansed, according to its state in the classification.
After the head of the sick person is bandaged; after applying a well-made linen bandage, like a circle, placed on top of the head; and the patient's hair crossed evenly, and held firm from all sides; then present the ointment, and anoint with old sheep butter; and heat it gently over fire so that one can endure to pour the oil into it; after emptying the circle from inside the head, let it cool; and do this once a week to someone sickly with good governance until they are healed.
If you see that the patient has been burned in various places by the caustic, this method of caustication moistens the brain equally; then place cotton wool soaked in butter and lamb fat on it.
From the heat of the eyes When the heat comes first to the eyes as I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something that clarifies the mind, and protects from all dampness, and they may sweat or take baths multiple times on an empty stomach.
After the command to raise his head, and make a fire cautery in the head, and two small cauterizations over the temples where the nerves of the temple are together, or if it is one; wrap all vessels from the blood causticization and arteries that are below the crown, and let the caustic be long according to the width of the temple; watch for bleeding out of control, and if too much blood flows, stop with a dressing as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, how to dress it as you would; never do causticization or binding below the two bones behind.
In the body's tears
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and over the veins, or near the arteries that appear before the forehead; and one sees that it is due to cold, watery superfluities, then apply the caustic as I have said at the beginning of this chapter: i. a caustic on the head, ii. caustics above the two temples, and ii. caustics or haiterel under the two bones; and if more is needed, cauterize gently over the eyebrow with each small caustic.
Throughout the course of tears within the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nuis cochies to drink; afterward make a caustic on the head, and apply the hot oil caustic as well; and also two caustics of the clavicle-cautery above the eyebrows, one near the brows but not touching them; and beware not to clog up the artery. And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavelis":
When the oil paper of the wound is softened by disease and moisture, then use the fire cautery called "olivaret". This is its form:
And if you see two cauteries on the same spot as the eyelids are; do not leave your hand except until a third of the paper is burnt, according to the method I have described.
and t they le Clavt y Comis quele ; by: it'issued them. At no time do the hairs of the eyelids turn to scales and touch the eye, and one performs cauterization in two ways: that is with fire or with burning medicines.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in a healthy position; after securing (or binding) the eyelids with a figure so that it is similar to the feather of myrtle, and let the beginning sign be close to the hairs. Then put cotton wool smeared with egg white and musk essence on the eye, then heat this cauterization as follows:
After the cauterization on the area you have marked little by little, let the skin be healed at that spot; and the signs of health in the wound are when you see the paper recede, and the hairs rise to the height of an egg; then clean your hands, and leave so for iii. days, then apply a cotton ball soaked in butter until the burn is healed; afterward treat with ointment until it is healthy again.
And if after that the hairs come in and the paper becomes soft as before, then resume the cauterization on that same spot; and if the hair is lost, continue cauterizing until the skin rises back to its natural place, evenly, without touching the original point.
The cauterization with hot medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment form of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and lively salt, each one in .З. ounces, and grind them well together quickly so it does not cool down, then sprinkle on the form as with myrtle leaves, and put on the paper; and if the illness is only in a single joint, you work with i.i., and in either of these; and put cotton balls into an egg yolk. And let the patient'n be well rested and place your two fingers showing under the medicine, and press .i. and lick every time when the patient feels mordacity from the medicine, as if it is biting like fire because. When you have done this for a long time, apply the medicinal bandage properly. And when the swelling is gone, raise the bandage and see if it appears lifted as if by fire or incision; if so, it's good. If not, reapply the medicinal bandage over the wound until your efforts are evenly done, and your eyes sharp; then put cotton greased with butter until the hair grows out, after which cleanse the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And you must guard your work carefully to ensure the medicinal bandage does not come loose from the eyes. If the paper becomes thin afterwards, and the hairs prick at their tips, resume the medicine over that wound as before; then cleanse it until it is healthy; this is the method of "the fool's folly":
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this, be their constraints; and do not return them by the straight path for those who have studied this art.
Of treating a fistula with cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then it is proper for you to perform cautery according to this manner.
the pudvous; but:s: bonstracz;
After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat the swelling and dryness; and if it is closed, work on the bowels; after applying a hot caustic substance, hold your hand to the part of skin above the oil so that your hands do not go mad; and place the caustic substance in the fat of the oil, and let it spoil.
If you begin the cautery up to the bone, it is best. Otherwise, resume the casterization one more time and leave as needed, then after applying cotton-like softened butter and treating with drying ointment until healed, if forty days pass without healing, apply corrosive medication until the bone is exposed; and follow according to what appears in his chapter.
And there is a way of treating a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. For an open wound, and then apply a subtle pincers with this form: They make it the amount of a . З. of lead; and hold your hand or whatever firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, until the lead has melted to its proper shape; and it is necessary that on the oil you put cotton moistened with this or with egg white: if the lead fills the place properly, then it provides a marvelous healing.
And if the abscess is healed by the cautery that we have described, it is good. If not, you must administer a pessary to the womb with this, and return the abscess back into its proper place in the body as required.
For ruptures of lips Often occur cracks in lips which are called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small lancet-like cautery according to this method:
Here for you have been the li que ite, and soignement dont cured in the next to the cauter les avies on l’ointe as they are treat et so the creter; that of the warts them healments as well: ce que vous m.
Of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the eye socket, palate, or near the roots of the teeth, after it has decayed and rotted and become old and turned into a fistula; treat it as we have described in divisions, but it will not heal: then you must apply .i. cautery according to the size of the fastole; after removing or opening the fistula, hold your hand until the wound is completely closed, and later too; do this once or twice more after the treatment we have described in remedies, until it is healed; if treated thus, it will be good. And if not, then you must expose the area and remove the decayed bone, according to what you find instructed in your chapter.
Of the slight movements of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but to no avail, then place the patient's head in a clean spot; afterwards bathe the cautery so that its form will come shortly after, placing one end on a rag over the tooth; insert hot charcoal into the cautery quickly, holding your hand as the patient feels warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and resume the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, leaving it there for an hour and a half.
And in such manner, the tooth that had moved is confirmed; the softened gums are held steady, and the moisture which was corrupted is dried up.
From the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold or heat, and medicinal remedries have no effect, then there is need for cautery in two ways: caulteries of butter and caulteries of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take a piece of butter from the cow, and shape it into a spoon made of iron or brass; then wrap cotton around the tip and cover with a tent cloth, causing the wool to stick in the butter; apply quickly to the painful tooth until cooled. Often repeat as long as its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; if you see that the butter-bound wool and cotton have hardened, then place it back on the painful tooth and heat with a hot iron until heat comes to completion under the tooth.
Cautery of fire is such that you take an iron or brass spoon, and make it thick enough so the heat does not reach to the mouth of the patient. After heating the caulteries, wait until they cool down before using them; place on the painful toeht and keep your hand there until cooled. Do this often because the pain will disappear that day or the next. And it is important for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter while applying the cauterizer, and then rinse out afterwards; and here are the caulteries:
And if the scrofulous growths are due to cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, then apply the fire caustic of which comes after this shape, and it has two openings for the fumes to issue from the fire cautery on another part; and put the hot cauterization over the abscess once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the edge of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then apply the cauterizations according to the quantity of the abscess and leave so that healing. And after, embalm: and put balms and lotions and tents as long as it sane are.
When moistures overcome the channels of the neck, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then one must first drain the patient with soluble medicines; afterward perform a cautery at the root of the throat and ensure you do not reach up to the throat itself nor burn the skin but only slightly. After that, make another cautery on the joint at the neck's spine base, and use the cauteries known as "clavile" from our previously described form; treat it so that it is healthy as we have discussed before.
When fever overcomes, administer a concoction for reducing heat within the body. When diseases of the neck are cold moistors, and the patient has no fever nor thirst, and it is an early illness, make two cauteries on either side in the eyes' corners; and another cautery between the buttocks where they meet; and use the cauteries known as "clavile" according to the form which was mentioned before.
When you see it, do the point-pricking cautery called "points" as before in the ear disease; and let the points be up to 30 or around that amount. After treating according to what has been mentioned above, let there be other cauldrons of four rounds in this form:
And because these cauldrons are lighter, as you make three from each one:
Regarding the shoulder joint dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset in place but cannot remain there, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first address the dislocation immediately. After the patient lies on their back and side; then lift the head inside the cavity of your left hand's thumb; and if the joint is dislocated, apply the heating rod with two nails at its end to shape it.
and heat the head to just above the ribs, using the heating rod with four nails at its end for shaping; this is achieved by caulking with the heating rod that has three nails, as the figures of caulking are these four rods; and each nerve corresponds to the subtlety of a tent, which is the shape of the heating rod that has three nails.
And at no time is it positioned on this nerve through which there are eight cauteries.
After applying the cautery for scraping with a spoon; after allowing the patient to rest, do not move the limb for long periods until it is fully comfortable.
And if it is dislocated again, which happens rarely; then make the caustic on the thick part of the clavicle with many cauterizations or pressing. Because the joint is closed, and bone becomes hardened and the patient feels better.
by [un su : (tir; you give meest odonz t fd’s:
The ancient ones said that one should make pleurisy cauteries from aristolochia root in this manner: take an aristolochia root as long as possible, the longest you can find, and let it dry, making it as thick and long as your fingers; coat it with oil and hold it over fire to create a single cautery between the throat's edge and the neck, two small cauteries slightly descending on the part below the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and the seventh, inclined slightly backward; one in front of the feet, another above the stomacg, one between the shoulders, two at each side of the chest, without pressing too hard with your hand but rather openly as when smelling.
And the ancients said that no man should use a fire caustic resembling shaving, and heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; and then relief comes with pain as we have described in liver abscesses. But in this kind of treatment there is fear or malaise causing death now, or a fistula arises that cannot be healed.
It seems like the text got cut off unexpectedly; it says "de la mort."
When treating the disease of those parts that we have mentioned in the sections on treatments, and it is not effective at all, then there are three ways of fire cautery, which are all good.
One way is to make three or four cauteries, aligned with the length of the parts, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient be turned over on their back.
Another way of fire cautery is to use the one with two nerves as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation; and lift the part where the limb's edge comes from the left side, and make elevations that you lift the part according to its size, according to the length of the body, and let the fire cautery be according to the width of the body.
After putting the two inflamed nerves, keep them until the core is pierced on the other side, and then apply the cautery, so there will be four in total. If you see this, cauterize all with a cautery at three nerves. After curing when it has taken long to absorb pus, and this involves moving like the previously mentioned cures.
Of edema
Cautery is not for edema, but in the manner called "asclytes." When you treat according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment does not help, then it should be done with four cauteries around the hips, one on top of the stomcu, one on top of the liver, one on top of the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the point where the urine comes out.
After letting the fire cautery open for longer periods to purify, do not release the treatment of the sick person afterward; healing would be hastened, and both intentions would be united with God's help.
The form of the caustic for the belly is to be a spatula as we have previously shown; and that for the back should be an olive, according to what has been placed there before.
Of the swelling of the fingers When the fingertips are swollen in someone who is jaundiced, and filled with yellowish bile, it must be that you cauterize above the spine between the little finger and ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery towards you. And do not enter too deeply, thus confining the yellowish bile, and make the cautery according to this form:
After performing on two legs two cauldrations in each leg at the ankle joint point; and let the cauldration be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, along the leg; leave the cauldrations lengthwise so that bile can drain out; afterwards cure the other cauldrations we have mentioned.
For the treatment of menorrhagia: take three roes from a pigeon and two roes from a capercailzie, grind them in wine, then pour it into a bottle with sugar; this should be taken at every meal for a month. Afterwards, if bleeding persists, perform the following procedure:
When the solution of stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtue that is in the stomach and intestines flows out, it cannot be treated by ordinary methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been explained here before about the cauterization of the stomach, where the cautery circulates; four subtle cauteries around the belly corresponding to one pointed cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good help.
For the treatment of swellings
When ganglions are at the base, one or several that are old and consist of large cold, damp corrupted humors, and they have been treated as we have described in divisions, and it is not effective unless you do cauterizations: three on the spine along the back, the one closest to almucantarotus, gradually triangularly spaced apart, and two below the armpit.
and if you think his stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and you see swelling of the face, then on the face do a large cauterization as previously described, and one on the liver, and another on the gallblad
of the black substance which is called "theleol"
When you come to the joint, heat sufficiently the caustic which appears like a small razor, and then set it all ablaze on that joint being addressed; leaving your hand and the caustic at the origin of the vein until blood flows out from it, so causing little harm; do this once or twice, and if there is much swelling, cauterize each one as we have said; after applying beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you use a large caustic on an inflamed area, it will provide greater assistance.
Of poorly treated wound
When the patient cannot endure surgery or incision, we will discuss it in this chapter; if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by caustic treatment.
When a fistula comes from any part with old and putrefied matter and corrupted moisture, you must probe it entirely with a very fine tube, and know how much the entire area is affected. After heating the cautery that appears as if one razor, insert it into the fistule according to the amount that entered there, and resume the cautery until the corrupt body parts are scorched once or twice or thrice, depending on the quantity of fat needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves which are in them. If the fistule goes to the bladder or intestine, watch out for these leaks, and do not make a hole as if you were going upstream; remember that it is not necessarily pervasive; after curing the leak so that it becomes healthy, and if the leaks are scraped off, and the matters have been removed long ago, then know that the leak is entirely healed; and if the matters have not been removed, know that the leak is inflamed and corrupted at its origin. Thus as we say of one of these in their location.
Concerning the illness of kidneys The quidon les mallot li parfaits couvertes d’autre ne est s. 20s autres de ses maint liaut et desir. Et donc le ventrement la m'est, au tient lee avons sus ce que nos vauter eux reis de choses; and the cestez de lesc et, il soie; Estropes:
Of the bladder When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture, causing the patient to hold urine, then make a fire cautery in the area behind the bladaderies, where hair begins at the tip of the finger; there should be one on each hand, as long as we have mentioned. There shall also be one on the back if needed; and the fire cautery shall follow the form previously described.
Of the marrow When the testicles are cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed endings; when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the scrotum, as we have said in urinary tract cautery, and two cauterizations on the back; and let the cauliflower-shaped cautery be made as we have said.
Of the hip
When the viscous veins descend to the hip bag, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the lion's share of the testicles is found in the departure region, so you must cauterize the patient with one caustic resembling a circle on the hip bag, and mark before the groin within the circle, ensuring that the bag is inside the circle; and let the cauliflower-shaped cautery be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three large olive oil-based cauterizations, and the cautery should be as close together as possible like all keys; apply the cautery until it is healed.
Pain of the thigh When pain comes in the thigh, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers as we have said in division and treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the sick of large humors with foul-smelling pills or other good pills that appear similar.
After the fire cautery; and the method of cauterization is in two ways: that is to say, with burning medicines and fire cauterization. Fire cauterization has many methods, among which one is such: you cauterize on top of the ham thigh's pouch, three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, ensuring good depth and size, and leaving space between each cautery as wide as a thumb; it should be an olive-shaped cautery. Another method is not done in the middle above the head of the thigh, because there are four following this form:
And if you see that the cauterization on the circular cautery as we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it so that the circle contains the entire thigh and all the space around its curvature is burned.
And this is the way to do in sciatica when the pain holds in the thigh and does not reach up to the thigh or leg; and if it reaches the thigh and leg, then make two cauterizations where the patient says that the pain bothers him, and one cauterization above the ankle four thumbs. And be it should be a cuticle-shaped cautere, and should be burned thickness of the curvature; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two feet or near the heel, then cautered where at the pain three points or four fingers with the cautered called «points».
If it is necessary to do so and if the pain increases; and if it seems that the pain moves from above the knee towards the thigh, then perform a cautery using either an ear-spoon or circular caustic, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave behind either the caustic used or damage to nerves and major arteries, causing further harm and constriction to the patient.
And I have seen others who made a cautery on the ankle near the foot, and they continued it until the leg was completely swollen, along with the foot as well, which became pierced and corrupted throughout; afterward, there came death from his belly.
And if the pain is in two places together, perform a cautery on each one accordingly. // The wise ones said of the haunch caustication, here follows this manner, make a piece of iron as big as a small finger or slightly less, and it should be through holes and spaced so that the quantity from one end to the other is like a pea's knot; the spaces are over two parts evenly spacculed, and also shaped like those mentioned. And there should be an iron strap well made; here is its form:
First bathe it until all is red and sticky-wet, then place it on the pouch of the affected leg, and twist with the sound ribs; and cauterize once using a hot iron rod and leave for three days; then apply beef suet, and let the open wound remain exposed for a long time; after applying ointment until healed.
Albuquerque says we use little of this cautery due to fear of its appearance, and few are seen using it; however, this is a good cauterizing method that can be endured, where one finds comfort.
from the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or excessive evacuation, or like cold matter expanding, none of these cases call for cautery unless it is someone who has taken in cold substances.
After the patient has expelled fetid pills or other similar substances, make them lie on their back where the pain is located. Three lines marked with 'X', and in each line, 5 cauldrons or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and perform the cauterization as per the cauldron called "points". If you see this: do 3 caudrons or 4 at the clavicle midline according to this method.
This disease often comes in young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow anus when they stand up, and fear; and you find at the base spine of their back and above the appearance that comes across other spines.
When you see this wound and examine it, apply the fire cautery according to this method.
If the fire cautery needs to touch each part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, apply the hot caustic around the spine with a tool that makes 2 or 3 lines and be close to one another. After curing the area until it is smooth as we have said, be careful not to perform cauterization in an indented area where there may be nerves.
On the treatment of joint pain
When joint pain is from moistures that have spread to every part of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which those called 'gout' properly, and when it is caused by coldness and remedies cannot heal it, then they are treated with caustics thus: make a ring of caustics around the joint of the foot, and let the caustic be olive-shaped in this form:
And if there is a need to grasp above the face of the foot, let the caustic be made over all the caustics called 'points'. And if pain comes near to joints and other joints, which often happens, make a caustic on each knee .iii. or .iiij. from each side, in olive-shaped form; and if more is needed, then add more, but do not keep your hand too close until the color of flesh is scorched.
And if pain descends to knees and the back, administer the caustic as we have mentioned in our chapter. And if there is pain in the hands, make points around the gulf .ij. lines; and if no pain remains in the joints, then do a point on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if pain comes to the shaft or shoulder blades, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and prescribe remedies. For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be well aided by God.
From the custom of sucking
When the sucking custom causes swelling and veins protrude anew, then when you see it to be healed, do not let them pass by without action that day; and use things that ease their stomachs so they can expel from their belly; afterwards sit on one's back between the hands, and command them to rub oil until the veins are repaired, and massage your arms, and give a gentle push under the sucking area over the bone of the wrist, and make any sign resembling half a circle above their body; then prepare the cautery as described here:
Then rub it until it is white and sweaty. Next, massage the veins at their location; and have the servant oil his hand so they do not return backwards; and work well on the limbs of the sick person, and place a pillow and a sergeant under the thighs, and another under the buttocks that he rubs with his hands; then apply the cautery over the mark made by your entire hand, and straight up and down until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it on the first try, then repeat again as many times as necessary until you get to the bone; and be careful that the vein does not come out while doing the cautery; do not burn it; and ensure that by this the sick person does not die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you approach the bone with cautery, your efforts are of no use. It is necessary for the cauldrons used by children to be subtle according to their size and those of large people also sizable according to their measure; after four days heal the wound from burning butter until the scalding is gone; afterwards treat with other ointments until it is healthy, and let the patient rest on his back for forty days so that the wound may be well united; and it must be ensured that their movements are long-lasting so that the swelling does not come out when they begin to stand in chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, have him properly dressed with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; let there be good rest so that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and shouting loudly; and when this instruction is done, then he will be completely healthy. And I will now say after the tailor's treatment in its chapter. Regarding the abdominal pain treatment.
When skin growths appear in other bodies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one fire cautery according to its quantity, and it should be as much as two-thirds of the original; afterward heal as we have said; and none of the ancients have stated that it should be cauterized with a fire caustic at three angles in this manner:
But first mark the base of the growth and draw a line for its width above it, and another below, and hold your hand over the entire fire caustic. But the first caustics are lighter and more mobile.
from ancient pain in any limb When pain occurs in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain persists for a long time, with medical treatment proving ineffective, then it is necessary to perform cauterization using the caustic known as "points", applying the caustics according to the length of the member, its size, weakness, virtue, location of twists, and its pain. If the first caustic proves effective, that's good; otherwise, begin with another caustic on top of it, for it is customary that the treatment should move closer to the affected area so that you can perform cauterizations until the patient is healed.
Messelecy or massage therapy
Massage therapy can be beneficial at times with the aid of caustic treatment, particularly in cases of disease arising from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. Can you apply a cauterization here if the illness is in its early stages, and if it has been treated according to what we have discussed in the division; neither delay nor hesitate, as if corruption may spread throughout the entire patient, then perform five causters on the head: one above the forehead near the root of hair, and the other at the front towards the end of the eyebrows; two above each temple, and one behind the ears; and let your hand reach to the bone so that the cauterizer can be reached out as much as scales come out, such that vapors from large humours may escape.
And if the swelling is widespread and clearly visible, it is necessary to perform cauterization with the cauldrons we have mentioned before: one at each corner of the head, two on the spine along the neck, five on the spine down the back, a large one over the navel and another nearby; two on both shoulders, two on the hip bones, two on the tendon of the ankle, one above each joint in hands and feet, and below the palms' pits; beware not to burn any nerves running along behind it; never cauterize directly over a bone such as the knuckles or stomach, nor liver.
Know that the more cauldrons you make, the more help they provide, and the patient benefits; know that the sick do not feel pain from cauterization as healthy ones do because their bodies are already completely corrupted. It is necessary for the cauldrangs to be large or small depending on the members and joints according to what you find in handling irons. After removing them, apply wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Remain vigilant that after extracting cauterizations, use a mixture of wheat flour and honey as long as the wound is healed.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then apply cautery to the affected area according to its size and smallness; the cautery should be a little bit into the skin's color. Then treat with ointments until it is healed. Cautery has also been done on the hand, foot, and back at the place where nerves move the limb, so there is bone deformity; however, do not interfebre any sinew if you are not familiar with the body's muscles and nerve openings.
The use of cautery to address swelling in specific areas necessitates careful application based on the affected limb's dimensions; a slight penetration into the skin is advised for visibility. Subsequent treatment should include ointments until healing occurs. Additionally, cautery has been applied to extremities and spine locations associated with nerve function that can lead to bone deformity when not properly managed; however, intervention in such cases should be avoided unless the practitioner is knowledgeable about muscle functions and neurovascular pathways within the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medical remedies prove ineffective, then apply cautery slightly with a cautery according to the quantity of color change; so that the blueness turns white, and the color changes; then treat with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves juice, along with bull testicle blood and duck's blood, each part by part; and mix it all together, and wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to the place until healed.
The treatment of ulcers by fire cautery
When an ulcer begins to develop and you see it can be stopped, cauterize with the fire that forms a full circle around the entire ulcer. However, the wise ones say they also do cauterization within the core of the ulcer; however, this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become further ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen such done before; moreover, a more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around, with fire called "circular," as we have said in many cauteries.
Of the inflammation that cannot die out
When someone suffers from a disease called "adubelati," which is slow to death due to excess or because of the weakness in the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or time; if you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by poking; afterwards leave it as such. For it will be inclined to die.
And if you see it pierced throughout the cautery, heat the cautery of which there is a shape:
And place your hand within the disease called "adebelati" until the core of the cautery has been pierced, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels behind in a way that the course of putrefaction is alleviated. Afterwards heal it completely when it is sound.
The healing of fire with iron
There is another way of disease called 'corrosive,' which is nothing but a mass on the limb, for it consumes the limbs just like dry torches are consumed by fire. If you see this disease in place and the patient can suffer cauterization with heat, then accordingly perform small and large cauterizations at the location where the disease or malady is; after cauterizing all parts until you have eradicated the entire corruption, leaving nothing of it such that anything corrupted be osteoed. And then leave for .iii. days, applying oil compresses to the cauterized sores until the fire-blisters are healed and all corruptions gone. After this treatment with anointments producing charm; and if after .iii. days it remains healthy, that's good; but if not, resume cauterizing on what is left of the corrupted limbs. And this mass has never been treated in place by ague medicine before cauterization with fire; however, cauterization with fire is more helpful, and I have already stated the treatment for ague medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
Of pus that comes to the joints.
Often it happens that in the feet a disease arises behind which is called "close" according to our understanding, and is a large swelling causing pain to the foot. And for this disease, there are two kinds of cautery: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery consists in heating a caustic as if it were a bellows' tongue, made from good iron that can reach all parts of the nail, with subtle margangs; after making it hot on the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the heat at the tip. Leave it so for three days until it starts to discharge pus; then make an ointment of ground barley and wormwood seeds, leave the ointment on it all night, and the nail will draw out and be uprooted from its roots. Then treat the foot with emollient cream until it is sound.
If they are turned forward on the body, and it often happens both in hands and feet, then you must use hot water caustic; and there is a particular way: take a tin of copper or iron, or a bellows' tongue, place it over the nail with its handle, that is for verrues; place the tin so that it encompasses entirely, then put some warm water on it, hold your hand firmly and press with your hand as you turn until the edge of the tin reaches to the root of the nerve, allowing the hot water to find a deep pathway to the root; let the patient suffer a bit from the burning sensation of the hot water for an hour. Leave it this way, and it will uproot all its roots. Do this again afterward until you extract everything from the body, then treat with emollient cream that nourishes.
them on; This is not to: est untines a la chauges until the be it. The time that tand rele your de ouga:
When someone shivers from coldness of nerves or fever quartan or other, it is necessary that you make them four cauterizations or four on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebra; and one incising and binding, and another near the stomach with an olive oil caustic. This will cease their shivering, and restore health from the cold disease.
Of pus-filled sores
Never visible from behind the body bathed, or pus-filled sores that arise from large corrupt matter. If in the first instance they appear that you must cauterize each head of the pustule: a subtle caustic made from wood mistletoe, with its point heated by fire, or from long astragalus root, or at the lenticular caustic. And never do we cauterize them at first when they appear, according to this manner; but it cannot grow further forward, and the excess is disrupted, making them healthy; but it must be done after blood evacuation.
When the artery is cut Many times it occurs that great blood flow from an artery cut to the wound on the surface or during abscess incision or member caustery, and similar things; and it is a very grave thing to stop bleeding.
And yet when it occurs to anyone, hurry to place your index finger on the wound of the vein and strain very hard until the blood is calmed below your finger, and ensure that no more flows out; then put olive oil causterys both small and large as long as they are all red; then take some, either great or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, and place the cautery above that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is stopped.
When it bursts out as you lift your elbow over the vein, and the cautery is spent, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
And continue to do one after the other until the wound is closed; and be careful not to burn the nerve near it, and that no other illness comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, you cannot properly close it on your own if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways we have mentioned: or with cautery, or through extraction if it has not been treated, or by strongly twisting a thread, or by medicines applied which can stop bleeding; and be glued and strained simultaneously.
Who will perform the proper closing of straining tightly with cloth or applying burning substances above, or similar things; if it does not benefit greatly.
If this occurs in someone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then one must place their index finger under the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it out until blood remains on top of the wound and vein; do not move it, but frequently moisten it with cold water so that it is very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and stops flowing; then make incisions as needed for cauterization and medicines.
As we have told you in the first chapter, all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices, causes, extracts, and forms of cauters; and I placed this chapter up to the fingers, and I will proceed with this chapter through the same path so that one finds it easier.
And so as I begin this section, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of cauteries, hence greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision over an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to embark upon folly. For many ways of healing come from those who have endured so much with their illness that they die easily due to the desperation brought about by their disease, and its severity; and we should fear for these ones. And among those who give their attention, and say: "Wait, I am the guardian"; but the illness is despised. You should not agree to what these people demand from you when they approach with this manner; instead, place greater importance on your honor than your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely based on that which you are certain of and can have experience with; apply prognostication and indication in treatments for your sick to where health is converted; and this will assist you in acheboring good renown, glory, and memory in the kingdom.
Dearest son of our lords, Our Lord grants you good understanding and rectitude, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as seen in the chapter of cauteries that I have explained from head to toe, so that you may find it easier to understand what you will need.
Full of water within the head
It is said that this illness often occurs in children being born, and when the sack exerts too much force on the child's head; there has never been a case where it was not caused by this.
And I have never seen this disease in beasts other than children, and of all those that I have observed it hastens death; therefore, I deem it worth mentioning the treatment section separately.
en son's tre ;
If there is too much moisture and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone and the signs you see are at the joints over the top of each part, and it feels like water when pressed with your hand inside, and has not been reset: then it must be cut into three incisions according to this manner.
And after the incision, remove all moisture thoroughly. After cleaning with cloths and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave so until the fifth day; then let it heal by bandages and ointments, and allow the head to be balanced evenly, and give dry meat to the patient in small amounts as long as the limb is strengthened and healthy.
And another way of incision is to examine where the head of the abscess lies and its water content; for it's never in front, never behind, never on the right, nor ever on the left.
Thus cut where the abscess head is and its water content according to your ability; be careful not to puncture an artery, ensuring there is a flow of blood so that the patient does not die from bleeding or loss of moisture.
To restore
When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and the illness is long-standing, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort is to perform cauterization with the tool used to tie off the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary that when you cover the eyes, the patient must keep his head back; after wiping the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extract one layer at a time from the neck; then look where the veins are located, and each eyelid's muscles are behind the ears, and they do not return much; then tie off each eyelid's ends with a stitch or two. Continue until you reach the bone, using one that is broad at both ends.
And if you see it, tie off the artery with a stitch from above and cut it just as two points cross over.
When the vein is opened, blood flows continuously from it.
If the artery does not open to touch or feel, you should measure the space of three fingers, then tighten and bind up to the bone; and the amount of blood that needs to be let out is five-six drams (about 276 ml), plus or minus depending on what the patient can endure and the replenishment of the artery. After examining the wound: if it remains above the bone without a sphagmous point, and no pus does not appear from it, then stretch the wound and sew it up, then apply an ointment until it heals.
From gouty inflammation
When gouty inflammation comes early and catarrh with moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headaches and such things occur, if it is treated by various medical methods of medicine and nothing benefits him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have discussed.
And the way to extract them is that the patient should have their temple hairs shaved back, and listen for the pulse of the artery which opens in the temple, because it beats clearly and heals quickly compared to some men who are too cold; and if it recovers, strain a bandage on the wound from the patient using rough fabric, then rub the area with warm water until the artery appears distinctly; then take the spatula like this:
First lightly scrape the skin to reach the artery, then turn it at the edges and separate well the threads that are below from each part; if the artery is delicate, twist with a pin's point, then sew up the area according to the quantity of the two veins. For if not sewn shut, they do not heal entirely in all.
And tie the blood of the five veins until three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you bind them in two strong threads of silk twisted together so that sores do not come before the wound's closure, and running bleeding does not occur; then sew up any excess between the two ligatures at the same time, and then, if you see, cauterize with a cautery knife to the bone as long as the veins are tied off; this is the proper work, provided that the patient has no fever and is of a hot constitution.
For caustics aid in finishing wet wounds; thus they are of greater help to wet wounds. For the extraction of arteries, fill the area with fine cotton and place well-made bandages; and when they are removed, treat them with dry medicines that promote healing, and use dressings until it is healthy; and if there's a lack of blood flow from where you work on it, quickly cauterize using hot iron or fill the area with vitriol and strain using your hand so that it becomes unblocked; and if not present, apply cold water to the site until numbness occurs, cool the area with cold water until congestion clears, and restrain as necessary; and those easier and lighter in artery extraction are cauterized at the vein of this sharp caustic iron (cautery) with two parts, but ensure the edge is well dulled to last longer against heat. For when inflammation is too hot, it holds less heat. And when it is two spaces between the points, and then you must have a heated until to the bone, and cleanse the vein for both sides, and they are far from the veins; and bevelled on both sides. And so that there is this caustic cauterize:
By tears
When the tears of eyes run down into veins near the forehead's upper part, and no medicine helps when administered there, you see the patient's face grow red like frightened flesh; and if oil is applied and moist enough that hair strands fall out, leaving burns from the heat of the tears, such treatment may be necessary.
They used to call it "contusion cure" in ancient times, and you do the same for a patient with this illness who has hair on his forehead: make three cuts or equal lengths according to the forehead's width; one of them goes through the middle of the forehead downwards until the nose, while the other two are made as if they were two ribs above the eyebrows. Be careful not to incise arteries that lie on either side under the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbone's length for each wound should be three thumb lengths.
From the incision that goes from the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all flesh that is between the two cuts until it reaches the sphenoide bone, then make another section from the middle incision up to the other end, and then extract this cautery stick.
If you put the instrument called "culterale" in the first cut, and it is very sharp on one side, but also soft so not cutting, and that is its shape: Hold the ribs cutting towards the chest where you can see, and the ribs away from the bone, and move until reaching the mid-fracture. Close all vessels that arise from the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to who opens the eye, then again in the middle fracture up to the other side; then extract blood equally, and express the wound for the taken blood; then put a tent of old cotton into each fracture, and cover with drapes soaked in wine and oil and ointment, ensuring that abscesses do not arise; on the third day remove the bandage, and apply large plantain leaves steeped in water, then cure with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
of the eye sockets
When frequent cases of eye sockets become swollen and small, and sight weakening the vision, and eyelids burned; and hairs falling out, and it causes great pain in frontal headache, and individuals suffering from such ailments are often caused by these conditions that this blindness but they arise from various venereum; and treat so beware of, and therefore cure, and thus:
Command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another wide one. A little bit. Begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, making the incision up to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves at the temples when they move while eating. When the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood onto a sponge, then place cotton between the two sides of the wound and cover it with linen cloth soaked in wine and oil; take care to prevent heatstroke from an abscess; when it has healed over, you must rub the bone until new growth begins, then apply curative salves that promote healing.
Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts wax, and mix them together to form an ointment; apply it to the wounds for overall healing.
For ear bleeding.
All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, pieces of mineral or similar substances; seeds, as in pods, peas, beans; or fluids flowing like water and easily passed, such matters.
When it flows from the ear as a stone or other substance not naturally close to the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear in sunlight. If you see the stone, then distil any small amount of violet oil or sesame oil, then proceed with extraction; and if there is sneezing due to this condition, plug the nostrils when sneezes occur, and put cloths or wool near the ear; elevate the ear above. This often brings relief through this treatment; but if it does not improve, arrange for delicate tweezeback removal as follows:
If it has improved with tweezing, that is good; if not, arrange for extraction using a small delicate double-ended forceps; and if it still does not improve, make an incision at the top of the opening or keyhole in the ear canal, and remove any wax buildup so that nothing can enter with the swab. Then treat as before, because often this brings improvement as we have said; but if there is no such improvement, take a substance like birds use, and insert it using a precise instrument of some sort, then place a small cotton at the opening; then press gently on the stone or whatever it may be, and treat as before. If none of the issues we have discussed occur, then quickly fracture the ear before an abscess appears or a swelling arises, and spasms; the manner of the fracture is such that you first comfort the sickly in his head, drain the blood according to its strength, then make him sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, creating a small fissure at the root of the ear where fat or tissue lies; let it be as a crescent until reaching the bone, then set the bone as much as you can, and squeeze out with haste into your mouth; cure until healed. If it is a stone that exists and swells, make a careful extraction; if it cannot be removed, then create a fine tube according to this form:
And make an incision on that stone. But do not perform this when you think the stone is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many cuts; then extract with fine tweezers and sucking, as we have said, so that the extractions be successful.
In the case where the patient's head enters the ear, it is necessary for them to use sneezing as a first measure and fill the ear with clean cotton. Place him lying on that same ear where the object is located; if it comes out easily by this means, it is good. If not, take many small pieces according to how much must be kept light and easy, and dry them slightly over fire; then put a piece of cloth or string from his own sleeve in there, and tie on the other side with another small stick above where the object is lodged; continue placing sticks one by one until all of it comes out easily. If you see this, take some kind of rod, insert one end into the ear, heat the other end over fire until the rod becomes hotter than the others; then replace with new rods until the entire object has been removed, as we have described in the chapter on stones.
For extracting the object, if it is of small size, like an insect or similar thing, treat as we have described in the section on removal; but if it is large enough to be felt, then arrange for extraction using forceps; and it is easier to remove whatever has entered into the ear.
For removal of artresir. se sont que l’oreille qui coure par le tennis tu l’oreille ne vuidier despiroire les tiers mains, et li mors sainsirs a l’a piere as ourtre tost; si condeuoir: la nostredes de li traits securer cestres ce, qui est coure en le curez auir la ou il sient despiere estrils sonts tennent maint quater les orle tout li.
It is narrowed behind and widened in front. Then put the more subtle part into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the patient, then continue throughout the entire canal; do this often as long as all hairs grow back. And if they do not obey to come out, then plug around the canal with cotton just as I have mentioned in the stone; and if they do not emerge forcefully as we have said, then apply distillations that the ancients have tried in bee sting treatment, and you will find them or treat by distillation; and distill oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which is the shape as you see.
It is made of silver or tin narrowed behind and widened in front for distillation; and to press the distillation through an instrument of well-made brass for this purpose, if you see a needle then wrap it with cotton at once; then pour your oil or juice, and as much of your medicines into the canal, so that the canal is in the ear; then insert all the cotton around the needle completely until the oil has been distilled or comes out from the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and make sure the distillations are kept warm as when they are distilled in the ear; and ensure they are not too cold, for otherwise the medicine would not be so good.
Pour que tu puisse ceuele que les poilz le oinseu quil estropent lou poignons si sachant que li oui parsont; et si a qui peint, et si bien estroier de. Et si tu ne seroit pas plus bon.
No child is born without any deformities in their ears and the same thing happens to adults through wounding or a foreign object lodged inside the ear, and these injuries occur fully within the ear such that one cannot see them; and sometimes there occurs an imperfect perception of sight while hearing remains good.
Therefore if it comes inward and cannot be seen, it often requires thorough healing in various conditions, and when you can see it, make the afflicted ear lie to the sun; then look inside: if there is apparent inflammation, the work is on this area where the form lies.
And be thorough and cutting before and behind all plainly, if it does not blister the ear; if the inflammamen is of a foreign object or body parts within the ear, then take with fine pincer-like tools, and clean lightly, until everything has been removed.
If the obstruction is completely in the ear, take a subtle and light probe and warm it slightly by fire, then put it on the body of the ear. If you feel the blockage causing the patient to have ringing in their ears, carefully puncture it, but be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the opening, and apply an ointment with barley meal.
Do not touch the wound for any day until it is closed, then you take a tent and apply an ointment with rosewater, and powder with vitriol paste; if you see discharge from the ear, replace the tent and move another greased tent made of rosemary oil and wax until inflammation subsides; then cure it until it is healthy.
And if there is bleeding, soak a sponge and wrap in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that remove blood discharge such as distillation therapy.
From the collection of papers
This paper when it comes from the rolls as they are wet and dry, one must stretch them with tongs and clips, then cover it with a paste made from its roots; afterwards place it in lime water solution.
And if it cannot be stripped away, then with the delicate cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is made, often many times they do not remain on their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burnt and will not return.
les que he as a l'ard; that t s;t; puis quivide le ; theta; J.
Many times there come to the eyes something that appears like frost in its form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine" [hail], and it is a large amount of moisture both above and below the paper; the treatments are as follows: carefully observe if the hail moves from one side to another, which is an easy thing to know. So make them wide open, then lightly scrape each part, then hold with pincers, and bandage. If you cannot cover it without piercing a bit of paper, nothing harms the patient; and if the fissure is large, gather together in one stitch, and heal until it is healthy again; but if it is small, do not exert force as the ointments will soon restore it and prevent scarring.
And if the hail is descending into the inner ear and towards the upper part, reverse the paper, extend the hail with pincangs, bandage and press from both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, nothing harms it; and when the hail is healed, wash the area well to prevent scarring until the patient is healthy.
And wash the wound thoroughly with water and soap to prevent infection.
It is formed from grease found on cloths and papers above, it happens more in children than adults, greatly affecting their eyes, causing them to come upon the cataracts by morning, unable to look at sunlight because tears hasten to their eyes; therefore they lie down on their faces until dawn, sleep with soaked eyelids which are concealed by the grease that appears in the oil. And when you press it therewith your thumb and feel the exinach between them.
The manner of the treatment is that the patient places his head on your hand; then take a linen cloth and make a tent shape in a circle according to the amount it contains from each exinach part, then place it over him; press with both thumbs on either side so that the exinach are gathered within the circle; then create a slit in the moisture at the sharpest point of the blade, and it should not be wider than the wound made to the veins. Cut through the skin until you reach the exinancium; and in various positions comes exinaccium from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Remove with your thumb and turn the cloth to either side until it is spread out; keep your hand turning left and right until you do not get stuck in the incision, don't let any of the blade up to the oil, so that he doesn't cut too much.
And if the nail does not pierce at the beginning of the cut, gently widen the incision until it appears; then extract as we have said, moisten with linen and water, and place on the wound, and bandage tightly.
And if there are such individuals who crush seeds and place them to spoil the moisture that remains. Then heal it until it is healthy again. And if an abscess occurs at the site, treat with plasters soothing until it becomes healthy again.
of hair from paper strips
When hairs sprout on paper in ways other than their nature and age, they harm the eyes, leading to familiar diseases such as tearing, weakening of the papers, and scurf until it causes destruction of the eyelashes; the treatment follows four methods: by cauterization with fire alone, or by ague medicine according to its specific chapter on cautery, and can be done either by incision and suturing or by pledgets, as I will describe.
You must place the chief of the eye in your right hand and then turn the paper with oil towards your left; if it turns well, that's good; if not, insert a needle through every thread on top; and do so near the margin of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and pull one thread across the entire paper, turning it to its edge; then make incisions into the area below the paper, below the displaced hairs, all over the spatulated coatings from the great corner to the small one; then extract a thread, and place a small tent of cotton and linen fabric underneath the paper, then suture it with an incision pattern like that of a marten's fur, making sure the stitching is in accordance with the amount you see elevating the displaced tissue.
Then take .iiij. çe chierres dores les gué qui seur son ce pliors a toutes les tissans conesme, puis teacqui le oise ligns. Seu li orles. S’est ceste ceux quis, puis dui, et esne la vont .iiij est chier de li peigne eun cheurse s jusla dulie chou ans que tu meuee par les pais; mais nec ansesme lays heu constrasse.
When it is in another way: and you must shape the paper to resemble the quill of myrtle as we have described, three times removed according to the form shown here:
Then cover what supports the small forces evenly according to the shape shown here:
And if you cannot hold the pincers, and things are not equal, then take an awl or needle with one thread, and bind it in the middle of the figure; and another thread near the large edge, and the second thread near the small, and join between your two threads evenly; then lift your hand even
At no time does the hair of the parchment change color: if it is necessary to use what we have said about making an incision, but the suture on either side is more artificial.
The treatment of fistulae is thus: and you convert the parchment and make them dense according to what I have said, then make two incisions with a sharp instrument as long and wide as the parchnament and the width of the gutter; and tie off both ends or where you hold the threads; then carefully join each part together beneath the parchment on top of oil, and suture the two cuts from each side properly; and leave it so for several days, and the skin that was sutured will die, shrink, and heal, until it fully closes.
If it is delayed, and the ties are too tight, then treat until it becomes healthy again; and if the wound has healed, and the parchment lifts up and cannot grow hair anymore, then you will make the two incisions according to this figure and with this length and width:
Take the operations such that you choose a fine needle, and insert it with a thin silk thread; then align the heads and carefully adjust both subtly so their lengths are equal to one palm in length; then arrange in the case another short, fine silk thread, and pass the needle through the first thread; then place the patient's head on your bench; and position it close to the sunlight so that the operations can be seen clearly, for they are subtle and small ones; then insert the needle completely into the root of the hair near the skin, and pierce the paper hastily as you draw along the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the case, and place in it the same hair if there is one or two or three or more; then remove your hand until all the hairs run through the paper with the natural hair.
And if the case has been treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will draw the case back from all the thread that you have arranged until the opening is exposed; then you will draw both the case and the thread, and leave open two or three days or more, so that the hair grows in its place and a scar forms; and if the hairs are short, accompany one long natural hair with it, raising it together until they are sufficiently separated, and then remove it.
And when you can be thread after them that case, and soil not too much oureatement the place until sile tooth a tides of time or long; et leli the filz, as the dents hairs the luex. 5 days.
When this disease known as "aleacrati" or the swelling comes to the eye, it occurs in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens through a sudden wound, from cutting, or with cautery, among similar things.
And the method of treatment for this is to split the scar, and separate the lips of it, and put linen bandages inside, and leave them until they are clean; it is not advised to use in its treatment anything that dries and constricts. Because if you do so, the disease returns worse than before; but work with things softening, like fenugreek; and rose water or distilled water, and linseed seed boiled, and ointments of melted oil from any of the oils, and they envelop a bandage, and this treatment.
And the essence of this treatment is that you must ensure it does not heal in its original form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely for addressing this disease so it does not return to its former form.
From the chariot entering the eye
This disease known as "axacrati," is both natural and accidental. The accident arises from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar causes; the method of treatment involves using a needle with double thread, inserting it into the eyelet so that the threads reach to both corners, then stretching the eyepiece upwards until fully tensioned, with a cap at its end.
And if the shape of the paper returns to what it should be, that is good; if not, take a scrap and place it in the tear, then turn the paper over and make two cuts within the torn area; let the eyelets from these two cuts match the angles at which you made your incision, so that when assembled they resemble the shape of a letter with no "j" inside; then remove that scrap, according to the amount needed to support the paper where it is weak, and join the separated parts together using a linen thread; then cure as we have said before with mollifying medicines and bandages until healed.
If the illness comes from a fracture or suture or cauterization, it is proper to make an incision cleanly over the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said above; then between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise means in all they can do to return the figure to its natural shape; and patients likewise, according to what must be done with work and treatments in various dispositions.
In adherence to the paper's method
When this stitching occurs on the paper in such a way that it is sealed with the egg whites of an oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then one must place the tip of a razor underneangs the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it out, as much as you scrape off what has been sown into the delicate spot beneath, which should not be too rough nor too sharp so that the patient cannot endure if the suturing is too aggressive or too blunt, then make your incision shall cut through this gathered area slightly; and it should be removed in its natural form; and all that healed, no times with dirty water, but use clean water, and soften, and collagen; then place a tent of flax linen, and put on the oil, and moistened by using water.
Of the nail of the eye
It is said that the nail has two manners: one nervous and similar to a hard sore, and another which is not nervous but appears like frozen moist blisters; when touched with iron and cooked in pincers, it cannot move. Both resemblements begin near the eyebrow and grow gradually until they cover the entire vision and all light and movement of the eye.
The manner of the incision is such that the patient places their head in pain relief position, then you work on the nails. Take paper to your hand, and cook the nail with pincers; gently warm it. Then take a needle, thread a hair from a horse, goat, or cow through the tip of the neede
And ensure that the spatula does not touch and break the flesh layer, and that the pliers are not pierced; after making an incision, pour some egg into it with a cloth soaked in litharge, and leave until the next day; then treat as necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle, and the hooks do not fit in, many times this resembling of a nail has been treated with medicines; they appear as described in the division, and if you see them covered, work on the patient's pain, and take a light spatula slightly according to this method:
Gently lift the nail above and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason is pressing on, distill from your mouth into the oil syringe made of litharge, and with a red straw and cloth wick, continue to treat until the next day; then resume another treatment according to this same method, until it is completely gone.
If no other matter opposes you in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then first treat the abscess until it is healed, and resume the work as before, until it is healthy again.
And if the appearance of flesh near the elbow troubles you greatly in your work, suspend it on a hook and cut part but not all, so tears do not reach there; then let red-colored oil distilled with lead leak into the area.
from the hair that grows over the eyeball
It is seen in certain men at times red swelling, covering the prunelle and restrained under paper and turned towards the head, appearing like a balustrate rose; the procedures involve that the patient places his head on a towel, then work upon the eyes, wrapping them completely as if bandaging an injured limb, supporting it with strength; afterward remove the first one, shave entirely up to the end, and ensure no oil remains at the work area; incise the spatulum similarly to how we described in nail incisions and minor forces for removing eyelashes, as demonstrated by the shape following this treatise.
Once the incision is complete and all hairs are removed, apply oil with a clean brush or distill red wax and similar corrosive medicines onto the head, ensuring no abscesses remain; if nothing remains, cover with cotton dipped in egg yolk, making sure it is securely adhered to warm sores; if any doubt arises about hot ulcers, leave oil and treat the abscess with soothing agents for such ulcers; then return to your work until healed by this method.
However, it is necessary that you apply the natural remedy for each type of wound; and do not occur in such injuries to them. And then as long until healed this kind.
From veins of the eyes
These are red veins that cover the eye and affect its shape and weaken it daily. Therefore, when you look into them for the first time, note where they lie, which is a sign, and there is no other disease besides this; then examine it in the following way: instruct the patient to put his head on your palm, then gently compress those veins along their entire length according to your wisdom, and let the veins be doubled subtly as follows:
And there shall be two veins by degrees in one course as follows:
Then blow the vessels gently, and draw out the blood hour by hour until you see them removed from the oil; and ensure that you do not bleed the oil at the tips of the spatulas, and perform this operation in the middle of the day before the sun, being very diligent in your work so that only those vessels are bled; and when you have done this, distill red and green dye into the oil collar to corrode what remains in the spleen.
And if you are unable to remove it all in that hour, apply a poultice on the oil of soothing substances for the pain in the eyes, and leave it untouched until the pain is eased and you are sure there is no inflammamation heat; then resume according to this method as long as they are healthy:
For the oil abscess.
When the vein is called "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and by using hot medicinal ague as previously mentioned, if it is not healed, then in it there is a trick where you cut above the abscess, at the spot where it must die off, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, return with all the instrument as described; it is called "aspre chief," made of iron from a piece of metal shaped like this pointed tool.
And place it on the exposed bone area, then turn between your two fingers and press with your hand slightly until you know that corruption is removed; do this again if necessary, then replenish the area with drying remedies.
If the leg is swollen and hardened, and the body of the bow remains so for 40 days without healing or forming an abscess, and no other event occurs unless it becomes sane; if not, there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula near the nostrils according to this method: and ensure that you open the bone a second time with iron, and with medicinal acids, and when it has been opened take a drill in accordance with this form, so that the head of the iron is at three angles, and let the shaft be tapered up to the top as you see here.
Then place it on the bone near the temple and move your hand away by one pace, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bwart and the patient feels pain if they hold their hand close to their nostril; and then restore the old medicines dry as I have instructed you, and when the swelling subsides and the leg hardens, let the matter go to the nostril; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
From the exit of the nostril
When all the limbs are opened entirely, and there is no sign of disturbance in the nerve or thinning, then you must bind the patient; then wash it, then apply compresses that do not burn to draw out blood, then place a dressing made of acacia resin, aloe, incense, and sarcocolous. Afterward, strain the dressing, and lay a plaster on bandages and linen; ensure the bandages are sufficiently soft, doubling each one fourfold, and then layer them according to how much the limb requires. Then stretch it by placing a hard board beneath, and resume bleeding without burning compresses; remove the compresses and leave the strained dressing for day and night, and if the binding becomes too loose, you must release it completely. After a day and night, remove the binding, and if you see the wound closing up, that's good; if not, resume using plasters, linen, bandaging materials, and compresses until healed.
The fall of a sheet or cloth used (in context likely referring to surgical dressing)
When disruptions come to the vein opened and visible, as a grain of resin, and it is hopeful to see; then you examine its workings, inserting a needle at the root of the part below up to that above, then insert another needle or use doubled thread from that part by the ear; pierce it, leave the first needle according to its placement; then cover the place with the double thread and tie a portion of the vein around it, straining it well, then extract the needle and put on the bandage moistened in abundance; leaving until the threads fall out with the vein, then tend the wound with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never restrain the wound by any part of a circle of cloth, until it has been healed.
And if the eyes give a great appearance, pierce it at the subtle edge that emerges from the eye, and pass a white film moisture and lower the edges, and enter quickly; then extract until it is healed.
Regarding the bowels of the wound
This illness called "alcunnati" is not just water collected in the eye, appearing like clear draining but isn't; its treatment method and appearance are such that you make the patient sit on a properly prepared and straight chair, then take their head between your hands with two parts, and move it until you see the water coming towards your eyes. Then fixate it so it doesn't drain further and is disassembled, observe if things go as usual; and if they don't come out from below, understand that it is indeed water, and if the bowstring of the bow isn't prepared as we have said, do so by sitting the patient between your hands again, then take a subtle spatula and gently press on the horny membrane slightly at its continuation with the horny shell and crown until the bow is tense; when it has been released, let drain into warm honeyed water hot or boiled fenugreek and honey, then treat again as another remedy until healed.
from eye waters
and soignet: qui les ansii ;andres que la t ret de le corps ne estreit;
After resting for a while and the heat rises up its second path, place the bone with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, gently rotate your hand slightly; then extract the splinter lightly by turning. Then give a little more of healing saffron juice, and pour some oil into it deeply inside. Then put plenty of ointment or soft linen cloth soaked in rose oil and abundant honey, and mix with the medicinal oil. We, as well as those who are from our time, place camphor plasters generously.
And if the splinter cannot enter through the bone due to its hardness, as some people have overly hard nails, it is necessary that you use an instrument called 'alberit', of which this shape exists:
And dole lou desirre les pointee coustidemunde: ousque le tendre de nus, et puis en la ou sime uoigne luysse dure; si covient l’orein parfonde li hue monte au malle dude uis vende ce qui aigle almagda lourve. Et que tu desmondermandee leu cove, et li de tendre estreme.
If an abscess comes to pass, on the seventh day you must drain it and apply the remedy for soothing the abscess; once it is pacified, cover the wound with a bandage each day, keeping it in darkness. Then gradually leave the house, little by little, and transform into your former self again; know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one day among us from the Yrach came and told us that in those days people were suffering from an almagda perciet, which caused watering of the eyes, but I have never seen any in our land nor heard of it in books by ancient scholars; and perhaps this is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them seem to see: and they are truly like this.
The head of those from this same subtlety lies flat on three corners sharp.
And the chariot is placed upon the nose.
At no time do various chariots emerge or are they placed close together so that some appear like scorpions with many legs; and if there is one such where the chariot has been stained in a wild color, and it also appears bony colored. In those cases of these chariots that are bony-colored and not stained, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; work on its nostrils, pour molten lead into them, and follow up with threading a needle through the wheels; then cover whatever you can support to the delicate tender point of one side until you know that the chariot is entirely bone.
on t carne; but 1ire by Chs des t
If the operation is not successful, and moisture reaches the palate, observe whether it is sane; if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, suspect there may be pus in the bone above, which prevents tissue from being cut. Then you must use a linen thread slightly thickened, soaked by hands and spaced apart by an interval of one or two fingers; place the patient's ear on the tip of the thread as much as possible, pull gently until it emerges through the mouth; this method is often used for children in schools, and is quite easy to perform. Hold the head coming out through the nostril with one hand, hold the other head coming out from the mouth with the other hand, and determine the distance between us who are holding the filaments. Perform this until you know that we have removed all pus; then remove the thread, draw blood if necessary, moisten the thread with an Egyptian ointpitain, and reinsert it into the nostril as before; perform this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves everything left from the pus. Afterward, place a bandage on the nose for several nights until sane, and if medicinal powders are needed, use them; this is the method to purge the head where oil and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
It should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, as if it were a vessel; and lead the same way. If you see anything, make a closed vessel for purifying the head; and have one hand to hold the head while heating oil or any liquid.
they p s, et w with l’s ount cite of arment:
Many times a disease arises at the head of the neck known as "telul," which grows and becomes large until it is visible to sight; therefore, it must be cut off from the beginning, and the bone fully removed, then placed on fire or with burning medicine; and if not promptly done while it's still small, watch carefully for hardness, strange color, poor sensation: do not treat with iron as it is an incurable abscess, because each time it is cut, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is from a sensitive area, not of strange color, and you see that it can be completely covered, relieve the patient's fear and cut without causing pain, curing dryness and constriction.
When the neck is cut off and removed
When solutions of continuation occur in one of these cartilages arise, it is beneficial, but for some people. Thus, as to do that when occurs as any, see if the wound fresh blood; and then suture both sides seams, so heal until cured; and if the edges are dry both sides, then suturing them off all parts of the hairs cut off, then s sear it dries with dragon's powder a powdered, and powder anointing powders as any, and s another pouder.
The method of suturing is that you assemble the thread: either with needles as we have said in the abdominal wound treatment; or with thread, as I have shown to you.
For abscesses on the lips
For dense abscesses on the lips that appear like grains of peas, both small and large; then you must turn the lips and divide each one, taking them with tweezeboar-shaped instruments for each part; afterwards apply vitrioline vinegar to the incision site until it is healed; and then apply a soothing ointment, treating the dried areas until they are healthy.
From the edge of the gums
Often arises on the gums near an abscess, which the ancients called 'albulus'; it is necessary that you support it with forceps, and cut to its root, allowing blood or pus to flow; then apply vitriol broth or other restraining and drying powders; and if that edge returns after incision, and often occurs, so the abscess is opened a second time, and cauterized: it does not return after causticization; these are methods for closure.
For ulcers
At times they are gathered in the heads of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough patches that are ugly and sharp; and at no time are the teeth black and citrine and wobbly, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell foul; it is necessary for you to make the patient sit with his head in your hands, and its eyes be on your holy symbol, and remove either the teeth or rough patches that appear, until there is nothing left; and thus do this with darkness and greenness, and yellowing and other discolorations, as long as they are healed; and if something is removed that was causing the first reason, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and third, until you have everything removed; know that teeth require various forms of treatments to be cured, according to what the work shows, because those who wrongly extract the teeth have different shapes than those which are extracted between the gums; these shapes and others should be provided with you.
When you treat the teeth and their pain, you must not delay in grinding them as much as possible, because this is a high-quality substance up to the point where there is no excuse for extracting it; therefore, do not hesitate to use force when necessary. : assoir quant elle doit tout a estsont pas; thestent, puis tu noir oe les dent sont le temps de par toutes douce n’a, qui dose and soient, d fois quant li sabe, et maintes l'oncles quels se tui.
After an arrow is straightened and broken, take one of these remedies and apply it inside on either side gently, then move the tooth as you did before. And if the nerve is pierced and mixed in, it must be filled with cloth where the roots are; and if it's carefully held with pliers, do not break during extraction; one must skillfully work around the gums to dislodge the tooth.
And do well to ensure that you don't break it and leave a part, causing the patient greater pain from the root's wickedness. Also beware not to act as ignorant barbers who, due to their haste and boldness, often break the cartilage without inserting anything we have mentioned; instead, they cause great illness for the roots that remain or for the cartilage they break, as we have seen often; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with wine or oil and salt; if bleeding occurs frequently, apply vitriol powder there; and if this doesn't work, cauterize.
The shapes of the remedies that make you move the teeth first have long points and large handles, which do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are their forms:
And they have large limbs that do not bend easily when grasped, and are made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth to hold them securely.
From the roots of the teeth. When the root of a tooth is loose, it should be placed in soft cotton cloth dipped in butter for one or two days until the socket feels smooth. Then insert tapered instruments called "algefries," which make the joint resemble a surgeon's drill; and they are made like files with this shape:
the le Mort; 1.
When it is large and thick so that it does not break easily, and the root jumps out through this opening, this is good; if not, use all methods available for forming them, which then come afterward.
And if you use the instrument that has two prongs, thus is the form as follows:
and other instruments placed in front on the density, and of this instrument which appears like large pincers, thus is the form as follows:
And thus this is the strain that cannot be broken, and know there are many strains of the same kind; and other strains which are not counted among them; and the wise master craftsmen discover by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and illnesses show him, for there are some diseases or the ancients did not teach an instrument due to the variety of parts, so it does not break at all in the cartilage or other bones, but seeks the strains which must be done, as I have told you, and assists with gestures, such is its form: Let them be large and well-fitted to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; then restore it back with appropriate medicines for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, you have all this instrument.
When the teeth appear not according to natural shape, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, you should know whether the root remains after the teeth, and it is not located correctly, and cannot be filed or trimmed; then scrape them. And if there are spurs with the teeth, take this instrument as shown in the image, which is similar to a small beak, and it is made of iron inserted into sugar:
And the wax is taken little by little over many days due to dental hardness, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that one can be filed down, then file in a manner consistent with its shape.
And it is like filing a needle; and file the tooth little by little over many days gently, so that it does not move until it smooths out; then in the end there are no rough edges at all, and if the grinding has been too aggressive and it blunts the tongue, it is necessary to file down the sharpness until it is even, such that it neither blunts the tongue nor corrupts speech.
When a tooth becomes loose.
When the teeth in front are loose due to percussion or falling out and the patient cannot bite down on anything causing saliva without spitting, even after treating with binding medicines which do not work; then they should be bound with a thread of gold for silver threads turn green and rot but gold does not change. The length of the thread should be moderate, according to the space between the teeth; if you see them tilted, take the thread and loop it through both healthy teeth, then place the gums between the teeth until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side, then resume coverage up to where you started, and carefully pull back with your fingers until there is no movement. The bandage should be tied at the root of the loose tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut off the gums from the thread using pliers, rejoin them between the healthaturi?
When a tooth falls out and is repeatedly reinserted into its original position as we have mentioned; only individuals who are skilled and patient should be involved in the process, never attempting to form it with the bone of a stag (i.e., using another material). The tooth is placed back where there was a deficiency, secured as previously described, and remains stable for a long time. This implies that proper dental care techniques are necessary for successful outcomes, and only qualified professionals should attempt such procedures due to their complexity and the need for precision and knowledge of materials suitable for permanent replacement or repair of teeth.
tions. I2 Confit.
On no occasion does this dislocation come from below the tongue or nature, as such; or by accident of a quickly healed wound; and the treatment is such that you work on the mouth with the patient's head in place, and lift the tongue; then sever the nerve connection broadly, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there are hardness or pus, and it is of a quickly healed ward, so remove the sinew and cut the broad bandage; and ensure that the incision is not too deep for the artery below; and when you have done this, elevate the head with rose water and ease, or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue; and apply an ointment to the patient's eyes each night so they cannot close. And if bleeding occurs, place vitriol paste on it; and if blood does not stop, cauterize with a slow-burning caustic which is good for this purpose; then treat with another remedy until healed.
And if you see that it is of color or blackness or hardened, so the patient does not feel it, do not touch it as it is cancer; and if it recedes to a blister, and there is moisture, pour on the cautery, and fumigate with a delicate substance, and remove from both sides; and if your first treatment prevails at the work, then place vitriol paste until healed, then return to the original procedure as you finish all; then elevate the head with ease and calmness, and treat with other remedies until healed.
ix, liant it is sore, et cest la ore if fain the l'ariz ot dite, but themes: and then let a bone le telle ise the te pierre d’avise et sereaux to pain dites du temps. And sores, the ou noir; si est de eis seize the cures, et of liant, soignez it the lits with lontaint: or les pren till them es ail not ome le t’em.
At no time comes into the throat swellings called "godath," and they are properly known as two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healed, be careful: if it is a small abscess with thin color and fatty consistency, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but let them grow until they die off, then you will remove them or they would break on their own; and if they are pale in color with fine roots, prepare the instrument to cover, but first ensure that the abscess rests comfortably and is soothed. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, keep his eyes open, have him work his mouth, and press the tongue between your hands at all parts of the instrument; it should be silver or fine iron as a knife:
You must press the tongue against all parts of this instrument and observe the abscess, then take the needle and insert it into one almond until you can't push any further; then tie up anything from slipping away with it, followed by covering the instrument part where its form appears to be a forceful tool; however, the head is bent, alternating in position, very sharp, and made of either iron or fine bronze:
Here's a la est est instrument, et les maintement, you can be all with it the chauquarge d'oftes. ici est to the pliant, and of, but so that the c the instrument, ou sewit is made ongne, just as coi de l’est, here, in a ce que tu pee, et thet ecointend with lances: for you may be any le pain est c.
And be sharp on one side, and have no name on the other; and when you have cut out one of the almonds, proceed to cut out the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the sickly with hot water, and water and ease, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle them with hot water or pitted pomegranate peels that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, etc., until the wound is closed; then cure it until it is healthy. And no other abscesses than the two almonds appear in the throat, so cut accordingly as the two almondangs grow together.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was deep in her throat, namely one of small size; and it had been nearly completely closed off the entire throat, to the point where she could not breathe through the passage which was blocked, and she couldn't eat or drink, and would have died if she stayed this way for a day or two. The abscesses were so swoln that they had burst open twice from both entrances of the neck. So I immediately began treatment; firstly, I inserted a needle in one, then pushed through the mass, removing a large portion of pus; then I repeated on the other opening, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted a needle into these abscesses, and squeezed out part of it; and thus cleared the passageways of the throat for the woman, who now began to drink water and later wine, and continued treating this abscess over long periods. However, the abscess kept growing back in, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so then I tricked it by cauterizing inside her throat: thus it stopped growing again. So I left those areas and only God knew what happened to them afterwards.
after a part of I the space healed with them as if, but did that is often. Et eyebrtee abscessing large I need to do him or not had it so became c which they should be treated by done and throat it was applied over again it back; s untainted, for them after let them long the pass I put then anoints. They were that with stab worm.
When they reinsert into the eye, and it is removed and elongated, then call it "perpendicular"; and if it is from a large and round swelling, then call it "eye". When it has been treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the wound's sores are healed, and they are subtle, then cut them; and those which are rounded, assembled together and not long, should be incised if they are red or of fat color or black. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have said about its blueness and length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument we previously remembered; then insert the needle into the eye, pull from below, and cut at .i. of the .ij. extremities as I mentioned for the incision of .ij. almonds. And do not cover more than what is beyond natural limits, because if you cover too much, it will injure both speech and swallowing; after the incision use as we have said in the treatment of .ij. almondcups. If the patient fears cauterization, then apply a device for easing their worry during sensory cauterization. The manner of cauterizing is with sharp vinegar water. And it should be that the patient places his head on your thigh, and then presses his tongue against the instrument we have mentioned in the toolbox; confine with acidic fresh blood vessels so they are not too thick or too thin; and apply pressure as shown here:
The patient's head has a hair or gum on the medicine, like the rim of a spoon, and places the instrument over all of the medicine on the eye; then have the patient lie down with their back against your lap, so that saliva and mucus come from his mouth into the medicine without going to the throat and choking. Then hold your hand over all the medicine on the eye, applying a quantity about half an hour'cups', until you see it become clear and the biting sensations of the medicine subside; if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument through the middle, keeping it on the eye until the cotton turns brown; do this often until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and remove after .iiij. jors or .v. If you need to reapply the gum of the medicine, repeat the process, and after cauterizing apply a swab wrapped in butter, cleanse what is around the area with the medicine; rinse with cold water and gargle until healed.
This treatment is more effective by incision than with the caustic; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamint and yellow yarrow and origanum and rue and chamomile and arronge and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in a pot, and place over low heat, and ensure the pot is well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot insert an instrument made as follows: And be it of silver or copper, and let one end be placed in the patient's mouth while the fumes rise into the nostrangs as long as the eyes are inflamed; restart frequently until the eyes dry up, and ensure that you do not begin this at the onset of a hot abscess, for many things may occur; and do not perform it only during the descent of a cooling abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a hose and place inside its head an eggshell, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; because the shell of an egg will not impede the vapor from affecting the mouth, and it is good treatment together with health preservation.
And many times sear the throat or spine of fish bone or anything else; if it is thus that you see what you can do so then press your tongue to all instrument under the sun, and move the thing does not and reinserted in the gorge, do vomit patient ais soie also li tissuant is cooked in stomach; perhaps will pass the thing through the venter out; or malaides swallow with sponge or navel piece of lettuce dried bread and dry bread soak up, and then take .i. And then wound the eschies filtront et iesprenuzier liet ; et esponge inlet l’estement; and it come ou a liaire laissiez let. And ete le chauton les estirent que tu et de m etre auaig, si prends est.
When the swelling is bent backward so it can more easily enter into the throat, raise the head high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that it may not move or push in any bone; adjust so that the patient inserts the instrument, because where it is easier, they will guide it there; whether blowing downward, or guiding it along evenly with all of the instrument until it feels firm.
For dislocation of the throat
There is no medicine for the dislocation of the throat as I have mentioned in the division with the treatment of medicines; and if it does not help at all, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sunlight, and press their tongue against the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the swelling, squeeze it entirely with a small pincers or fine tweezebacks as appropriate; and if this does not work, take a hollowed bone, place it in the throat of the patient, then push hard against the bone with an iron rod repeatedly. And if the patient's swelling is colored with water all day, then fill a glass vessel full with cold water, and wash their mouth, and mix it until they can swallow, and move it often by hand; and as soon as the dislocation feels the water, it will pass.
If it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with aromatic substances using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times because it will find relief eventually. The method of fumigation is such that you take a pot where there are burning charcoals, and cover it with a cloth perforated at its center, and through which the head of the instrument passes; then pour your fumigating substance, and have the patient place their forehead in the mouthpiece, closing the mouth so the smoke does not escape but travels to the brain; thus the sinuses will be relieved now, and if it does not come out, begin the fumigation process again many times. Allow the patient to experience thirst and consume unsavory things both salty and sweet, without drinking water, until they must exit by this method.
The form of the instrument used to treat sinuses is similar to tongs bent for insertion into the throat; and it resembles the beak of a surgeon's tool, with roughness like sandpaper so that whatever is inserted does not slip out. Here is its shape:
The instrument used for treating sinuses; and it looks like has texture similar to surgical procedure as the beak of a surgeon's tool, thus:
There are many types of abscesses, as it comes to memory from this book and others afterward; they vary in perforation and cutting; and there are two ways, one being the same kind but due to moisture, and the other for wounds within the body. For abscesses on the head are different than those at the base, and abcesses in joints are different from those that arise elsewhere, each having their judgment in practice.
If an abscess does not need to be pierced until it is fully matured according to its development; and for such kinds that require being pierced when they are ripe, and do not die following their completion, as in the case of an abscess near joints. For abscesses arising near jointangs, if left untreated for a long time, it may cause corruption of ligaments and nerves at the joint, causing contraction in that limb. Or if an abscess is on the main limb, if you delay the piercing until fully matured, it will harm the main limb; or if near the base, one should pierce as soon as it has ripened; and do not pierce an unripe abscess except for those near the base that have spread throughout and become a fistula; and cannot be cured in a short time.
and it diz semblanz; si la perforation, et se tandans. Et li ait on leis qui est dui cilue sont auent; et demeuns que te mourts as evez quant il en escheutres pierre ou les aposteme ne plues tu lor.
In cases where they swell, treat the affected member accordingly. And when abscesses are in their place filled with pus, leave the perforation open until digestion is completed, as we have said. For if you pierce it too soon, the venom of poison spreads throughout its body and it becomes full of foul matter; and by chance they may become hardened, the lips and deep wounds of which. And with any abscess that expands according to the width of the body, as the member requires. You must treat small abscesse
For those without a head, if superficial abscesses are present like swelling, pierce it easily; and when the abscess is large and has formed a substantial curve, pierce it so that you don't empty all of the pus at once but part of it; then let the abscess bleed until the next day, then do not pierce anything further; repeat this gradually each time more than the last until the entire bend is straightened; especially if the patient is weak in spirit or a woman bearing children, young children, or old decrepit men. For sometimes the arrowheads may pop out with the exit of the pus, which could potentially kill the patient, so be cautious. Therefore, treat this procedure with great caution and once you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound; check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a simple lump, dress it with linen or old cotton cloth; but if there are many holes in large abscesses, ensure that each one has its own dressing so they touch each other; and if you have pierced part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old thread or shredded linen until the third day; then remove it and apply ointment until healed.
man and:
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
Of pus-filled boils
Certain types of small abscesses occur; they are similar to the folds on an animal's skin and there are many varieties. There are some that are fatty with moisture like hair, while others are hard to touch at their base. None of them cause concern when touched by a tool called "entromissor," as one can feel it afterward. This is because if they contain moisture, they secrete from above the long way. And once the moisture has been removed, scrape without leaving any hair that contains that moisture behind; otherwise, it will return when left alone. Then dip a piece of cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; or alternatively in water and oil, and apply to the wound until the next day; then wrap as before with a bandage for one night. And so you do again on the second day, and so forth, continuing until you are sure it does not remain open during the night. Then treat the wound with suitable ointment until healed. If there is fatty matter in the abscess, cleanse according to this procedure: wash thoroughly; drain any pus; scrape off all parts; and apply all your dressing care on the covering where it resides; and if the tool causes trouble, do as I have instructed previously. Similarly treat an abscess that is hard like a lump or cysts as I have said before.
And on the swelling above the abscesses or of pierced wounds and moist, it is more easy, for there is little blood. And if any of these types of abscesses do not have moisture, such as in some cases of old women's abscesses where I found an abscess hard like a stone, rough and bloody, which could not be broken; and if someone had struck it, they would have made a wound as from a stone. For other types of abscesses coming out or above the head in children and at the roots of ears, the opening must always be kept small so that pus can exit; and treat them as required.
Scrofula is an illness caused by tuberculosis bacteria affecting the lymebones or surrounding lymph nodes, often presenting with swelling on the neck's side. It was commonly treated in medieval times using fire cauterization and other herbal remedies to draw out pus and promote healing.
The text appears to be a maladie de the les s'en; si l'est le bon espleier estemps tandit est lou scrofula iexarose se li fistile douche, et est laiset n’le en qui ne est ques eus. Ne tu losse les veoirsie est maladies ne est il est que on de la mains a cest. Sui leu, et esprendiz s’en lou ie chescuns le miex se si keur l’et li est. Est parles mein li scophis eist l'est dandit. 5
And if you open the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, put vitriol paste in the wound, or various powders that stop bleeding, and squeeze the wound; then leave it until the abscess is calmed down and softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood stops flowing, return to your task as long as you complete it; then follow your proper direction if there are no small scrofulous lumps, remove them and cleanse them. And if in the vein root of the scrofula there is great swelling, do not cut out that scrofula at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and let it hang freely without harm; then apply a woolen cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment to the wound.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary to sew together the two edges of the wound and hold them in place so that there is no excess due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary for you to follow our instructions when coping with its root and extracting the fatty tissue; then puncture those scrofulas containing excess as they appear, just like before described; then treat them with ointment and similar substances so that what has been removed from the corruption decomposes. And once the wound is well-cleansed, apply aromatic balm until it is completely healed.
And if you to oil any residue of excessive as weeping; and ointment so what remains like that they remove with.
The ancient ones spoke and wrote of the treatment for a sore throat; however, I have never seen it practiced in our land, and this is according to their writings.
For those who have swelling, it is necessary to clear the flap of the throat called "epiglote"; and nothing can be done about this because all veins and the main organ causing fever are located in individuals with abscesses burning either in the mouth, or the throat, or two almonds. When the illness is in the channel of the organ, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we split it from three or four circles or a small slit across, between two circles or by the quantity of the slit on the side.
And those eyes if they are connected to the section of the epiglottis so there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long from it.
And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to its full length, then split the flesh as far as it reaches the windpipe; and avoid blood vessels, unless you see something, and then cut out the abscess, as we have said.
It is demonstrated by the cutting of the throat muscle which falls apart from where it is torn, and due to the loss of voice.
And leaves an open wound exposed for a time.
And when the time has passed to doubt strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound on its edge, and the entire skin overlies the membrane; then apply medicines that cause heat to grow until it is healed.
by: Then block the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
And so they instruct the patient to leave the wound open until the effects of the illness have passed, which takes about three or four days. Then they command to sew up and cleanse the wound when it is healed;
byt's (or: I saw a maiden took a knife, and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe below the cartilage.
and I hurried to help her, finding her as close to dead.
I discovered the wound, and found blood issuing from it; and I saw that she had not bled from her veins or any other passage except through her throat, and the bleeding was strong from the injury.
by: a the old with ou rered
Et it did not happen to the lady until she was red with voice, and returned afterward to her own condition.
I say that in treating the epiglottis there should be no fear.
of the large throat
withd so they istoi-so and c s. ougter lese in the ouest on theirt.
There are two ways: natural causes, and by accident, where nature has no remedy.
And accidental causes have two ways: one appears similar to us being greedy, and the other way resembles an abscess that arises from our arteries. and it brings fear, and surgery should not be performed without cause in those who are slight, and one must test and search for everything amiss: by far l’s la: c� the 1 fe : And examine everything thoroughly, and treat as it ought to be, until it is perfectly healed.
From us
There are many ways in us, of which I will say all the similarities:
And therefore it is necessary for me to explain the entire difference between them.
I say that an abscess is swelling and fever-inducing until the boiling over is past and it has been completed, then rests both fever and heat.
With ours there is no fever nor heat nor pain, and contains a boil which is its own pouch and follows the color of the body, starting as soft as wax, but becomes hard.
ce te c so; Ouds (doze acessd.
When attending to the patient's wound, first examine and question with all the instrument called "intermitted," according to its form or procedure which is afterwards.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you squeeze or find more moisture where you see it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that the inflammation has reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the "intermitted" instrument, and be careful so it does not hurt him too much.
If moisture runs through the veins, let it have its own color as I have described for other abscesses.
If after the entorse injury no moisture comes forth, it is fat, so treat it as described for other abscesses: drain it with a lancet and lightly scrape from each part, then cover the wound where it lies, ensuring that you dress it healthily.
And if you cannot treat it cleanly, remove by parts so nothing remains.
the text are, so e, also and her acta seme tirxe bonstrait; "et;
If it remains for a while and the wound grieves him, apply some poultices of corrosive acrid powders to the wound, bind the wound, and put soothing substances on the inflamed abscesses, and treat other conditions until he is healthy again;
If the wound is large, cut both sides of the wound's lips, and treat what causes pus;
tol so as ete le quittes a is not l’an vient la mot: 1 les kee de parle d’est of patious ouri, li gist et sont they;
Here are the forms of entwined intestines, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small; and there are three compartments called "albaret," one which is called "breb"; and in three sizes again: large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses of fistulae.
and are like the needles used to pierce sorcery marks, made of citrine or iron or silver, and yellow-tipped ones work best, which are more effective in blackening when circling abscesses of a fistula.
and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the widths of pores.
The shapes of tumors are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and those with two heads in three ways each.
and those with three heads, which are also in three ways each; and tumors with two heads, but only one head each, and these are also in three ways each; all of these must be in their proper place.
The main types of these are cutting, and among those there are some that do not cut at all except from one side, which scrape the skin, so that neither vein nor nerve is severed.
And from these interruptions are hernias restored in bands, so that the patient does not experience pain upon opening abscesses.
And there are three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see;
they de lion iste Ande.
At no time is another small instrument used, resembling the shavings of splints, according to this method, where one attaches blood.
And at no time is one placed in such a way that it touches the veins for copulation, and arteries, and again according to this great method:
the p that it.
And they remain disfigured and swollen; those who wish to treat them must do so according to the form of this line: B.J until G. Then scrape the fatty tissue and dress the wound with medicinal charm-infused ointment, then sew together the three edges of the wound, and continue curing until it is healed.
And the breast falls to one side, and is softened by its size, as with women, so it must be supported underneath, with two rib-like structures above, through similar incisions. Why one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g; Then scrape the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and prepare what we have said about stitching and powders, and all that is necessary for the treatment, until it is sanitary;
And if it is not sanitary, or the incision is not entirely healed because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with fine cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; And let it remain until it devours what remains of it and the fat, then heal it so that it becomes sound again.
Of abscesses on the elbows
And often it is found in places or any swelling of, and are from them that the oment wherein lest.
Those then which contain moisture must be cut according to this shape, from line B down to line G: And when all the bowel that is in an abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles like scrofula, treat it as we have described for the incisions of scrofula, and if the wound fills with bowels, prepare a fire cautery as we have described before.
Of the procedure of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it hardens, many abscesses occur, and likewise there occurs bleeding from an opened vein.
and if one grabs hold of it because of the artery, then the abscesses are large in number; and softe et the li s rout
And it is madness to attempt this with an abscess, especially when it is under the jaw and in the armpits or neck, and there are many other locations where it is large. Therefore, one must avoid the use of iron cures, and those with headaches should also avoid them, and in cases of artery swelling above the long skin.
Therefore, one must avoid the use of iron cures, and those with headaches should also avoid them, and in cases of artery swelling above the long skin. Then work on the tonsils, gently separating the arteries from the sheaths until they are exposed.
Then insert a needle underneath it and pierce until the opposite side is reached, and tie off the vessel with a double thread as I have shown you in extracting the two vessels that are in temples.
Then puncture the joint between the two ligaments using an intrusive instrument until the blood flows out and release the abscess.
Then prepare a poultice as instructed earlier, while the sutures are healing. Then treat with ointment as needed until it is healed.
and if the abscess is by the size of the vein, then you should bind to your hand whatever you can of the abscess on all the skin. Then apply the needle at that location where you hold it in your hand and pierce it, and have . I two strands of this tie on both sides; First bind the abscess as I have told you, where the threads from one of the two heads meet with the two bones.
And if you doubt that the threads are not strong enough, then rebind another needle through all of it in the incision from the first needle, and strain the threads at four lengths apart.
Then cover the abscess until all excess has dried up, then cut away the scab and leave what remains attached.
;t;
Of abscesses of veins
Similarly, abscesses come from the artery and vein; they form in the nerves when struck or due to excessive strain, and similar occurrences.
And this happens more often with shoulders and elbebs, in all places where there are joints; it is a particular kind of abscess, its color resembles that of the body, and causes pain in various ways.
s
Et mettre bien tout autour, et ne bouge ni vers l'avant ni vers l'arrière, ni sur les côtés, et celui dont la tête est disloquée doit être immobilisé sans métal : autrement, il pourrait y avoir une contusion.
And he who is at the crown or forehead makes a wound with a scalpel. If abscesses are small, then cut it out with pliers and cover its root.
If it is large, if the suspend it to the sling and pare, then the bone and sew the wound closed at the stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Heavy hanging mouths It never occurs elsewhere than in the womb and not anywhere else, and it is an illness called 'funge' because of its resemblance to fungus, and has subtle roots, and the stem large; and there are small ones as well as very large.
the t.
I made the cuts and found in one 18 oz. piece, and in the other 5 oz., with the incision so that you look to see if the patient is damp, and the color of the sinew is bluish and moist with a delicate root;
If the cut reaches the sternum, and be present with you the fire cautery. For at the chest comes many times excessive blood loss, and if it does not stop, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and tie the sinew as we have said, and let it be for 2 days;
And then the restraint is applied, and one must continue to strain the thread until it reaches the elbow joint, which causes some effort; and if the roots are thick, be wary of the copper strip for the abdomen, but you must also properly apply copper on the majority.
Then you must cauterize so it does not return; then treat the wound and ensure that the nerve which is of a sickly color, poor sense, and watery appearance is not coppered.
For it is an advanced syphilis, and I will treat the chancroid hereafter.
When the mouth jaw is injured
If the appearance of the jaw comes from a wound or puncture by an abscess, and is located on the belly and in certain veins, as it occurs in other situations, or blood flowing from vessels or arteries according to what is seen beforehand, or swelling.
and if it is by the abscess' rupture and the discharge of pus, then the appearance of the lesion resembles the body's natural color, and is an easy thing with no pain but has various issues. If it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed at its limits, it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance it may be swollen, and greatly enlarges the entrance to the bath and for vigorous work.
If it is due to moisture, it's a light matter, and easily opened when you press with your hand without constraint. And if it's for blood, then the abscess appears large and hard, and protrudes in accordance with its quantity;
And if it's for inflammation, then it is sensitive to touching, and the wound heals as you observe whether its appearance suggests blood from an artery or vein, or inflammation. If it is necessary to let the wound remain open. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is of the intestines or bowels, it is necessary to instruct the patient to dip their armpit in something and extend it straight up, then secure it all around with a bandage. Then command them to lie supine between your hands, Then go around the area you have secured with all the bandages. Next, stretch the small abscess above along the entire large splint.
the they are in the boile by ones: If you find it caught in the ligament, then dislocate it, and place the intestines back into their proper position within the abdomen.
If you find it swollen, take hold of its tail, and cut away any excess.
If the artery behaves contrary or pulsates, and it goes away entirely, then return to your original work and take two needles, and insert two thin threads with them, and place the two needles around where you made a cross that you pierced.
if c; And saym: "L'sue : sighte the; they bone ; When you encounter a wound that is subtle and piercing, then treat it as necessary, and close the abscess as we have said.
When you encounter a wound that is subtle and piercing, then treat it as necessary, and close the abscess as we have said. And extract any blood or pus that you find, then treat the area as needed, and sew it closed.
On the ulceration
We have spoken in the division of similarities to ulcers and how one should work with medicines, and how one should apply a heating cure; and let us speak of ulcers that originate in bones, requiring great caution for treatment, and according to the ancients, when ulcers are present or can be reached as if they were sores under the armpit, groin, buttocks, and must be completely removed at their onset; and when they are large and old, it is not advisam to approach them, for I have never seen one healed; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
And the operations when present and can be removed as we have said are to purge the patient of black bile once; then make them fasting if they show manifest repletion, prepare a clean location for the operation; then apply your ointment or ulcer, and cover all with wax, leaving no part exposed; let blood clot fully, squeeze well at the site in your hand or on any object, and if bleeding occurs opposite to the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the vessel is sealed; then perform another treatment as long as it remains healthy.
And for dropsy, which means edema due to fluid retention in the body, causing swelling: apply a concoction of rosen with roses and ointment and pour on l'estuin, et les eaux; puis giete li detergens le morsel de l'eau-lui. We have discussed in the section the similarities of dropsy, how the assembly of water is formed, signs of each similarity, treatment by medicines and that which is cured by iron; only these two are exclusively separated. One must not touch with iron in either of these two similarities: namely tympanitis and hyposarcoma, for it's a deadly matter; therefore when you treat this dropsy similarity called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not help, consider if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropscu; as usual and in matters of stomach solutions and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there's doubt; and if you see a strong patient solely afflicted by dropsy, neither too young nor old, then treat thus: Lay the patient upright with your hands under his belly and instruct the assistant to press the abdomen gently pushing the water towards the lowest part of the pelvis, then take a spatula made according to this form: And it should be sharp at two ends. However, do not make it so pointed that when inserted it can reach the intestines or cause bleeding;
In the uuele de lis poignie est droit. Si tu les .i doi les deux ceste coustitute la droitièsliens, si soit droites et li dois eest les s’en tost, puis les maladies le croist, se nuisso:
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument and inflate it, then lift your hand to cover all of the swollen area between the skin and fascia just as in scraping by the thickness of a fingernail or slightly more; then pierce the fascia until the swelling reaches its proper place, which is where the water resides, then insert this instrument whose form consists: It is similar to an extremely thin silver chain, made of silk or light linen, and in the part below it has a small hole; when laid on one side there are three holes; two on the other side, and one more; its head is cut as if with a quill pen, which is how scribes fashion their quills.
At the top above is where the vessel lies, so when blood flow reaches the water, release now onto the instrument; then empty either half or a third of it because if you empty more than necessary at that time, there's a chance the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, causing him to sweat heavily or approach death.
then the patient is suffering severely from water, and if you see, so you remove a small quantity. Then do with this instrument another day.
On this day and every other, avoid overexertion until it remains; but give it a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and leave out too much water, cure with burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and sunlight; and color with drinks; and cure with medicines that dry up until they are healthy again, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
From the impotence of the male member There are no children born who do not have a foreskin on the penis, or if the foreskin is small, or it is not in its proper place. If necessary to perform this promptly: then provide him with a very fine thread-like cord and tie his foreskin so, and leave it as such for three days or four; and when he needs to urinate, remove the knot, and let him urinate, and then redo it; but perhaps there is no need, because the urine that comes forth does not close. Those with a hernia whose head is small shall be treated by the method of pressure on the loin, as we have said, it will expand. Those who do not have the hernia in its proper place are fixed, for no one can develop having the hernia at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until their penis is raised; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and it is a serious illness.
The method of operation is that the patient lies with their back upwards, and raises the head of the penis and covers it as if they were holding a pin, so that the hernia may fall inside; and protect against blood loss which often occurs, and if it happens, apply a ligature to stop bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
Of pus from the penis Many times these bubbles come in the vein, and it is an ugly appearance of a wart; and there are both malignant and benign ones; so you must pluck them with a fine needle, and excise and clean thoroughly, then place cotton pads moistened with Egyptian ointment; then treat with refined oil until they heal. And if the bubbles are malignant, of foul color and oozing, then you must treat with fire-cautery. After excision, and if the bubbles are inside both hairs and skin, partially, it is necessary to remove the one inside first; and once healed, care for the outside. For when treating them together, it is not certain that the head of the vein will be unharmed so blackness and decay may occur there as well; therefore, address all that is blackened and corrupted, then apply a poultice made from honey and ground almond shells, then treat with other remedies until healed.
And if there is bleeding, then apply the lunar cauterization in this way: The cauterization helps with two purposes together: for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the vein is retracted and decayed, it must be that you tie or pull out hairs from the genital area, and urinate on the patient during excretions; and when the hairs are long at the top of the genital area which happens in those who have not been circumcised, or if there is a wound or abscess, so it must be that you scrape with an instrument, until the ligatures are untied, and the head of the penis is relieved.
If it is a serious matter to discuss this issue, then you must scrape with a spatula just the tip of the penis and hair; then carefully separate them, and put a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water over it, ensuring it does not dry out completely.
Regarding circumcision
Circumcision is not a discontinuation of wounds like the others; however, when we perform this work by our own will, especially in children, it must be done as well and with the best possible method that is beneficial for their health.
I say that the ancients did not practice childhood circumcision, for it is not done in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
For I have sought the majority of masters and scholars who practiced circumcision within one day, and with force, and all newborns; it was common because there were two stages, sometimes performing one above and leaving the other below.
But it results in doubled pain and the cleaning of the newborn is not assured at all; and often during fingernail care, escapes happen with the knife, which may harm the flesh, and wounds can occur as such that there's no need for further cleansing and I have observed this.
From the immobilization made by force throughout the entire limb, I have found from experimentation that it is beneficial, as the forces cut equally well above and below.
For when you press your hand, cut evenly on the entire sole tense; but ensure that the thread is properly straight around the skin; and make it in such a way as if instructing a child, if they understand, to only tie the thread around the penis for some time, then allow them to move freely in all manners you can. Then make the thread stand straight between your hands, and let it be pulled taut on either side of your fingers so that the child does not see any strands; then press with your hand onto the penis and blow or cure until its head is raised completely; then cleanse thoroughly of all filth accumulated there, then tie the knot of a double thread, then secure from one end to another side by the link. And hold it as if on two pillars at the pouchet (foreskin) and the glans, with the thread between these links; lift gently but firmly and pull up the head of the penis.
Then make the thread stand straight between your hands, and let it be pulled taut on either side of your fingers so that the child does not see any strands; then press with your hand onto the penis and blow or cure until its head is raised completely; then cleanse thoroughly of all filth accumulated there, then tie the knot of a double thread, then secure from one end to another side by the link. And hold it as if on two pillars at the pouchet (foreskin) and the glans, with the thread between these links; lift gently but firmly and pull up the head of the penis. Then allow the blood to flow little by little, for it is a sign of healing; and apply powder on and over it, a dressing bound with a cloth from one-half of an egg boiled with rose water diluted in warm water, beaten with good quality fresh oil, and leave it until the next day, treating as necessary until healthy.
If the force of healing is this: both sides of the chin are held and sharp, and the chin is as large as a fingernail equally on all sides.
If the error of healing is when the kernel escapes through the incision; therefore it must be extended to your fingernail, so that the left causes an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold with your fingernail, then use tweezeburners, and then cut.
If they persist for three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, let it be left until the inflammation has subsided somewhat, and lightly scrape it; then move as you wish, but protect the area of the rod, as it will neither harm nor benefit.
Thus treat the sudden wounds with powder that we have previously discussed regarding powders, and if it covers too much skin and spreads upward, do not harm it; treat as we have said until it is healed.
Regarding urine retention
Retention of urine is due to inflammation of the kidneys, or frozen blood, or bowel, or swelling caused by similar things that we have discussed in the section.
And if the urine is not flowing, and you see retention due to kidney enlargement or urethral obstruction at the bladwart's neck, it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; place their feet on the backrest, extend their abdomen upward from below the back, and restrain the patient as much as possible. Then the bladder ducts are forced to express urine above by doing so, which allows the urine flow again.
And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with an instrument called a "syringe", which is this shape: made of fine silver wire, like bird feathers; and its tube should be one palm's length and half again, and finely at the top.
The manner of urine flow release is as follows: take a double thread and tie it to the tip of some wool or cotton, then insert the head into the syringe through the thread; trim off excess wool and fit it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and almond oil, and have the patient sit on a stool, then apply urine oil, olive oil, and water tears to the bladder and penis.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis up to the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the scrotum; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladaderivate until it is empty, and this is not done in accordance with this order unless for the reason that the conduit twists as it goes; then extend the thread to remove all wool little by little, and urine follows along the thread, then extract it, and collect the urine.
And continue inserting the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and make the patient relaxed.
diseases of the bladder
When scrapes or blood enters the bladder, or putrefaction is present therein, and you see to distill waters and medicines, make use of the entire instrument called "clyster," which is thus formed:
It is closed and has .iii. valves: two on one side, and one on the other as you see fit; and the outlet hole where the medicinal substance comes out well enough to allow for evacuation of humors, and expelling when necessary.
s.
And this is the form of subtle suppositories, which are used to treat the bladder: so it is here.
And it is made of silver or lead, and the head is higher up; and from one side or the other breast the ligaments tear. Then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture intended for suppositories to treat the bladaderenewel the two breasts with a good double thread of silk, then warm the paste on fire; then insert the head of the suppository into the rod, then squeeze your hand over the bladder until all the moisture reaches it when the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle in it, pierce roundly through; then insert a strong thread into these holes, assemble the circle as one would with a saddle, and put inside what oil, moisture, and water you wish to use, and tie it up with an instrument; do so as if you had made it from the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the vessel.
Of the stone
We have discussed in the division the methods of stone removal and extraction with medicines; and we have mentioned the difference between a stone formed by grains, and all the signs, and where one must work on a stone's size reduction; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will now tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stones formed in the bladebe occur more often in children, and it is a sign that the water of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety; and they are sandy, and gritty, causing discomfort to their penises, and making them urinate many times, then retracting; and with much frequency there are such movements; and it is easy for children until they reach four years old, but it is very severe in the elderly, and moderate for those who are between youth and age; and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
When we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema in order to clear all waste from the intestines, for at times there may be obstruction requiring the stone to pass.
Then take the patient by hand, stand them up and move from side to side, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladard, and it never comes back up high. Next, make him sit between your hands properly arranged, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is fully inclined downward; then grasp and touch its ends.
If you feel the stone in its place, hurry to remove it immediately from there. And if it does not pass easily with all your efforts, grease your left index finger with oil, whether the patient is a child or youthful, depending on their age; and push into its base, grasp the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, insert it towards the neck of the bladder; then press upward from your finger, and expel it where you see fit.
And command the minister to press the bladder into his hand, and he commands that with his right hand he extends the joints upwards, and with his left hand he removes the skin below the joint in the area where they make an incision; then he inserts a filling spatula, which gives it its shape.
And they create a space between the joints and the foundation, not inside but along the left edge of the nail; and it is right under the stone, with your fingers close to or on top of the foundation, shaping the incision so that it is wide at the bottom and narrow within, depending on the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Occasionally press the joints that are near or atop the foundation until they protrude without effort; and know that there is sometimes a stone with corners or edges: if it is easy to remove; and if there is one like glue, smooth and round, where the evacuation is light.
In the cavity where there are angles and edges, make the opening larger; and if it does not widen, you must use a tool like a file at the head, to stretch out the piercing so that it cannot slip out; or strike underneath with a subtle instrument bent over; and if you cannot manage this way, broaden a small hole somewhat, and if there is no skin covering, strain it using vitriol.
And if there are more than one piercing, first remove the largest at the bladder neck, then cope (cut) beneath, then the trite (small bones), and any others after that. If they are very large, it is better to make a larger wound, because two things can happen to the patient: he may die or urine will come through where the wound cannot be sutured; however, do your best with milking or using pliers on the tenailles (small hooks), until you extract them piece by piece.
And once you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon'amoil (dragon's blood), and bind it tightly, and place a moilliet (bandage) soaked in oil and wine or oil and rosewater and cold water to cool down the abscess; then reassure the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
When you reset it, raise the area well with oil and water, then treat with the ointment diafiniticum and basilicon until healed.
And if an abscess comes in the wound and pus buildup, and blood congeals in the bladder causing urine retention (known as a certain manner where it cannot pass with the urine): therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if any remains, it will corrupt the bladaderen and cause inflammation.
Then cleanse the wound with water and alcohol and vinegar, treating it in every way you can until healed; and ensure all bandages used to treat him are tied around both thighs and that remedies be applied at the site of injury.
If the stone is small and located in the urethra and inserted deep within, and urine cannot pass; treat as I have described previously, by dilating multiple times with this procedure. I have experienced it thusly.
Take an iron bar in the following shape and make it at three sharp points like stakes:
Then take a thread and wrap it around the urethra below the stone: if it cannot come back into the bladero, gently insert the iron rod into the urethra until it reaches the stone; then turn the rod slowly with your hand on the part that remains in the urethra inside the stone. The urine will flow shortly afterward; press down where the remnants of the stone are still lodged within the urethra. It will be broken apart swiftly, and it will shoot out along with the urine, and is healed for the afflicted.
And if you cannot do so due to any obstacle, then take a thread behind the stone and another on top, then bend the rod at the spot between the two threads, then pull out the stone forcefully, release the ligament, cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
From the stones of women (referring to uterine stones or fibroids)
There are times when stones occur in women (referring to uterine stones or fibroidangs), and if it happens once, the treatment is difficult, and there are three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and another reason is that they cannot find a woman who knows well how to undress before the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that sometimes one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman's womb is more embedded than the man's, so it requires deeper cutting, causing great fear.
And if it is necessary to do so, one should find a skilled midwife and pay her well for the work, and if you cannot find one, then seek an exceptionally skilled expert in women's health or a woman who knows part of the art, and command that she perform what you instruct regarding the stone removal.
and examine carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must put her hand or foot on the ground to search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it down from its position, and command that she puts her hand or touches the patient with her left hand firmly over the bladder.
If it is twisted, one must gradually move it from the entrance of the bladder to above, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then place a support under the stone at the hip joint opposite the side where it has moved irregularly, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move its knee over or below the stone, and stabilize with your hand on the first small movement.
Then pour on the stake in the thigh, if you feel the stone and can expose the wound so that the stone may come out forcefully; be aware there are many types of stones: they can be small or large, sharp or smooth, long or round, with groovebut know their similarities for understanding their exit.
And if the stone does not move, put powdered vitriol on it and let it sit for an hour until it loosens; then return to your task, until the stone is loose, and have compresses that I have instructed in the extraction of stones at home to assist you with your work.
If the blood does not stop, and it is from an artery that has been severed, then apply powder at the site and compress with tapes and bandages, without restarting bleeding, and do not pull on any wound fragments unless necessary as the patient may die; then treat the wound.
And when the fever of blood is calmed and the limb restored, return to your work until the bone is strong.
Regarding inguinal hernias.
Gathering moisture is nothing but an assembly of dampness or pus, which emerges from under the skin near the joints and contains fat; it is called "pus," and never properly in the tissue of the fat, for if one thinks it's a different fluid, that isn't the case; and this is the leather of the fat around the bones we have mentioned; and such occurrences are not rare.
And the formation of this pus is due to weakness in the joints, and it spreads that material.
And it never comes from hitting the joints, and this dampness has many colors: sometimes it turns yellowish, or is without red color, or black, or white like water, and such cases are more.
These are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is white and foul as we have said, then the boils are many, that is, long like an egg's shape, and do not break the veins, for they are entirely dampened.
If it has moisture in the proper cloth, then there are many boils with part of an egg, and so one thinks they are another egg.
If the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the foul white, if it smells well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, you should examine all thoroughly, as to why its form was like this beforehand. According to what follows after the intermission, judge according to what is within.
According to what follows after the intermission, judge according to what is within. And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy as much as possible and have fullness of body; then place them on their back on something slightly raised, and cover generously with linens.
Then lean to their left side, and command the assistant that they sit on their right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs at the front edge of the loins;
by the s.
Then pierce the thigh completely with water through one large hole, and drain all the water, then put in the onions, and stretch the skin upward; but do not touch the core of the bones, only the flesh. Skin it either whole or in pieces carefully as well as possible, if you do not cut neatly, the water will return.
And if the joint pops back during your work, when you have completed on the thigh, then join the two halves of the bone core with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until they are healed.
And if you find the joint affected by another disease, it is necessary to bind the veins that are hanging, suspecting the discharge of blood; then cut the bone at all the suspenders, and extract the joint, and treat it as we have said.
And if the bone is joined in two parts together, know that these are two branches; bind the other part as you did the first equally, then drain the blood, and apply a linen bandage soaked in rose oil to the wound.
and apply another linen bandage soaked in wine and oil, and place on the two joints, and cover with doubled cloths, securing them together according to this method.
Then take two cloths and fill them with shredded linen as per this pattern, sew them together at the groin of the trousers, and one head goes to the foundation up to the back, and the other to the part near the wrist. The second set covers both elbows, all assembled, then tied in a loop with a belt.
Et at no time is this branch of fire cautery in place without a knife made of iron, and you must take a fine needle-like caustic, and cover the leather thongs, and it should be soaked as we have said, that the white sack containing water is revealed;
If you take the caustic according to this method and pierce that white sac at its veins, and rub it with this hot fine caustic.
And cover in all ways that you can, until you have rubbed it thoroughly; and keep the flame from touching the skin; and know that this work is more healing; and with careful regard to bleeding, and avoiding complications of cutting.
And if any other thing occurs such as an abscess or bleeding or something else, treat the matter that causes contradiction according to what has been previously said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this treatment because of its severity, then perform a perforation as I have instructed you; and it should be that when you are well certain by the meanings we have stated, you reset.
if you make the patient lie down on their back with elevated legs; then incise the abscess below all tissue wide, and place the perforation deep into the body; and let the edges be large so that water flows freely.
Then place cotton at the site, bind it, and leave for proper drainage of any remaining water, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the bandage does not allow water to drain out of the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a pen or instrument used for draining pus in hydropathic cases as described above; and open a small portion of the wound so that the fluid returns, reassembling after 3 months or sooner, and once assembled again as before, this will pass.
For abscesses in glans penis
In this part of the branch on fearful conditions, I believe it is best to let them heal.
And I shall tell you about the work and similarities of an abscess.
Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the thighs; and this is very common.
said of lesse c's l’le tile ben craabitat ce le sfe la Mits the vjn; that way they dont. If you.
The color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess.
And sometimes it may be a frightening and painful abscess, with a fiery color, and never comes from our arteries or vein swelling.
When it is from us, [the physician], the abscess can be known by its hot disposition when pressed with one's thumb. as est par:t s n:
He who is afflicted with vein swelling is known by his tendency to react at the touch of fingers.
and can well make an incision in this manner, as well as on other parts; and you may cut out the core of the kidneys, then extract the fat to the top, and the fibrous tissue as white; remove the sutures from all parts of the organ.
by, if he:n f with n, and sofa. EST m, that is to ce t, or theyt the glose la combs suscept (or lel : s, but weitherle; you maye onze are all s. I, for a it’s d, just as an untttest the same line:
If it is near the liver or within what is inside the vessels, you must thoroughly empty it and roundly wrap the corpse.
And if the birth of a stone is there, you must completely cover it and extract the calculus as we have said.
And when your works are finished, dress the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other salves until it is well again.
s; If you give me. Est acpleez:Cole tad that la crot et les ben :l's (prie 1.
This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling that of a joint, with the softening of ligaments and it moves quickly causing pain to the patient when touched.
and its treatment is just as fraugturous as this one before it.
the w ougue s dissections of a;
It is necessary to make the patient sit on a raised seat, then tie the sling with cords around your shoulders. For all the vessel which is near to the thigh, and ties the master's bandage, and extends it properly.
Then cut with a sharp scalpel wide across where the vessels are, until they are exposed.
by n's
Then insert a needle where it is, with a double thread, and attach it at the initial location where the vein appeared, and securely fasten to the other end. Then apply bandages straight along the length of the body, according to its size, and treat corrupted moisture spots;
Then heal the wound as you would with others or an arrow wound, ensuring that no bandage slips off and loosens one of the joints.
s; If the ear loses its hearing due to the incision of vessels, and drying up and cannot be aided.
Of the treatment for scrofula The remedies for this shrub are by the cutting that comes or scrofula, or the extension on the stomach in the groin area, so that the intestines descend from that inflammation to one of the legs;
the ph.
And when it is of extension due to a boil, so it happens little by little over long periods, and does not come suddenly. And it is equal swelling towards the beginning due to the intestines being hurried by the boil.
And the signs are when it is of division due to a boil, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse appearances appear from near the skin and it's for the exit of the intestines and the body affected by the boil.
At no time do they tie the intestines with cords, and are kept thus; it causes great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these treatments of iron that cause fear, one must take care to remove them.
And the manner of this surgery is that you command the patient to manually remove the intestines into the wound if possible. by and de m 90 (e present the gardder Mar:
Then extend the head above it, and cover all the skin over the joints with long cloth. Then insert into the waist hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the bones can be pierced.
Then scrape off the fascia which is below the skin of the joints, as long as the white flesh layer is entirely revealed.
le c; and it la. The ous they should not so far the patiente; the r them; this line: Do you to g s that he:t is the bo :P. Jichossi said ou refl� J.-d, but none in the old.
And the one who is behind the head enters the second sac; and push with your right hand into the crown of the joints, and extend the white sac to above your left hand, and lift the head completely through all the sac toward the waist. And instruct the minister to extend the head upwards, and remove that which is behind the joint.
And approach your feet if there's intestine wrapped or hardened white sac found, and if you find anything, push it towards the belly.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of nine strands, and insert it into the rear part near the sacking, which is after the leather of the coat-tails; then cut the threads that appear from the strands, as long as there are four strands. Then join them one on top of the other in a cross pattern and tie the sacking, which we have said is below the leather of the coat-tails, with two strong knots. Then wrap the strands around the hairs and tie them with two knots so that no insect can enter in to feed on it, lest an abscess forms. And immediately apply the ligature according to the first bone length, and after these two bones, leave out the sack which is below the corner of the collarbone as large as a thumb.
And then the rest according to the curvature that the upper arm bears; next cut in the part which is below the edge of the collarbone, as straight as possible and the bow, as we have said before.
Then prepare a soft poultice with oil, and apply it to the wounds, and adjust the ligature as we have mentioned. And at no time is the facial swelling cauterized as we have mentioned, after incision, due to concern for blood flow disruption.
For this often happens and leaves the wound open until it heals by itself; and if it takes too long to do so, use warm water as we have said, until it heals.
then treat the wound with other care, until it is perfectly healed.
Of a groin hernia
In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
: curie l'oeil li lec. Li the n’esprentiel. So may beque it s uistressé la est quarte les arestreliez et maintissans, oriz qui tu estu, ou rance de lie.
Then dress the wound and treat the abscess from which it works, until the hairs fall out; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Never does there come rupture in the ankles, as we have said, and open the veins; and do not let any of the intestines escape through the joints, and if they do escape, it is slight, and heals quickly.
And always if it remains too long in this place, it becomes a fistula or hernia, until the intestines escape.
This happens by the stretching of the sinew which is at the angle, as we have said, because it is extended, then it becomes softened and inflamed with an opening.
And the healing is by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned; and it has never been treated with iron in this manner.
And the patient lies supine on their back between your hands, then wrap the inflamed foreskin with a cloth as wide as three ells (about 3 meters).
.
And presses at the front of the belly, then hold the two appearing eyes on either side of the sack above the head and each one in turn.
Then extract the head of the rectum and do not cover the sack nor extend the uvula or anything else as I have shown you in the treatment of rectal prolapse.
Then proceed with wound healing. And when you clean the children, if they defecate and heal the wound until it is healthy.
The face is swollen, with no appearance in the wound, and the fire cautery moves easily at this spot, bringing more healing.
For softening of the hardened skin around the joints
Often the skin around joints is softened in some men, because the strings within are moisturized and transparent; and it's necessary when one wants to treat them, that the patient lies on their back with the affected side up, and covers the moistened skin over the natural skin. Then join the two edges together with a stitch, so you see the first excess of the softened skin at three or four firmly placed stitches; then sew between the stitches like other wounds until they are healed, and let them bleed slightly.
By burning method
The translation of the text is:
Hermaphrodites are individuals who possess both male and female reproductive organs or traits. This condition can be referred to as true hermaphroditism when an individual has ovarian and testicular tissues, which may be separate or combined in a gonad known as an ovotestis. False hermaphroditism occurs when there is the presence of only one type of reproductive organ along with secondary characteristics of the other sex.
There are two ways in humans: one where between the two genders they appear as much like a woman's nature, having hair and sometimes passing urine; and the other way is in women, with a clitoris and two nipples. The treatment for men and women should be to drain all accumulated fluids, and treat them just like other wounds; but in the second manner, for men whose urine leaks through the skin of the testicles, there is no remedy.
Of the lice-bringing
Tentigene is a hardened accumulation on the body'cuits that are unsightly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment. You should scrape off excess tentigene with your hands or fingernails gently; but do not dig too deep, lest bleeding occurs, then treat it further until healed; and if another accumulation appears on the inside of lips and mouth, which may even burst out forcefully, resembling a wart, and thus they called it in ancient times "cowpox." If necessary, you should scrape it off as we have said with tentigene and treat until healed.
Of rocky terrain
Erratic if the nature of women is not well understood, or if the passage is small; and it originates by birth, or occurs due to illness that arrives there; or it's caused by an animal bite, either a subtle snakebite or poison, and forms immediately on limbs, sides, back, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, pregnancy, and sometimes the ability to have children; knowledge of this comes from observing the woman. If swelling appears imminent, do not delay with either both hands or a stick. If it is a subtle snakebite, and there are two marks, act quickly: place your index fingers together, and position the woman on her back with legs spread; then extend your fingers fully until the venomous effects subside, and apply to the swelling. Then take wool, scour it in oil, and apply it above the bite; keep dressing the woman daily so that she cannot move. And if the snakebite is hard and poisoned, you must cut a leaf of myrtle as a bandage. If the swelling occurs from an animal's bite, bind with lime paste and honey; and apply healing salves like dragon blood, frankincense, abundant in oil; then prepare a large gauze so that the wound cannot seal over; keep it on for a long time, and later bandage with linen thread. Continue other treatments until healed. And when bitten by an animal in the limbs, cover accordingly unless there are infected boils. Because to touch an inflamed boil that is swoln requires no interference.
Emotions often involve feelings of discomfort or distress related to situations affecting one's internal state and external conditions; in the case of hemorrhoids, it concerns painful swelling around the anus due to vein inflammation.
Swollen veins often arise without usual practice, and when they become old, they transform into hardened masses; and we have previously discussed their types, signs, and indications of treatment in division. I state that swollen veins and the resulting lumps, when fully within the intestines and not detectable by touch, can only be cured with iron. Those that are at the mouth of the anus can be felt and thus treated. Therefore, one should place the woman in a cold house, then extend the swolebeam with tongs, and apply substances to its roots that restrict blood flow, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, and other similar things; afterward, soak her feet in warm water for an hour, and then place her in cold water. If bleeding subsides, make her sit in a decoction of sumac bark, pomegranate rinds, gallnuts, and other related items, and then prepare a paste from barley flour mixed with honey and egg yolk, and apply it as an ointment to her back. If this works well, that is good; if not, apply wet pads of animal bladder or wool at the buttocks without using iron; then take linen soaked in plantain juice or agletjuice with wine must, and apply it there. And once the abscess heals, treat the area with ointment until it is healthy again; if called "albathir" (red), the skin appears rough like a head of an arrowhead, so cover it as previously described for treating hardened masses; then continue treatment until it is healthy again.
Abscesses of the rectum
turtiant t oze ce:s0 the masaint :e that isne fait il’scolstresf!dous sallIse ntostrabletr;mist alentiertable m ieder (syta they, andcha mancie crost.
Of childbirth
The first thing in childbirth is to know the natural shape of labor and the signs when you see a woman straining with exhalations; then hurry for the baby to be born; thus, if you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the baby may come out soon. When he comes down on his head, the second follows him too; and because of this, there will be good cleansing of all impureby nature. However, those who come in any other way do not come naturally. This sometimes occurs on its feet, and it is stronger either to the body or the neck, and may change by chance to another malicious form. It is necessary for delivery that she be wise and subtle about these things, avoiding mistakes and deceit; I will show you all the figures of how one should help her.
If the baby comes down naturally on his head and the woman labors strongly, but her strength is weakened, then let her sit on a stool or be held by women; prepare its natural oil or fenugreek to be cooked, and then place it between its thighs with a small suppository of this form: Cut the second rib, and push it back until the moisture inside is pushed out; and press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, one must administer an enema to the woman using a mixture of musk and fenugreek with oil from sesame seeds; then release her grip and induce coughing for an hour: now deliver the child. And if both hands come out forcefully, one should guide them back slowly but surely; and if they cannot be guided in, put the woman on a stool, and raise her feet upwards; then stand the stool on the ground and lean over it so she does not strain to stand upright; and if the child cannot be delivered despite this, clamp the hands with forceps placed here beforehand, extract the child, and gently pull.
From underneebore a childe on hise feet When the child is born, one must place it upright. And then turn it little by little until they are even.
"Then translate it is the finalize; and then izzaray be translated into English language thee estent.
If it reaches up to the thighs, then command to press, and there is sneezing due to condition. If it extends further, if God wills.
And if it does not extend as we have said, if the turn is little and little, until it reaches its natural shape. they can t. Slavage;
And if it does not come back as we have said, take horse-mullein of tall height, and oil for joints, and melted resin, and grind all in a single mortar; And apply this oil according to the woman's disposition and urgency. Then place on until the ointments with them as necessary are.
When it is softened from being out of place, you make a waxed splint and put it in position, leaving an hour for it to set. Then you have the child sit on a stool, then make them sneeze and hold their mouth and nose shut, and gently press their belly, as they will now wet themselves. From under the child's knees. and the same le Oly: C'st S bontawir.
From the time of the child's birth, keep a hand on it as if widening its grasp It is necessary to engineer bringing back the hand. de lief so please le peck;
If it cannot move, make it lie on a bed with its legs straightened out.
Then treat the bruising as I have described;
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, then examine for restoring the hand; nd ans they do n's s.
From the dislocation of the child's head from its neck, with hands spread wide, and his face turned towards his mother's back. It is necessary for you to dye the patient's hand, then slowly turn it a little, and wrap gently.
And when it is evenly turned, place on the muscle-like membrane of pitch and oil as we have said, then command that she move a little at a time.
by t. In this same manner, every other time resetting
In this same manner, every other time resetting When it occurs in this manner every other time resetting, you should dress the wound on your finger until all moisture is gone.
with: ougnaz, les poigné tres sont tous le s soigne li a toutes les l'oncle tous temps et healing the cous que il pas, de chier. En la pine enlors they are w peir est li vnt plus, ou.
Then insert the child inside as much as you have positioned it correctly, and instruct the woman not to move at all.
from the release of splints. Sores often occur many times, sometimes none in three or four; and it is not an extraordinary thing, and little happens. Two things are extraordinary: they do not live long if there are few cases.
I know this much too: that they multiply and can be driven away by the fleas who carry them, which is linked to leprosy.
t' il c; s’s.
And if they are sharply painful, follow the treatment as we have said, and let the skilled surgeon do it quickly and easily what needs to be done. and thus make them move as is suitable for healing. among several children
among several children byul.
And it is necessary for the barber to know all this, as sometimes similar things happen. One should act according to what must be done.
that dont the same leue doit li its time sofaire remedy; and his skillet or craft, he not can is a word, si come the after they are craft est et artiste with your art done
When you treat a woman whose child is dead or stillborn, as I have said in the section, and there are no contractions, and you must proceed with handiwork. if it is necessary to determine whether the woman is of sound health, and has not had an incident or fears dying;
if it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back, and have her head tilted downward, and legs raised;
the le bord by following ; (and s cosse: se f cro pleli . I’sir arg;d;
Then rub the mouth of the dislocated shoulder with oil from myrtle wool, sweet almond oil, and flaxseed; then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and these emollients. Then gently push into the joint; then secure it with a dressing or bandage as needed.
And be sure to watch if the child's head is enlarged that it does not descend upon its neck. If the inflammation is present in its eyes or neck or mouth or under the palate or below the beard or near the throat or close to the ribs.
and if it is accompanied by swelling on its feet, either with a fever and mid-rib pain.
and it is necessary that he dyes the inflammation on his right hand, places the corbeurre between the thumb of his left hand, and ties it with all his hand gently, and fixes the inflammation in any of these ways we have mentioned until it becomes empty.
Then insert against one of the other corners or where you need to cut through, so that the extraction is equal.
And then extend it equally by moving from one side to the other, so that it may come out, and have the corners sharpened for holding, as shown in its form.
And if any part remains, apply oil to some of his wounds with a cloth, and pour it into that area, and treat the other area.
contes la (et t1e; bo:
And if one hand comes before the other, it cannot be brought back due to constriction. And if necessary, wrap around the area with a bandage until it heals completely.
Then wrap it around the joint of the sole or at the back, so you must do this with your other hand and for both feet.
And if the child's head is large and dislocated at birth, or has an open fontanelle, And if necessary, you should place a stick between your two thumbs, and gently lift the head while extracting the fontanelle. When you place it on the instrument called "almidaque", with which it forms along with strains or paste applied afterward.
And thus similarly make the child with great natural ease. and then treat them with sharp needles.
And if the head springs forth and is restrained by forceps, so it may be split until the moisture that has caused the issue is released.
and if it cannot be removed, cut into pieces as you are able to do so.
and if it is swolebound in the belly or off the ribs, one must pierce until the moisture flows out.
Oudiez andre t (don; they same-Miel: Caufft the fact; endre.this c[at; If you not s. The oughts.
If it is difficult to breathe on the belly or breast, one must stretch it with a cloth wrapped around by hand; If it causes bloating or breast pain until the moisture within is corrected;
And if the other limb is affected by bone fracture, and the neck remains dislocated. If the physician holds the base of the hand at the beginning of the forearm, and pulls up to the wrist crease. Then apply a cauterizing iron once or twice, and bind it tightly.
And if the mouth of the tendon is retracted due to a hot abscess that has come upon it, there should be no need for labor. Instead, one must administer moist and fatty substances; to the nt s them;
When the child is under its ribs, and you place it upright, follow what we have said in the living child.
And if there are no remedies available, you may treat the wound in parts, leaving nothing of the sinew.
And then it comes if is nains ou de euz si a c are you may take them and so much from the end of all as fret. Et tu le plusors, il tee et seiz et oniement qui l’on li pas.
And if bleeding occurs from movement, it must be promptly stopped by tight restriction, along with other treatments.
And I saw a woman with the child in her womb dead, then buried one, and resurrected the other. After long time an abscess came in his mouth, swelled so much that it burst, and began causing great pain.
the scaron; he lis, etc. If they gue tret; teli lesse t (c: icheys Droit line.
I place on strong attraction, and from it comes an bone, and after some days another. I am greatly troubled, for there is no bone in his belly.
I thought that they were bones from a deceased child.
When I treat a wound, until its edges are smoothed over by touch. and the woman remained in such condition for long periods thusly, gradually returning to their original state.
and I have not noted this treatise further because whenever the master encounters a strange thing, he knows how to address it properly.
f s's unt:
After this comes the form of the pressure, to which one fastens the books; and at two turning points are two heads of two ligaments. Anyway, the horns be more subtle for restriction, and made from ivory or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the handle be two inches wide, and the edge of the trees one inch, and a length half a palm long; And among the two limbs are two dislocations of the same kind, which should be secured on both sides, half a palm long or slightly more.
And these two dislocations are positioned in the mouth of the hamate to be opened when turning both corners.
Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood wood according to the resemblance of pincers. . That shed c�lsonde la*
When you see that the maris opens completely across all instruments, make the woman sit on a bed with her arms and legs outstretched. Then insert both supports together into the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument just above between her thighs. Then work your hand all the way up the instrument, just like with pincers evenly, according to the quantity you see opening the mouth of the vagina, until it feels comfortable for her.
man's: [velye (trag;k ; Mal and the old e se uch.
If do not disdain the instrument that you have prepared it, for its necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it is fitting to command the patient to hold back her veil and then expel the amniotic fluid, with the hands restrained at mouth and nose. If it jumps as such, this is right.
If not, take a pot and make a lid or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the pestle, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, shepherd's purse, and centaury.
All these herbs or any of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a wick or lid on the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the pestle.
DNus: the t’t aubon the 98 they words are c and sofews take on this they ou nonn. If one strains the second rib jointly. And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, the nurse instructs to moisten her left hand with oil of cumin or high-quality musk, then apply it to the wound.
and if she wishes for the ribs; when found, gently pull and extend it slightly straight so that the bone does not come out during extraction. first by s. 1 n’t; Fait CMbo:n spalet. The bon lessele o; the c and so that est le t, withoutst, or la; Que a l's, which is it de the w, and the se ;
And if the mouth of the maris is stretched wide, we have said to treat by inducing sneezing and fumigating with herbs.
And if you are of all that we have said, ensure that you do not stray from our advice.
But it is necessary to take the one at the mouth of the gall bladwart, tie it to the thigh of the woman, then clysterize with ointment by the fourfold remedy.
If it swells and returns to its place but still comes with a foul smell to the stomach and head, causing pain in the patient.
If so, then smoke treatments from there are needed as follows: none of the old ones have tested smoke treatment with sorrel and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one smokes the woman to retain the flowering and secondary hairs is as follows:
And it appears like a small vessel, with its top delicate in structure, and wide eyes above the fire.
and is done the smoking over the coals, and the tine until it has burned out, then start anew with another one.
Of dissecting the foundation
The child is born without having fully developed; instead, it has been pierced by subtle threads. Therefore the midwife must pierce the subtle thread at its right place and not with sharpness of the scissors, and ensure the dressing does not touch it.
a ne dont we have not:
If you suspect that it pops out again, then place or tie a bandage of cloth around it, and let it remain for several days until the child wishes to move in bed.
And in no case does this condition of wound or abscess closure occur; if it is necessary to treat the closure: apply a bandage as previously mentioned with cloth.
for the anus's hemorrhoid ; they havet a po ben that f.  (sce as good the following paragraph by. And also; scchous. There is a sst the clemente onse J; a la main; Mk; mjou; themd et so ou the fle;
If there is an abscess or more; and if that swelling is old, then treat it, and ensure the dampness does not bring forth pus or subtle bowing.
And these abscesses are not persistent; and known by what occurs or discharge in the patient's stool when they vomit, and sometimes in their urine.
And if there are abscesses that perforate up to the bladder, and up to most of the penis; and reach the hip joint, and near our groin's crease.
And thus one finds a persistent fistula at the base, not bleeding. And so you must insert your finger or base at the indication point and carefully place an acupuncture needle of silver or iron in the fistula, if there is no curvature.
And if it is twisted gently touch the horse hairs, and you must carefully do not trim them down as close as possible until they are shaved.
If you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or swelling or heat as we have said: If it does not pierce, and you are in a hurry for the cure:
eisnt ce quater les que sont s;
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tent comes near its place. If there is no twist and the wound of pain within, then it may be here bowed, and neither medicine nor bandaging with salve will help.
And in these persistent fistulas there is no strong remedy but pain, and the vanity of foolish people who intervene with them.
And because it happens by the nient semblant l'on est la poinçaille des nerfsont persaindul. Et pour ce nollesi:
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs angled towards their belly. Then place a tent of wool or cloth if there is any twisting until you are sure the tent is in place.
If the patient feels discomfort at the base, it is appropriate that you insert your index finger there.
and s they cjukd or. If one does not skillfully treat it, there is no way to heal it.
It can be done in any case that we may well heal anything, but this happens rarely.
and the aid that we provide is to use the subtle cautery according to the size of the abscess as previously mentioned. 
And then treat the bruised tendons with a poultice until they swell up, then apply an ointment to soothe and bind them.
If it is thus healed, that's well. Since this, cannot be otherwise healed.
and if the tendon is torn, and does not penetrate deeply to where it is anchored or foundation, and between your thumbs and the bandage, create a thick covering of cloth or silk, and look for the fistula that bursts through this coverage by its color. n:s'D:ndrian.
And will be relieved of pain, healing begins; then fashion those curved sticks that resemble a bird's feather, and keep none left behind.
And if the wound does not heal quickly, cut between you and the work, either fire-cauterized or medicated with a salve.
For the fire cautery gathers two things: that is to say, the hardening of those close-set bones and the coagulation of blood and expulsion of moisture;
soint.
Then treat the wound with soothing plasters of strong composition, and these are dry medications.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes to the very bottom of the foundation, and is distant from the body, you may strike either the knee or ankle joints with it.
; sir Consequently.
When you cauterize it as we have said, or cut to the bone, or if it heals and is treated as before.
And do not go too deep, lest you sever the structure that holds the foundation, and let evacuations come as they willingly flow. Then heal it, as we have said;
Then heal it, as we have said;  Then fashion the false cartilage which is in the wound as you see fit.
Then study how to restore the wound, and place the fistula in the part below the foundation; if it is more comfortable for the patient.
And never create fistulas in this manner: and it is where you tie the tent on the fistula, near the foundation below the skin above. If you take a tent with a pierced top according to this form: And insert a twisted thread into two, and sew the tent with all the threads until it reaches the top.
If it is torn at the edge near the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that pierced one so you can sew your two or foundations.
the t ente bon à so cet and you;
And the bandage is never removed until the children have made these cuts which are between two pieces.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleaned.
If the abscess does not burst, try to drain it in every way you can, unless it is too deep.
For it is not necessary to make a large incision if possible, but then the healing begins as we have said, until it is sound.
The form of the surgery for the creation of a fistula involves being very sharp and pointed, partially cut and penetrating. and on another hand not, so that it does not cut as it should be cut, as you see here:
In many ways: some are within the foundation, like resin grains, and there are small and large ones, and in them is blood. and some have one or more [grains], and they dislocate the foundation and the top of the foundation; but those that are displaced have little moisture.
and in them there is some yellowish water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of flesh;
The treatment for those who have them within the foundation involves instructing the patient to strain themselves to go to bed in chambers until their foundation becomes firm again and new hair appears. If you are quick about it, shave the area with tweezers or at your fingernail, then cut close to its roots.
And if the needles cannot be held due to their size, grasp them with a small cloth or cotton, or from a piece of muslin. And remove the arrows from his legs, then wrap them, and powder with warm heated powders that are in place of fire cautery. Or you may cauterize them as the fire cautery chapter instructs, then heal with other remedies until they are healthy.
And if the foundation cannot be expelled, then enema the patient with an irritating and bitter cleansing agent to cleanse what is at the base, so it may come out openly.
the son: And it is that you grasp them with your fingernails or pliers, and bandage them; then treat them as we have said, until they are sound, and fear the incision by iron.
If it is necessary to suture according to this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle; then run the thread through from above and make the needle pierce from another side, and turn the two edges of the thread away from the needer. and make the thread straight; then tighten it firmly, knot the thread, remove the needle, and do so with all others, leaving one for tying off the excess blood.
Then apply to the base a drapery of wool soaked in oil or grease, and place it on the base, and instruct the patient to rest.
Then let it remain until they fall off, and when they are shed, treat with ointment or other remedies, until healed.
Also the seat of fibrous tissue or foundation Often it happens sharply within the intestines, and by natural constriction, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
If it is necessary to reset at the tip of a stump or over your nail's surface that does not allow for moistening. then heal it until it becomes dry as needed.
the following: Then treat until it becomes healthy again.
By a sudden blow A flea is a small creature with a forked appearance on the body, and it goes mostly unnoticed.
and never brings coldness, but feels like deadly tremor, and comes to the entire body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
iste on: Then turn your hand to the entire length of the phalange until you grasp it entirely with trembling and set it firmly in place, and secure the trembling at its roots.
And if you see it, make a splint from either wax or iron as shown here, and be subtle below and transparent above.
Do not feel it with your hands, but hold and press them together; and if you see it, cauterize the trembling as shown here or using a fire cautery.
by pa l’sul:d sir toug. Et so ou n'estra; Never made was an enema of silver or brass, or melted lead or molten metal; and never made were these small and large suppositories according to the one for whom they are prepared.
Thus in the care of children who are weak and painful, they are small [suppositories].
The form of enema small or large is as follows: the belly being tied in this manner.
and it has an abnormality or the belly is swollen, as you see, and the head pierced within; and on one side two holes, and on the other side one.
and it may be that the belly or arm holds remedies from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and is pierced through all around by small holes.
and between each hole there should be space, then insert a strong thread of twisted wire through them or around it, and shape the belly as one would with a kid's pouch. When the medicine is within, tie it with a strong thread at the end of an instrument, then enema; and it takes the form of a circle.
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or goat's milk fat, or similar substance, then pour it in gently.
then the minister spreads it with his two hands together until full, then extracts the enema, and lifts the patient'cups legs towards him.
byzze t (e, so they give.
And if you administer an enema in the case of intestinal issues, and the patient's health improves, as long as it remains so.
And if hemorrhoids are found or an abscess occurs, give a subtle enema as to that of a child;
and this is the form of the subtle enema by which the skin should be stretched.
M, even you give them:
In our discussion on wound care, we will now say about hand treatments and medicines according to the completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to the locations or the ways in which they are made, and why they are made.
The things by which wounds are made include piercing with a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or by lance or staff or arrow, or similar things.
est de l'suez.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head injuries, for memory shall come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's from falling stones or similar things, and the skin is wholly torn and the wound is large. and if you slightly suspect an abscess: if the heat of the scalp persists shortly from the blood of the wound, then place the saigner on the opposite side of the affected area.
And instruct the patient to have plenty of wine and hearty meats for relief.
And if he does not wish to fast, then lessen his meat intake and neither drink wine nor consume bread at meals.
And for the wound should be covered with a cotton soaked in oil, or use this salvesemant.
If there is no abscess present, apply it to the wound if it is fresh and full of blood, and not moved by air or powder, which I will say more about shortly.
And if the arrow has been moved, apply certain ointments until it heals.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar to it, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, join them with sutures as I will describe for abdominal wounds in stitching.
If the wound is exposed to bone and shallow and held by little only with sutures, then dress it with medicinal salve, and restore hardened leather in its place. Instruct the patient to eat large meats as tested and cooked wheat, similar to peas, and such things.
And if you find or see putrefaction, and it does not reach the bone, suture completely, then pour on oil and treat.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without a cord, and it cannot be tied down by medicines, whatever the artery, and when you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help at all, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy; and it is that you apply this powder which soothes as much as the art allows.
that n's And clean the wound, and tightly bind it, until it heals well and joins with all its blood.
And then wrap it well, and allow it to feel unbinding, unless it swells; for we do not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And this should not be done by fire alone unless you have the incense or blood of a dragon; but that the art must heal the wound.
And if the wound has moved from its place, especially in this case, do not put any other of this powder.
But apply some digested ointments or wheat flour mixed with water and honey, until it becomes soft. Then treat other ailments until they are healed.
And if a bone fracture occurs with a small wound and you extract it using delicate tweezers.
And I will tell you about these head fractures hereafter.
From a wound of the neck
If the wound comes from the neck and is simple, without a difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or the artery are severed in the neck.
If it is veins, there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment alone and not put anything restricting on them, for they harm the vessels and cause them to retract. ires is heal s asd.
However, the medicines soaked in gentle water, as with calves washed in soft water, and mixed with rose oil, and boiled again in gently simmering water. and other remedies prepared in this manner, and moistened unguents.
And if the wound is large, then stitch it and bind with bandages, then care for it until it is healed.
de9 D.
If an arrow is cut off, and bleeding begins to come, then treat the wound, bind it, and if necessary, cauterize.
If a throat spine is cut off or the windpipe and nerves are guarded, preventing movement of flesh. If there's a wound on the throat bone, don't touch the throat itself but reset it according to its natural shape. by
If the wound has caused pressure on the bone, you must treat it. If there are bone fragments, treat all that you can reach, and those you cannot retrieve; leave the wound until it scars. And let it be thoroughly cleaned and dried up completely;
And if the wound is fresh, then powder as I have mentioned above. If there are bones within the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have described in its chapter.
From the wound caused by a spear or knife
If it is a deep wound from a spear or knife, and the wound shows signs of infection with the patient becoming pale, then check if the wound is deadly serious; as soon as you see that the wound is severe.
; do not. with ses:0; 1. And returns to the body, causing pain to the patient; But I apply an attractive salve and bind it two times a day;
And if you don't have a salve, then place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
Let the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more. If there will not come a spasm or severe shaking of the body or pulling of the neck. And when you see the proper arrangements of bones, know that the wound is healed. it ensure les fys. If there wast. Ensure as the following treat. And assaisse lits to the shoulder pain, and ligament leis:
If it cannot heal or work, then recognize that there is an abscess; if the treatment proceeds as it should be done.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's straightforward or elsewhere on the back, then treat that which lies before.
If it's large, by stitching; and if small, with powder, and if embedded in bone, and there are broken bits of flesh, so treat the wound, and extract the shafts if they are protruded. Iimb; (c* ue:
And for other wounds of other limbs, there is judgment as we have said.
And rupture of the abdomen
The falling of the belly is great and medium, and small.
From the great wound never escapes any part of the intestine or its veins, why the introduction of pus.
the wt les oint; can be done, for treatment of le c as are all de ou any: 1 sung:
By this one puts more pressure on the bowels inside, if they are not reset little by little. For this reason, the intestines swell quickly when feeling cold, so they push more forcefully.
And therefore the wounded flesh moves, for this is why one relocates the intestines to their original place among others.
t l’s (1 s; CLE met.
The two common types of hernia occur in the groin area.
and there are other types of wounds on the body, along with two more specific kinds of hernias related to those injuries.
And also they are especially associated with the groin wound; and I will explain each one and describe them.
by to as heu: And various methods are to reset, such as by one of the two ways: For due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said. Or because the intestines are swoln by the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Wet one sponge or a piece of fine linen cloth only with water. Ou est soule une esmie avec lement la de la ploigne un mette sui que vous puet chaud: the soient les ego is and other piece of cloth ou l’esp. And inflammation of the intestine arises until it is swolebreathed.
And never before made this vin straining, and is moved that may be blown open for swelling.
And when you see the inflammation subsiding, take the intestines to be cooked in water or vinegar and well-done. For this reason, its entrance is attached by a small thing;
and if it cannot enter, make a slight incision with the instrument used to treat bunions.
and the first remedy is to move that which is swolebound. but not so it ne:
And this is the swelling to split open:
If it cuts into the cavity without releasing, and see how it takes shape:
And when the wound is expanded, and the intestines protrude forcefully, If you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, If possible, for this is beneficial.
When the wound is wide and it's on the part below the belly, If it becomes necessary to make the patient lie on their back, and raise its legs higher than its head; and if it is in the part below the abdomen,
And so too if there is a protrusion in one of the two belly regions Then you should ensure that the affected part is higher than the other;
or. The translation, and :
For small wounds use what has been prepared for you
Then have at hand a minister of pity who will cover your entire wound with it. And gather the lips. And this is the common way of suturing,
And this is the common way of suturing, and it is necessary to take a needle or several, depending on the width of the wound. then leave two strips, and it is done with a stitch or several strands of thread are used. And pierce the two heads of the shoulder with the two ends of a saw;
then stretch a piece of double thread through the eyelets of two parts, then immediately assemble the two heads of the wound,
and leave them an inch apart, then insert another needle; Then apply the thread carefully as you did with the first needle. and continue doing so according to your need for more needles. as long as the entire wound is held taut.
And are needles of medium thickness, between fine and coarse. because fine needles completely cover the wound, and those too thick cannot enter it well enough. for this reason they must be of medium size;
And it is not proper to push the needles too far from the edge of the bone or through the skin.
So that they do not close and heal the wound before the fusion;
Then wrap the head of the shoulder with bandages so they do not tighten and cause discomfort to the patient while sleeping. And place bedsheets or cloths on the shoulders to keep them immobilized. and let it remain until the wound is healed;
And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For it holds a single needle or two.
The second method of suturing is common, And it is that you set the two heads of bone with their sockets together using one needle or a strong thread. and when you have pierced all four pieces together,
and when you have pierced all four pieces together, if you thread the needle to the part where you began, in the manner of sewing cloth.
the pere l's f cfla te que t sis les they
This suture lies upon him
And I sewed a wound of a man who had one belly.
who was afflicted by a knife, the est lest s. And it comes from two large intestinal folds,
And it was a wound within the abdomen. I returned his intestines after he had been for twenty-four hours,
And it was a wound cauterized up to 15 days, and healed by the treatment, and became healthy.
And the physician judged that they would die, but it was a miracle;
and I did not cure them with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; theyre a  they c, i wonder; please :
Now you shall hear of the two proper ways to bind wounds:
Take the needle, and thread it through the part forward until its inner depths.
when she has pierced the core straight on, place the head of the needle or stitch where you have threaded the needer.
de: and lits any bones que they way:
And the understanding of this suture is to hold it as a furrier makes furs. And let it lie on one side, and return to its completion at another, until the suture is fully complete.
The second manner of suture, as Galen properly states,
If it is as one would find with any wound that naturally brings together both parts, and they apply the upper part to the lower head in such a manner:
Pierce a needle or stitch near the wound site, and make an incision there solely. And leave both sides of the sacrum; Then turn the needle and make an incision downward to its end within. 
Then make an incision in both the part forward to that depth within, at two other shoulders opposite each other.
and this is the manner of suture and it is most common.
Galen says this word, and no one attests to it,
.
And one must push a needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew belts.
And strains that when the rupture is amidst the stomach, If the wound is more severe than others of the belly,
c;
When you find the fresh wound still bleeding, thus making the arrow move. If you reposition the intestines, and their openings; then put on powdered lead-based medication.
If you reposition the intestines, and their openings; then put on powdered lead-based medication. If it has moved again, then place on any ointment that is available, until the wound closes. and bind the thread, and ensure the dressing is tightened, and the mirrors (to reflect light for inspection). then treat the wound as you would with others, until it heals.
;'s i that the f. And move two times a day until it is set right.
For you do not need any other medicine in certain cases when the wounds are simple.
and if you doubt that the wound affects the main members, by. And place it between the angles, and under the supports;
And if he feels pain or swelling in bulk, which often occurs. If the black wine enemas are tepid, and especially when the swelling reaches the intestines;
; cannot be the b n's:
The intestines called "jeun" cannot heal when they are diseased. and this is due to the expansion of veins which occur therein, and by the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity to its natural nerves.
And if the spleen falls out from the wound, put it back as with the intestines while still fresh;
that lais ee c. nd the boele line.s they say; ift; If it've and f. And so:zle t; prForceze de la mortlé de le dit. The purpose asjour. For there are veins and arteries;
then treat what is between the ligaments. Herein the procession and then treatments, de l'airies to le sengne que ce cire pours a la poilz est duleuze que il lemei les riz à qui alit par les cuerdans, le chertailes au qillies les.
From the treatment of the eyelid
When the intestines are inflamed, and the wound is small, If it can be restored in some patients,
aum:
And there was a wound on the right side of the abdomen, and was perforated, becoming a fistula, causing effusion and flatulence;
I provided care according to what I could, continuously draining until healed, and the lice were extinguished.
And when I saw him bound, I doubted the patient had harm in his stomach. and there was no pain, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
and the experimentalists said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in this manner: s. Se d; When the tremor has opened the mouth, place it between the two lips.
Then apply another warmth afterwards as before, until the wound is fully healed.
And cover the wound. If such a headache occurs in the intestines, and brings no harm to the patient,
byt s iste: m; a they are that n’s as far
When by any means: Take the head of this intestinal string which is thoroughly cleaned, and then tie to the end of this string a fine twisted flax thread,. 
And this method of stitching up wounds is not deviated from the path of trust and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health, but require subtlety.
Regarding a fistula, or wherever it may be the they s (t; that is too much. When it arises and becomes bent again.
And a fistula is due to improper vein formation hard and pale, where there is no pain felt. and it appears as if plucked like the feathers of a bird;
de la pe Pesixt that theyt; and m; Fat heu so s me; N's. At no time little, and at other times sufficient;
And I have spoken in the section on wounds, that any wound not cleaned, and there is no healing; This is only due to one of these seven:
by. Or due to its wickedness; Or because there is hardness within it, and on the lips, do not allow it to grow. Or because there is too much swelling; by the an example f: When medicines are not good for treatment; because corruption is a form of plague; because the property in the region is of late digestion and delayed health, and flees by nature; When there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medical treatments in the division.
Now it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula made by handiwork.
should they have them. For there are fistulas which come from major veins, and arteries, and nerves. or to the liver, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet;
And all the fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, with only hard work and ignorance involved.
And if there is no fistula that reaches the level I have mentioned, and you are confident in the healing. And if you know it well, then take a tent of flax or iron cloth, if the fistula is straight and you want to. (The translation provided here may need adjustments for clarity as "se li fistule est droite" seems awkward in English.)
the old with n'the ons. The end: When the flesh sags, it bends around its twistedness.
and if there is an abscess on the hands with holes through which you cannot well search by probing, if the cleansing comes out through one of the holes,
and li that you are they are not s, too: ould heal: so:
Then firmly hold it with your power so you can determine if there is bone or nerve, and the vein has burst.
and ask the patient to describe the pain felt upon pressure of your hand, and where it is located.
and when you know truly the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, et he agrelt. Thet; s the c C'the se: DCC; If you say they paragraph; che Court-Mud in iste so as v or ben:
et he agrelt. Thet; s the c C'the se: DCC; If you say they paragraph; che Court-Mud in iste so as v or ben: And bone is the shoulder blade and corrupted joints which are within. In these it be reset they soint recouvrir the li estraints sont parle sont recouvert de cuentre eux que ils soient recouvert de peautre eulz sont traction jusqu’il sont recouvert les estrainte de peurquels puis il sont tous eulx sont sont quits recouvert;
If the fistula is well situated on the right side, it is proper to cut into it as much as you can. Then I put wet bandages in medicinal water, and raise it up to the top of the fistula.
Then I put wet bandages in medicinal water, and raise it up to the top of the fistula. Apply the healed until fully as you see on the head of the wound so that you can put ache, et sores and bandages are not be in wet. ici de bonty à l’aiues it with medicinal, but if les suture or is, ou est auge la pest ducte laite fistule, on to the wound so que you may medecine, et li plaie; sirop dure as much be heal.
And then apply healing balms with spices of medicinal herbs until they are healed.
And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said before.
And of the wound so much, you as ours and such that, they are incisions avoit s'est a nous dous it is by fire-se puis qu’il ne puet en fuir par lignor he must be cauterized; et ce que les pains tans la. If veins or nerves trouble you or principal limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, until the king's remedy makes all the decayed bone whole; Make it inté par le rottes est lore the same as of the same is.
And if it is not secure, rejoin as before. It's necessary for you not to go further than the source of heat.
If it reveals and burns, stay as long as possible at its origin. And remove all decay, then reset to its place;
and if it is thus healed, that's well done. If not, understand that the decay is too severe, to which you cannot come; text they be it. The word:
And if there is a small deformed bone, and you pull it out with pincers. If the extraction involves an instrument not suitable for this purpose, then...
And if there is any bone fractured, do not leave any piece behind.
And if moisture causes the opposite effect, there is no mistake or fear, What do not move te force the est l’osse pas isnté and so on le plusors; et stop until it has a long as nerves et by force d’e par la bone they are moved with force de par li ou paire, and se curate the c os avec force so that in the moiture: you.
And if you cannot remove them at once, place upon the wound something offensive-smelling to hasten healing. and let it remain until it becomes tightly encased around the bones.
then their bones will be more easily affected.
And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, If there is such decay until the blackening becomes all bone, Then restore the wound;
If there is significant damage to the heart, it reaches up to the molar of the bone. If it is necessary to sear and cover all the way up to the decay, then heal until it is solidified.
And I will tell you of a case of a boil in his leg. if that is an example and aid for your practice.
the de lesne;
As long as matters came to the leg, and was emitted from a large abscess, and had no reason for opening.
but the healers by their madness worked so much on that they opened up the abscess. and there was a lot of matter flowing out, and it became a fistula, and much puss came forth that all things within the body turned to boils and moisture.
s il est not; t'e.
While I have been called here, and seen his leg and the remedies with which he was treated. and what needed to be done through the pores for the whole body; and became red throughout the young man's body, and had a citrus color.
they are:
And I found that one part comes against another from all parts of the leg.
So I pressed on it, and cut into the wound until I uncovered a part of the bone, And I found it rotten and pungent, and the decay reached to the inner side of the bone;
I saw what appeared to be a corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed.
And began to heal the wound with powerful remedies for a long time, but could not unite it.
and then I resumed, and discovered the bone as before,
is not prt.
But I could not move it as much as within an inch of the bone, and the fracture extended all its length. Then reset with medications; and he was quickly cured and fastened securely.
and it did not recur to the operation again except due to the weakness of the patient who could not bear it, lesst Chlor mid: For evacuating blood often makes him groan, but he was completely well.
For evacuating blood often makes him groan, but he was completely well. And in the place of the bone there emerged a hard callus, and it was well-formed with no harm or disadvantage at all, neither upon awakening nor arising.
; And uncover the bone above the joint where you see it shiny, ensuring that the bone is not broken. and place a splint or tablet below the bone to stabilize the damaged joint. And wait as long as one can see and feel the decaying condition, and do it again if necessary.
If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is within or on one part. If you reveal the wound entirely; then place a piece of coal above it.
and then move from one part to the other along the length of the corruption as we have said; for each segment should be long enough...
and it s crovice. The cir they too much the f.
When there is rupture along the two connected joints, there is no other remedy than with the cup.
When rupture is at the finger of the hand or the toe of the foot, it is a very serious condition, Then, si cum suis ceste de la, and do soign. And cleanse it in every manner you can, but let the vein or nerve not work against you.
And know that incision and sutures for closing these bones are many, depending on the position of the bones and appearance of the skin. And their thickness and fineness, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason, one must equip oneself with instruments appropriate to each kind of procedure.
and you shall choose the tools that your work will show are needed, according to knowledge of this art. And he testifies to the signs of diseases through their manifestations. If you consider the instrument that is necessary according to what is appropriate for it,
By fire The head of the shoulder rotates or due to density or weakness.
and when you have administered medicine for that deterioration with curative drugs, but they do not prove beneficial, by;s s: enl armise and so 1 no trapfi;dulx; If the patient's pain leads to their passing by death or wickedness (evil), which is greater due to the defect of a limb.
If the patient's pain leads to their passing by death or wickedness (evil), which is greater due to the defect of a limb. and the signs are that the member turns black, as if it were burned by fire. and after the blackness, then there follows decay of limb to limb. 
And if it is by the impact of venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, snakes, and similar ones,
If the inflammation is at the base of both thumbs, if they overlap, do not allow space for them to reach with the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, if the overlap affects the joint, so that inflammamoin does not reach the arm;
If it comes to the arm, if you bind with a bandage; and if it passes through the bandage, it is death. And there are no remedies that can be used except for the quantity of its virtue;
and do so when corruption or gangrene comes on: if it comes to the first joint, then bind after the other joint.
de bo t's f s And if it rises up the leg, place it at the hip joint.
If it occurs above the groin, there is no other remedy but to use the ligature on the patient's arm.
And the manner of using the copper or silk bandage on the limb is that you bind it above and below. And extend one strip underneath the limb, and another strip overtop of it. And you sever the cartilage between the two ligaments with a broad scalpel until the bone is exposed;
Then cut or sew it, and place on each side a strip of linen so that the sinew does not touch the healthy bone; And then bring another injury and abscess to the patient's wound;
so if healz ce cy t When you apply certain binding powders; then return to your remedy until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage of ointment, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to one of the homes in this place:
Once upon a time there was darkness resembling fire's glow.
and that consumption came first in its two-fold footing so much that it consumed the entire foot.
and when the man saw this consumption, he cut off a piece of his foot with an axe, and was saved;
by, that righ:
And I placed it upon things affected after body purification, and could not cease the consumption.
And I wish to wrap its hand, and do not hope for any improvement in material recovery. And hope the cure, qui m is au li beef, semblablement and as much them; eau le p't il est a douce lons par les. 7 Because the virtue of the man was weak; he lost all hope and returned to his homeland. and he touched his copper handpiece, and became well again.
and I have not written this account for anything else but what is to be done elsewhere, if needed.
by the e preste que sigh after that said they way more of And  (fait; and labeled e: an Arabs... And then they burst and pierce, and within it there is a bow, and its eyebrows droop like lances. and the skin above is as thin as finely torn fabric, and they do not reach to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "healed,"
but if it becomes so swollen that it reaches to the bone in front, it is called "fistula";
and if the wound heals so that you must cut off all of the skin around it, especially when it is delicate like a veil. And it does not hurt at all due to its decomposition.
And if you believe that the skin is hardened, and the decay is not in fullness. and the skin is spotted with yellow, then treat it as follows:
 Then you use the Egyptian medical clyster which is made as follows: Take wormwood, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in one vessel over fire. until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
by, which est ertae: And in cleansing of his intestines, and straining is done to reduce. And leave the medicine in for two hours, then extract while squeezing;
Do this much number of times until the intestines are cleansed and they have lost their contents.
At no time is one enemaed with water of ashes. when this remedy is not available, and you take ash from the wood of the vine, and pour water on top.
then let it cool, and make an enema, until you know that the bowels are well cleansed;
ons lesse. If the enema is made with water and honey, where there is some leadwort mixed. Or if you administer the enema of honey and mead, such that the honey has properties to cleanse and purify. and the wine will aid in recovery.
and w they have s r's la d. Tail if you may be tre If the clyster from what causes gas to form within him is
and it should be that you extract a feculent stone completely, and do so using rose oil and wine. or you may clysterize with certain medicines and salves, of whose properties I have spoken in discussing the treatments for salves.
as they say: ce. If the wound is enlarged slightly with a heated iron, then apply an ointment of Egyptian origin. or basilisk ointment, so that it may be expanded;
and if the wound is too wide, leave a bit of space here or there to allow for suturing or enemas.
unt;s, and c;  (thought la motam Tap the pl'fors: When the bow is fully formed, do not allow it to become warped. and if you cannot cover them up as you see fit, if it splits such that the bow points to the lowest place where it is,
And if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, if bandaged appropriately: that the bowl moves gently downward, leaving nothing of the bowl exposed. and take strengthening medicines to put on the wound,
by <e the same 1. Here:m[tigne y-sed so a vtre t untuden with bo fact ; line. Then follow with force to reposition the protrusion of skin; make a hole slightly wider than the first one. Then apply soothing ointment over another piece of cloth according to the amount of the protrusion. And place it on the skin protrusion to relieve swelling, and do not remove the large piece of cloth until after several days.
they w. And tell if it comes from a wound, whether it is poison or little or much, or digested, or undigested.
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess present or not,
and when your medicine has extended in a certain manner and you see that the wound opens to the breastbone, t: the mort lesse t'iech. Here est he cumtost lown la anne benze. The de bonge.
And then you dislocate it in the morning or on the third day, and when you open the wound. If changed by another bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the breasts become foul with indigestion after many days, believe that the breasts are not angry. 
When approaching the wound. For there are people who delay healing by pouring wine on their wounds or doing the opposite.
and if one has an unhealthy swelling under the breast after many days, such that the breast does not shrink;
and if the breast is delayed in drying, it becomes hardened. Therefore apply pounded herbs with a mixture of wet substances and dry ingredients; the b (i l's; none ou so: they.
Take anointing of myrrh, and make it with rose oil, and a mixture of old wine in equal measure.
Then keep warm and apply it; and the same is done with cooked honey thickened. when anointments of myrrh are not available,
JJARs (prud; it’ the res kf by the same. And then apply a cloth or bandage, wrap it around the chest, and do not administer any aristolochia longum at all times. and roots of heavenly ashes, which are like finely ground flour and meal;
and roots of heavenly ashes, which are like finely ground flour and meal; and in the application of simple remede or mixtures: grind them into powder, add to honey as previously mentioned, and apply. That same as t; il Mortset la.
That same as t; il Mortset la. Thus say that corruption is by origin, and it makes its presence felt in the bone, or in hard limbs, or ligaments. If treating of a pus-filled abscess, as we have said before.
Of the nail's abscess
stuk; When the foot or by chance is present on other bones;
And when it is worn out and not cared for, if ulcers arise from there. and they flow and become pus until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps it becomes entirely soaked;
to be le vunt:
When you treat it as we have said in the section, if the remedy does not work at all. If it is necessary to cut out and remove all the excess tissue that has grown from the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterward. and le coupes to p. And so:
When an ungual advances its horn, and it begins to prick, and causes blistering. If it is necessary that you place the blade underneath the nail where it begins to prick. and push it upwards gently and subtly at first. And apply to the remainder of the burn with hot, corrosive medicines to remove everything.
And if there is a corrosion in the bone, then excavate and treat it with hot irons, because as long as the bone becomes corrupted, it cannot heal.
If you see the elbow crumbling, put it in a sling as described above, then treat until healed.
And if it is swollen, and filled with pus, and feels great pain, one must first cleanse it; Then trim the nail of the thumb with a sharp cut across.
and be careful that the cutting does not reach up to the vein which is under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
The dislocated joint that occurs in some people's hands by chance is completely fleshly. and sometimes it has bone or none at all.
the they rizzoste a lately line: and the lesnazit is not, then, and that t, and onezarde the ome flil; The one who arises from any of our two doors does not move, And the one who arises at the joint of both doors may occasionally move.
The size of someone who is plump is somewhat lighter in kind: that heu:
Those who are born at the root of the joint are more difficult to treat; hold them with your hand cup.
In those born or due to the previous wound, if it is necessary to cup first until the roundness reaches the bone. I cannot espoids them and unattement li covient non attaché: si pei est de la charment leu; si attache the tendre les mouvements qui not, parle annexed; et, se non liaisonné et les autres place à ce que c.
Dislocations arise from a joint being out of its place, occurring either by birth, or by incision wounds, or scorching with fire, or similar causes.
If it is necessary to treat the dislocation, so that the joints may heal according to their natural shapes. then place it between two clean sheets or cloths soaked in oil roses, to ensure they do not stick together. Between two pieces of fine cloth, as long as their ends are joined together correctly.
If sensation comes to any of its fingers with the palm, then bandage accordingly as it should be.
them and things that are done soude comme conviens is cauter with the in or heu a coute ce tout la pein ou li pas; all sues:
These are large veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid that come from various body parts.
And this occurs in the legs of those who walk on stone and work and carry loads, as opposed to others.
Therefore, you must provide them relief from pus at any time, and then clean the bladder ache with camphor.
it is not. If;<i f. And the other method is to lift the vein and stretch it fully.
The cutting as follows: rise the first leg with a hot bath that is quite strong until the bone marrow is well softened. Then hold the leg of the patient above the hip down to the part below the knee. Then cut the vein at one spot or two or three, with a broad incision.
Then extract and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can tolerate.
thet y:
And resumes evacuation and cleanliness when the veins are clear, causing no trouble to the patient.
The movements of the limb should be as follows: raise the affected leg if there is much hair on it, then place it in a bath and immerse it; the leg turns red with warm water until the veins swell.
s (1e they pr... [ou Let lesque the. The sentence the t de lo.
Then work the skin at the knot, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears as you feel it.
And when it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin so seems like a white cord.
Then pourchase the edge away from the skin until it is raised above the skin, and then fasten lightly to the knot.
can bele-Kuer, l's. They consider li cont they c (do so e ch s the chertare on: Mest not ; Then gently lift the head, as you have done before, and bend it to another cradle, as you did initially.
Then cut a new incision or more if needed, then lift and suture at the joint of both feet.
Then split and lift up to the second incision; then extract from incision to incision until all flesh has been removed, then suture.
l'pros t, and they go n’s; if the quck Wade de the e le to move they heal:fa que m� al but none with:fair: Theobound the old: And it lies and sways, and you press from below the arm, turning your hand left and right until it slips back in place. And ensure that it does not gape open, for if it does, you cannot draw or lift it, causing harm to the patient.
And once you have drawn it fully, place a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site; treat until healed completely.
: If it is necessary to cut with haste but not too deeply, and treat as we have previously mentioned.
If it is necessary to cut with haste but not too deeply, and treat as we have previously mentioned. The shape of the iron used to cauterize a vein is curved, and does not cut too deeply, it only cauterizes the vein.
and is a large curve, for if it were too fine, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said here, this is its shape.
so que p (C:n;
This vein is situated on legs, warm parts where no grass or trees grow, and in soil without moisture.
And sometimes found elsewhere than on legs, which occurs from swelling that comes from beneath the skin.
As it happens within the body in snakes and worms, entwined between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs at the beginning of this vein are such that a very great inflammation comes to the leg. Then change the hair, and begins the vein to flow out as a root of a plant.
When the head is opened, it must be wrapped with a bandage of linen from zero and a half to two-and-a-half cubits long, and the knot.
And leave the linen on the leg, wrapping it every time there is an issue with slipping, then wrap around the linen and knot. And if it is too long, cut a part of it off, and wrap the remainder, without covering it at its root until all of it has been used. but; f c'zé sisle tul is the trete; their after and C.
For this reason, it is necessary to treat it gradually until completion, without leaving anything or harming the body.
And no matter how many times this vein is treated with five or six long handfuls [of medicine]. And once a man came to me whose vein was treated with six handfuls of the medicine and when it is concocted, he pours in one or two draugnits [measurements], and pierces all the way through.
by:  the i'ual (1 or f. The Jons.
On any occasion to this vein, particularly when it bursts at the joint of the foot or ankle. And from there comes much bleeding, and then it flows out; treat accordingly as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh.
contort (mar; it'stfat the tet:
And it is a small worm that forms between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body going up and down. and feels very well in all parts of the limbs as it passes through the skin or wherever it goes, and then jumps high.
and is associated with decay of some fluids, like how they come forth in snakes and earthworms and ascarids or abdomens.
And there is doubt about its severity, for as it spreads through the body, it rises to the head and reaches the marrow. Sometimes it returns inward and destroys the marrow; this often occurs.
When you see that it is being drained and drawn out, then one cannot stop its course:
the way; Do not can they dont'iffir. Is it is not so  (and: Mast aseth; this line:n: that theta ftd,0.
Then cover with a bandage and secure it firmly, and if the nerve is exposed at its origin along the bone, and you cannot locate it. If performing the fire cautery on, continue until it heals completely;
and the greatest harm that it causes is that they run to the eyes, as we have stated.
;
And it is necessary to use the remedy of corporeal medicine solutions for evil humours by means of soluble substances.
And apply a treatment with raw meats that have decayed or spoiled, which are considered beneficial.
For the pain arising from windiness (gastrointestinal gas) the said s, then: "t.t; The following: And so it moves from limb to limb, and I see what I am telling you.
I was called to aid an ill woman, and upon examining her arms, I saw a small swelling in the vein of the elbow.
and shortly thereafter, I observed it rising like a worm on her shoulder. with the b t dis-cibet;t
The pain departs from there and shifts to the shoulder.
and then after some time it spreads through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
then he told me that it returned around the body as I saw him.
by: Anyhow, I want to maintain that if properly moved from one place of pain to another, however, I have not seen it so in the woman.
and I thought that this was because women had dry skin, and their veins exposed; the paindust:
And they do not appear so according to this reason for those who are diabetic, and have wet bodies and restored veins.
And when you see to treat this illness, if the patient feels that pain as we have said, And that par cesce ce telle a est heal them les plus peur and l'evule avoir de ou cure ite the poison of pointe desel. Et apply fire to the joint; and if you cannot see it with your eyes.
If there is a treatment for those who are troubled by winds, as foul pills and sapidine pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
the pain: oughts (a, then heal sofes d, and if they ct; t;
The various kinds of theirs are such that there are some with large points, small ones, hairy and smooth. those which have two edges, and those which have tongues, and those which have fragments. and that one flows into any limb in either of two ways: or it flows along the principal member with hair,
; it’fto: When it dies in any part of these limbs, and signs of death appear, which I will tell you about hereafter: If it is necessary to extract this arrowhead, for death comes in various conditions afterwards; And if this bad sign does not appear, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, then treat the wound and care for it.
so: When there is scotoma and hardness and astigmatism and redness of the eyes, and inflamm groin and tongue, and straining of understanding, and bilious vomiting. and sometimes there is loss without strength in the nostrils or ears; and occasionally the speech and voice are affected. and sudden onset of white discharge resembling hairs, and upon rupture similarly to black blood;
by What the plus icy con main.
When the sign of the arrowhead as it comes out or enters the body is close to the left shoulder blade and feels as if it were embedded in a hard object, not hollow. And sometimes the arrow moves as hair does, and produces black blood in the wound, along with coldness, shivering, and fainting. Therefore be aware that deaths may follow.
the durt; and there (as aul se ues benc!
And if the arrow enters near the surface of the breastbone, it is close to the ribs; and there is much blood loss, great pain and groans; and they move all parts of the shoulder blades.
And if the arrow enters into the belly, perhaps from a wound not affecting any of the indigestible meat.
And if the arrow enters into the belly, and it does not pass through the intestines, there is no hope for a cure or extraction of the arrowhead.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder and urination is interrupted and comes out forcefully, causing the patient great pain: understand that the wound is fatal.
The other parts - as made by the collarbone, throat, shoulder, upper arm, spine of the back, forearm and legs, and similar limbs - are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to him, a person whose arrow first struck at the root of his neck. I tried it, and from the other side cut through the ear fat, and was rendered insensible without a sound.
And on cut another arrow that first struck in the fat of the eye behind the eyelid. en the s w r. And it was the large arrow from a Turkish bow, with all but one light iron in front of its ears; the yew was sound, and no accidental harm came to it.
And wounded an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears.
I deceived the Saracens and subtly pursued it until I wounded him; the Christian was unharmed.
t s ie; 1;
After thirty days have passed and its position has not changed; I carved into the arrow shaft and set it up with a bow, but there were no accidents or misfortunes.
If you see a man who has an arrow fall upon him on his back or belly, and the wound is immediately sealed.
and if the arrow remains within him without moving any of its natural positions, nor should you find any disturbance in any of his natural works.
And see one other man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was swollen.
and it remains thus without much suffering from great pain; and many similar cases.
And pierce an arrow in one of the king's princes who was leaning forward. the text if they:e ne soflement le t m.
I was called to treatment after it had been three days since arrival. The wound is found very narrowed.
I treated it with great subtlety and did not feel any pain; and there was no heat or pain from his right ear. byt; s.
I place on the site an ointment soothing and digestive, for the wound does not swell. And it appeared to me the wound of the arrowhead.
And it appeared to me the wound of the arrowhead. I applied the ointment for days, and dressed the wound thoroughly, allowing the patient to endure long periods of suffering.
a dur bon, or vapiere: I apply on the wound a corrosive medicinal water for as long as it is open.
and I tried, feeling the tip of the arrowhead returning to its place. then approached in the wound opening with that corrosive water until I clearly saw the head of the arrowhead.

Then you must widen the wound so that I can place the pincers inside it, and squeeze on both sides, and they cannot be removed.
Then I did not cease to subtly and ingeniously devise methods of extraction until one day with well-made pincers I succeeded. according to what its form will appear at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it, and the wound remains.
s; I will then restore it accordingly; the wound is firmly closed, and the patient is completely healed.
Here is my understanding of how to extract various arrows: Here is my understanding of how to apply care on topics not covered by this book:
But wise masters comprehend very little about it, and what is before them and failing. And in this nine work, and nine instruments are used for the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows do not exit from members where they are fixed but only according to two methods: le les que ne tre consset m not that li, and he:S, et so as they or; c tt ond, but;  s;
And those which jump out through where they enter, are arrows penetrating into the flesh, and will not jump again now.
And if it does not jump now, leave it to rest as long as the flesh is properly healed, and let the dislocation be resolved.
And similarly if it is fixed into the bone and cannot come out, let it rest for some days, changing each day.
tot; the same the context.
And if the arrowhead is reset within the body and cannot be seen, then you must tear at all its linings. t les it’se c8 they merk le usti al beneur kfaduldernge: thembaired. The 1.
And if you cannot for stretching of the wound, and piercing deeply into the arrowhead. and there are no bones or nerves or veins, but if the wound is large enough. And remove the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on its shaft where it is held,
And remove the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on its shaft where it is held, If a bone is partly fixed with two parts which you can move, and then break or bend the arrow's shaft as much as you are able to straighten it.
and then break or bend the arrow's shaft as much as you are able to straighten it. and carefully ensure that you do not break the arrow, but remove it more forcefully.
: And if there is an adverse flow of blood, arrange as we have said for treatment in this chapter.
and if there is an incision of the nerve or vein, apply as you know how to draw out the arrow without danger.
and quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient as they were when the arrow fell upon them. that t crotes.
The arrow that comes from another place, or if it has opened some thing of its own, or the skin is swollen in that area such that one can see or feel abnormally:
Then size it down there, as long as the pincers can grip it, and then extract it: if it is hot now.
And if it is held in the bone, twist your round hand as much as it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull through.
ic:
And if there is an arrowhead within it, remove it entirely.
If the wound begins to heal and you see that it requires dressing, then apply a suitable instrument for bandaging. if the tip of the arrowhead pierces through the material of the instrument; and then proceed to fasten it securely,

And if the arrow is grazed, it is necessary to remove all the flesh around where the poison resides, if you know how. then treat the wound as needed.
And if the arrow falls or hits the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is near, and you know how to cut thereon, then do so.
And keep clear of the vein and nerve, then extract it, then bandage the wound, if necessary. And treat until it is healed.
The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; here is the shape:
so's; heal Jue, and l’t les s.
de la. Of veins which are bled, there are .xxxii., of which it has or head sixteen.
This is to know: two scissors that are behind the ears, called "herbé." and the two arteries which appear in two temples. the is not mtes: ougt that you have d are, and so they n's (as line de the li est et c; f. When the vein is within the forehead; and the vein by the nose. and the two vessels that are above the ear. and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, which are called "jugular veins"; it iste en est lont ce ne de:
The veins of which we commonly puncture are five in each arm:
one is the superficial (cephalic), and it lies on the left side of the ribcage, and they call it "the vein of the head." and the middle one is called "fast," and it is composed of the superficial (cephalic) and the basilic, in the moste t. And they call it "the wind's entrails," located below the phallus. And it is that which one feels, clearly upon the scrotum.
Dislocation les eau se li cure and recoeur de joints alligle gueinant the dislocée to the esgis sachent pains which it beings sont les moldie and soies are nus le joe tient, l’mouches:
And in the leg where there are three veins: one is below the hollow of the left side rib cage, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side, and the vein called "nassa," that is in the ankle on the other side.
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
de cont far : And the quality of the sinew you mentioned is such that you must raise the head of the patient.
And the quality of the sinew you mentioned is such that you must raise the head of the patient. and rub with a coarse cloth where the veins are; then tighten the collar on the neck with a string. until you can see two veins behind the ears, hanging down from the head: de la.
Then take the scalpel, and insert it from below the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand all along the vein above. and cut and remove the skin and vein thoroughly. Make two crosswise incisions, and let the blood flow until you see it stop.
then tighten and bind it so that it is cleaned.
the same thing de la prchain ne com: is.
The condition of the two arteries located in the two temples, if it requires ancient remedies, and salve ointment, and applied pressure and accustomed blinking techniques, and placing drops in the eyes with a small tool.
and the quality of the salve is as I have described: that don’t they c. And feel pain below your elbow, then numbness follows.
Then lift the edge of the vein up above your elbow index and insert the lancet below it. And lift the vein upward, and tie off (and do as you have done in two other veins), and make a cut according to your need for blood.
Then dislocate the limb again, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton.
And then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have learned from their bleeding and extraction, where the book begins.
The healing of the vein in the forehead is equally effective for headaches and cerebral diseases and migrautes;
by Marmettiere; Then take the instrument called "forceps," which has this form:
And insert the tip into the vein and pierce from your hand or another object, allowing blood to flow out according to the amount you see. Qui li est parfaites le sang qui sont un de sang ne saignant les tire vous tu poignez the menee ointes del a la vien, si bon amiement; puis fait: and then let your sanc veille l’est enlummet:
However, it is not necessary for the flames to be too large; and the shin across, for the bone is near, and by chance it may break the flames when they are slender.
The two veins that are in the temples aid to the eyes, and to the temple, and to the ruddiness of the skin, and to the earlobe in the oil, and to face diseases.
And the quality of their veins is such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting any ligament as before.
Then he sows, and let it lie damp for some time on both long and broad wound slightly, as there is no heat.
And if the moistness is subtle, perhaps it may burst; then make clean of blood, as much as you need, and then apply woolen cloth, and wrap it well.
The treatment of the vein does not work with coldness, and superficial swelling, and diseases on the face. ; If you in : the same: bon the oume (C
And the quality of the sinew is such that the patient strains his neck, then strains its nape to your left hand. and takes a long thin thread in the space between his two nostrils. for the veins do not open easily, and blood will now start to flow from it.
And do not go too far with it, and make a proper incision according to your need, then let it heal overnight, for it is often quickly restored.
The fluid of the two leeches helps in stretching the vein, and at the beginning of bleeding, and for many diseases, and epilepsy, and erosion, and herpes, and itch.
And the quality of the leech fluid is that the patient draws out his spleen from under both. As we have said; and it should be that the master stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat;
Then cleanse the vein thoroughly for a while, then handle the blood with care as needed.
Next, treat it again in the other vein, then heal the ligament, and gently constrict the veins moderately. And do not constrain the patient; let him rest until morning when the wound is healed.
 The health of veins in the lips above helps with boils inside the mouth, and decay of gums, cracks in the lips, and bleeding and swelling.
And the quality of health is that you should make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have described. Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left. t se t; J Rx est la car l’s to so that. The c ovla dur: Therefore do both [sides], and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt.
Therefore do both [sides], and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt. If you grasp the larger of each side, and do so with both veins, one above and one below, because it is all the same manner.
From the vessel beneath the tongue the (et les.
And the quality of the sawn bone is such that the patient slices between his hands under the sunlight and lifts his tongue, and looks down on each side for a black vein.
Then cleanse both thoroughly, but do not go too far inward, as the arteries are located below.
The veins of the arm that one commonly cleans in two common ways:
l'fait is. And they are wide and subtle according to the width and stretching of the veins. The shape of this flail mistle is much renowned, and wide as you see.
And it needs to open plain veins filled with thick and visible blood, which contain copious and turbid blood. the f;
Et c'est plus subtilement pointu, et pour soulager les veines subtiles, où le sang est subtilement citrin.
The drainage of the sacral vein, which is one of these vessels, helps with diseases located below the throat, and neck, and groin, and abdomen.
And it is necessary that he sanitize carefully, and wash the artery below it lies. And if you cut an artery, and bleeding occurs, then it must be stopped, as I have said. And the flame should not be pinched but trimmed, just as one would with a hare.
And if the eyelids do not open clearly, it is necessary that you remove them and change another pair. And so m. Et placeau sur le flanc silencieux, comme nous l'avons déjà mentionné.
And if you recognize the location of the sinew, then as well remove the arm and touch the place until you feel the muscles. Then mark the spot of inflammation, and then bind the arm, and cut into the vein silently.
the way that o (t.
And if you see it protruding upwards as a child's urine does, and the wound is red and subtle, know that it is from an artery. Hurry now, and rest your thumb for a long time, then remove the bandage where the wound is unfastened, as it often happens.
Bind up the arm, and leave thusly, and do not let the ill person move it; be afraid of pain, and do not move until healed.
* (contract as la  and they are not so far the res that. Theires c s[o;d. Jnezet this by their t – i. If you cannot. This is in the firste;
And take a slice of quince, and grind it, then take one half and lay upon it until the next day.
If the wound is closed, that's good; if not, then heal it as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
And the closings are not for all wounds in various conditions near the small area of the injury and the strength of the arm joints.
The vein of the vessel is pierced deeply enough so it draws blood from above, and below the body. for it consists of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have stated;
and it is necessary for the surgeon that he soak it to find the nerve beneath, and if it protrudes too far, and he encounters the nerve. try they don’t ement.
This nerve is opened many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, you should sharpen the instrument again; avoid injuring the nerve as much as possible.
If there is a vein between the two nerves and it feels long.
The essence of the head helps, as it draws blood from the forehead, and benefits the eyes.
And it is fitting to heal by gripping the base of an olive or myrtle pile, for they are the safest of all ligatures, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath them.
Nevertheless, it is proper to seek the most gentle place, and do not strain anything if only for the first time, and then start over. And sometimes this swells in some men, as one must go about it at the first time, but do not strain anything. The quality of the wound is as you think.
The first thing you must know about wound care is that a wound is treated only to maintain health.
Here's the information: 3 or more for wounds, and they be sure it heals well, here are not infection is important. Et it shall be the sinew made in one of the three veins that are therein: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilica. And it should be strengthened at the beginning of spring and autumn, and in winter after eating when signs of satiation appear.
And it shall be fortified on the first day or third, after two hours or three days later.
s in the woun ten t:
And it is not necessary to suckle children until fourteen years old, nor a woman bearing only for the last quarter month up to the seventh. And should not be suckled the elderly who are over sixty years old.
And when anyone wishes to nurse in any way, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema. If there is excessive heat retained, so that veins do not draw out the surplus from the intestines and cause harm to the main members.
Nor should those who are excessively fond of meats or intoxicated remain so powerfully affected, nor dropsical.
and be cleansed from these conditions after experiencing colic pain, vomiting, abdominal distention, frequent intercourse with women or men, nights spent awake and joining, and all virtues, whether by things of the weapon or body.
s'll essa: t the ou Zt; (1.
Then apply a bath if there is no obstruction, to facilitate the blood flow.
and cleanse the vein near the third joint as we have said;
and protect him from work, pain, dislocation, and similar things on that day;
it a h s in the 1, so:
Then stretch the ligament gently, for when it is too tight or loose, one cannot correct it without care.
and then rub it at length with hands, until the veins swell, and feel them there;
then moisten the patient's wound with a little old oil, and place your thumb of your left hand slightly above the vein under the length where you want to suture; firstly ece le Tumbet in t. For there are veins that flee as cords from a butcher's hook, and some of which are flat with swelling. when they are pressed upon the flame, if drawn back to the flame, and cannot open the veins, thus it is with these.
and if he works on the veins, then the wound may be too narrow, so it is necessary that the surgeons be knowledgeable in these matters.
line.
When the flesh is swollen, and the patient's hope fades, let them rest for a day or two, without binding the arm. Perhaps it will bring abscesses; do not bathe, then resume cleansing if he desires to continue.
And if the holes are small, or the pus is subtly flowing and you doubt that it does not bleed as much as you see, then puncture the same hole directly through to the entire membrane.
tres t c (CZ-  but by far lesse prive. If thiement.
If you see the joint swollen, do not attempt to resume movement, and apply a bit of oil on it, for it eases pain in that area and softens the tissue at this spot with the oil.
And thus administer the oil on each vein you treat to help stop the blood flow.
And likewise make trusses and splints when it is placed on the joint; they are subtle but separate if too thick.
And if it comes to large abscesses that happen often, especially when they are not fully healed at the time of vein opening and the incision is small. If you do so hastily, place a damp sponge with water and salt warmly upon it, and apply the strain for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood evacuation from the vein, and if there remains at the site for several days any blackness or greenish coloring, it causes him no harm. .
And often there is an abscess and appearance of the sickness in the basin-like area: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the lump tender under pressure from your hand, then that appearance is bad. Avoid then putting anything on what we have said, for it may happen without an artery being cut; but give it a dry plaster to harden the lump, and then apply another salve until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see a large amount, allow it to decrease until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And one who is flat and without flesh, and in need of blood extraction, should be given larger wounds with wide openings.
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite and they should be bandaged little but often, and it should be done by cutting across rather than pressing.
And this method of healing prevents blood deterioration and nerve impingement, and it allows movement as in the long or wide ones.
And for those whose body needs the joint to be moved, give them moldy bread in pomegranate juice; if they are exhausted, move it three or four times by touching the blood.
And if they have cold complexion, nourish them before the joint with moldy bread in syrup or sweet honeyed syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
If it is painful at the joint, after much blood loss, it is necessary to give him a pounded mixture of charcoal and sweet-smelling syrup.
And utilize other things as we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting, for blood vessel evacuation.
And if he wants to drain his arms, and use leeches at other times as needed, when they are greatly swollen by moisture, let him bleed a little bit and a little bit continuously depending on the quantity of his vitality.
t c; they have sfite and:
And if one wishes to treat another part, it must be treated on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body that has been heated, and it causes fever; thus one must drain a great quantity of it, and dilate the passage until it flows freely. then you must address all conditions of illness, and place your hand over the pulse as it beats, so that death does not come while it flows. theyus in its: a...
And it is not necessary when you see the arm dislocated, to make blood flow a second time, and since the vessels are closed, press firmly on them. But if it is bent, extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad.
but let it rest until the blood flows again; or do not touch at the tip of the flame, until the veins whose vessels are frozen and closed have opened. (1. If you:so t.
If the vein is swollen, let it remain unbound until the abscess is soothed.
And if a second bleeding of blood is necessary, let it be bled in the same place or another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein under the arm is bled where the head of the vein lies because it is composed in that manner.
they do:m : sud soceze se lesne t the d  as f. If you, and le Tad, neither its not so far...
Then bind it firmly so that the vein appears well, then suture while across, not too wide or too long.
And be the punctures wide, and suture close to the joint of the hand so that nothing can come out, then immerse the hand in warm water, allowing blood to flow into the water until you have enough.
And if it is swoln, do not reimmerse the hand in warm water again as you would in summer rather than winter.
ki ben: The bole lk; (Cunt HCPard ; t. If the phlias.
The heating of the salve for the palm of the right hand is effective against all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done:
Straighten the hand, and pour on boiling water until the veins are visible if you can see them; And if the healing is crooked, and if it covers the entire area uniformly, do not cause any harm while doing so.
T. If you tell;
Then put the hand in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound, which cannot be removed.
And when you have addressed the bleeding as much as necessary, apply oil and wax to the vein and quickly join them together, doing this with each thread.
The remedy for the illness in the left hand is as follows, do exactly as I have told you with the right hand.
it'i’has e-m: M. lide by their: As with diseases of the bones, retention of urine, and illnesses of the joints, and old hips and legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of his health is such that the patient should pour hot water on their pain and rub it on the veins until they soften. and apply it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, with many swellings over the bone.
s;e; 6t' s et so that i est paslons.
And if you dislocate the joint above the foot, watch for nerves that are below it and cut through as in skinning; and let the bone fragments be joined similarly.
And if the sinew cannot exit, reset the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if the tendons need to be severed the first time, restart a little above on the second attempt, because the flesh is salted. ; 1 and so (that: m tner leursle n's d.
The head of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle near strong, and its irritation causes pain in the thigh when it's due to blood heat.
And the quality of its irritation is such that the patient goes into a swoon and extends over the ankle four fingers by twisting.
because otherwise it does not open up; and if it opens, the vein is injured in all ways you can see, including across. * oug
* oug And if you do not manage it, take any cloth that covers or wraps around the arm and neck, and turn towards the small finger, and protect against bites.
And do as much to stop the bleeding as you see fit, then release the ligament, and place cotton and bind it tightly; now it is healed.
Dislocations of the shoulder joints
Ventouses are made from horns, or ivory, or glass; and bloodletting is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this method of bleeding that does not involve striking is done in two ways: either at high heat or with heat.
and two others in the two ribs of the neck; and the vein from under the chin. And the windpipe under the two shoulders; and the windpipe under the knees; And the pustules between the two arms; and the vesicles of the two legs; And of the two ankles' blisters; and the bleeding from incision does not involve much blood, only small spots scattered in the wound.
and for this reason do not make any effort to move anything, as one does with wound drainage; the esttie:
When by necessity of illness it is needed to massage, or for habits, we begin each hour at the start or end of the month, and in between and every time.
For there are those who, when they need massaging, have heavy heads.
and if there are those who experience swelling and redness in their face, and on their head, and around the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
with: If there are those who contemplate it, they see without blood or pain and death and similar things.
And when we observe these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order to bleed after 3 and a half hours past noon.
The treatment of the muscle strengthens the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it must not be done before the evacuation of all the body.
qui lesse ben;t that t they rir; buts the cur:chin the date with noce l'is it...
And it is not proper for those of cold complexion or with scrofula to use this, as it causes them great harm.
And it does not suit for those with old age or cold ailments to use them.
the unt les deux they are;
Ventilation within the neck is located at the level of the windpipe and base of the skull; therefore it requires extension of the body. and to incision of the channel in the throat, and everywhere, and filling.
and it must be done gently, for if held too firmly, it may cause obstruction or harm to the stomach or heart.
; please and they ou:
And it is in the place of the sickness of the basilica; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand in placing it, ensuring he does not cut the artery or cause bleeding.
The incisions from below the chin indicate diseases of the mouth, and decay of gums, as well as similar ailments that are found inside the mouth; they occur near the sores on both lips.
Incisions in the shoulders indicate diseases that arise from heat and fullness.
The inflammation of joints is as much like three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the surgeon not to cut too deep because the bone is tender here, and it has veins and arteries beneath.
and m ct is not n’s.
If the veins of the legs are bled openly, for they draw blood from all over the body, and are as effective as ancient remedies for rains, stones in the bladder, and kidney pain; and reset the flours (sweating); and are at the two knees, and on both ankles, and always weaken the body after long use, bringing about numbness in various conditions.
The way to apply the cupping is that you place it first when empty and quickly draw out blood, doing so hastily, moving evenly, and not stopping until you see the spot reddened and swollen with a hint of darker blood; then firm up, replace the cups, and observe the condition of the body for those who have tanorexia (itching) or clear pores. If necessary to puncture only once, make broad and somewhat deep incisions, and suck gently.
And if the wound is large, you must puncture twice: the first time to fine-tune the path of the blood flow.
When blood is copiously flowing, it must be stopped the third time; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we do so only once.
And if we wish to draw out much blood, we begin frequently; and if the flow of blood is profuse, strike firmly from front to back, so that the veins are pierced cleanly.
and it is for those with large and hard flesh, and who have thick skin due to age, that you should apply the suction cups of oil which are invigorating and dissolving. If it is as such, with ointment of violet oil or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
and if it is in a poultice, with chervil oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar substance.
And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balm-oil, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
the s.
After the ventilation with rose water or cold water, lemon water, pumpkin water, porcelain water, or any similar type.
And those with excessive moisture should rise easily, using myrtle water or sumac and other similar substances.
Those with large excesses should rise using old wine, water of mugwort or chamomile, or other similar substances.
And it is not proper to engage in sexual intercourse before or after the bath, but one hour or two; and do not sleep after performing catheterization.
And it is customary for him to bathe when he needs to be catheterized and when he has been catheterized. And beware of those who are cold with fever, and whose blood is too thick and inflamed; the.
And mix well, and of meat, and moist meats.
And those with a cold disposition should prepare syrup of honey, and moderate-aged wine, mixing in small amounts of spices, meats, young birds, and pigeons.
And on the day he exercises himself, should drink more than eat.
the s to ce que ne bonnez ;s m on: And let it be suffused with something, but one must not drink if they are hot.
The cupping that is applied without causing pain are those placed over the liver, and joints like knees or heels, and gout, and stomach and swelling and hemorrhoids, because these parts do not tolerate being pricked anywhere.
and this is done only to draw blood from one limb to another, line.
And remove the pain when there is blockage or stone, and draw out by its attractive virtue by chance the blockage, or return the stone to its place.
And so do it when placed upon the liver and in the belly where there is retained gas.
And these blisters are made hollow to be squeezed as often needed; and they are never filled with both fire and plain water.
(Ceste: the line sesla;
The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
And it should have two handles each half the width of a palm and around its edge one small hole as for inserting a needle.
and be made of ivory so that it does not blunt the patient's nail when placed on the limb;
The pain, and çmort
And they are large and small according to the diseases and condition of those who take them.
Because children's cups are other than old ones, and slim as opposed to fat.
And this method must be applied with the poultice to the limb:
Take the wax candle or ointment and place it within the poultice under the bandage where the shaft lies beneath the poultice, so that the whiteness is at the bottom of the poultice and does not burn the patient;
the le sonte f ça les bon lesse ponder in m; it so you. T’semble.
And apply the bandage as before, and repeat if necessary, depending on your need.
In the blistering that is treated for pleurisy, immediately, it has no penis nor testicle, and is only dressed when full of fluid, and placed over the limb.
and this is its form:
au. Et se pli kfy ne pas the t't: bon cert the Clevise les; The chest by nnz And in its removal of hair like a dog or cat, and similar things.
and the quality required is that when you find nodules that are soft with gentle smoothness feel like pus, take them.
and put it in a soft mild-tempered water, until they become familiar, and have nothing else inside; the be so that d; can.
And when they are full and have feathers, if it is in place where you can put a poultice, do so, for this works well.
If not, raise the dislocated limb and then bathe it, very thoroughly, and then apply pressure.
And if it affects too much the body'score of the limbs, make it sweat with a piece of flax cloth in cold water, and apply until the swelling subsides.
If the blood is excessive, put on powdered antimony or galls and similar substances until it is stopped.
Place half of the shelled beans in the heat and let them dry until they are ready.
If it is readieds, quil les eus lis leu cest que ongne lait;
If the vessels do not want to be taken, rub the fresh blood spot or insert a needle until they burst. and then place them back, and as soon as they feel their blood, let them cool down.
and when you see that they bleed, dust some with a little aloe and saltpeter or ash, so they will dry now.
the d.
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and involve the repair and replenishment of breaks and moisture loss.
Understand, dear student, that the wise physician is versed in this treatise, which has never been seen nor read by any ancient books or letters.
and for this reason the knowledge is foreign to our land, as I have never found a good one.
by  t d c that f.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of ailments that are treated, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
Therefore, we must say that the preface of this book contains the essence of its words and chapters where the wise apply their understanding, dwelling on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when you encounter a breakage or dislocation or torsion or wryness in anyone, it is necessary to support the patient on one side and another if nothing completely supports them, as with weak limbs, children, or old people.
If the tension is not too great or too cold; and mix with warm juices, that is to say, cold broths, bird and rabbit stock, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much with foods that cause sanguine veins to be filled, until you are free of fear of hot abscesses or material expansion in the limbs; then return the patient to their first regimen as they have used it.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy nourishment, or viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and beef, lamb, pork, veal, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. For certain heavy nourishment represents moisture and more rapid healing of the fracture.
And know that broken bones from old age and decay cannot be well repaired or joined according to their natural healing of limbs, nor those too tender like the bones of small children.
But give care, reset on the broken bone, large tendons that are strong and join the limb together until they strengthen as before; do not perform all of this work at once, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with rich meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures occur in various ways.
When the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that resemble an arc and others by sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that resemble an arc and others by sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing. And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture along a small crack.
culzat. The following the ga : are trement; If you s t.
And it is known as the break of bone because the joints are twisted and opened widely from behind, and they press against the palm.
And when there is no twisting or pressure on it from below, and the patient does not feel much pain unless there is indeed a fracture.
But it may very well have twisting, or tearing, or small fractures. If it is not necessary to move your hand at all, but apply the following remedies immediately and then gently strain now subtly.
And understand that the fracture which is in flight and the two parts are disconnected, they must now be set equal to each other as soon as abscesses arise.
and if pus arises therein, leave it no day until the abscess is calmed; n'z ar st set the Covme s and they byte (or.
If the bone is in pieces and they are divided into two parts, if it's hands or feet, or to your hand if it's small limbs, or between two cords, or one cord and your hand.
And place the limb according to its natural form, if the broken parts of the limb are scattered, reset it by all means and adjust them in their places as you can move them, and ensure that with your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
And join well the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
And he feels it well in the hand if you think that it is not quite right: dress it neatly, and do not extract it too forcefully or press as those who make abscesses come forth with heat and constriction of the limb, as we have witnessed many times.
And when the limb is at risk, gently restrain the patient so that he does not move, neither in wakefulness nor sleeping, turning, or any other manner. and ensure that the limb is securely held to feel no pain. When it feels no pain at all, or just slightly, then one must put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
When it feels no pain at all, or just slightly, then one must put it in such a position that it feels no pain. and ensure it is placed correctly, so that twistedness does not occur when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I have told you.
; that he est la:  (e patience de se mar :
For there are small members such as arms and legs and similar limbs; thus one should use soft and fine linen wraps.
and those that are large, like thighs and legs: it is best to use a wide and sturdy bandage, for the broad bands encompass the entire limb, holding all parts evenly without any slack.
then one should use light gauzes three or four turns according to the limb's size. Tie a little more at the entire bandage and go above the fracture, tying it looser than the fracture itself, and gradually move away from the fracture site.
And moisten the ligaments a little and a little more until you grasp a large part of the joints, then take another sinew and turn it back to its proper place on the broken joint.
Then return to the part above the fracture and bind it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first section above.
Then place between the ligaments swatches of linen or cloth so that they are all equal, then bind it together with a bandage on top, and then put in well-made splints underneath, if there is no abscess or inflammamo.
If there is swelling or an abscess, apply soothing balm to the abscess and reduce the swelling, leaving it as such for several days.
Then straighten the splints and let them be of a moderate width as one cuts wood or makes strips from hardwood, shaped to fit.
But it is necessary that the splint placed on the break be a bit thicker and wider than the others.
And so long as necessary for the member to heal, whether minor or major.
Then you must also bind the shards in the same manner as with the first resetting, then tie above an awl promptly, just as with the initial binding on the break.
; that theye bentrement.
If the threads are too thick, as I have observed from the works of madmen who twist their levers made of flax thread, it is a great error because if the lever is too fine, it cannot be equal between each tooth, and it should not have less than two spaces in between.
And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the pins after being tightened to healthy places, then place cotton or linen rags on them so they do not slip out.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the bone is broken, I will tell you the treatment as follows:
And know that it is not necessary to extract all shattered bones on the first day. For when limbs are large, it is not necessary to insert splints unless after 5 or 6 days, or more depending on the risk of a heat-induced abscess.
And here is the manner of ancient splints to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that adheres to the walls of a mill; mix it with plenty of egg, creating this concoction which should not be too clear or too thick, using it as a common means for restorative splints in various conditions, particularly among women and small children, since it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of poultice for treating fractures and dislocations and twists: take aloe vera and ladana and onion and aspetide and gum arabic and myrrh, an amount of each equal to half a pound; aloes and mirre, five ounces each; alkalis VII pounds; then make powder, and add honey with olive oil. If the patient's complexion is warm, use this poultice as it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Another poultice method for treating twists: take myrrh and aloe vera, half a pound each; also mirre and aloes, seven ouncuils each; alkalis III pounds; bolic armenic X pounds, grind well, mix with water or olive oil, and apply.
Another poultice for joints and bones that have lost their position, and alleviates the pain when it comes; also reduces swelling in the bone: take new wool, raw gristle and fat oil, and apply at the site. This poultice does not restore, but is good to soothe a hot boil, and properly relieve pain.
Another method of splinting to mend broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together to make a plaster.
Another method of splinting for mending bone fractures and healing the remaining abscess. Take the root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour in equal parts; grind it up, mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, use the mixture with moist coriander water or plain water to apply.
Another method of splinting more effective than the first for when hardened abscesses need to be restored in the limb. Take valerian roots and flaxseeds, bladderwort, mallow seeds, and marigold leaves; also violet and chamomile flowers in equal parts; grind them up and mix with saltwater or fresh water (or wine), according to the temperature of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras states in his book that nothing else should be applied to the broken limb for healing other than a mixture made of wax and oil, and it should not be too hard or too soft within two layers.
And Galen seems to suggest that dry and slightly warm substances should be applied to the broken limb for healing, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Another method of plaster for injuries and pain: take mugwort and chamomile chopped by men, or bird feathers, and yarrow leaves, and simmer them equally, then grind them up, and make a poultice with the mixture.
And then lightly relocate it afterward, and be sure the patient feels no pain nor has moved any bone from its place; if not dislocated by mere chance.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling of rest or swelling occurs, do so quickly, dislocate and immobilize the splint now; take a light bandage, and use moist sea sponge, and plunge in cold water, and lift up the limb until the itching ceases, and pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry bandage or cloth wet in cold water or rose oil, and bind it under a poultice until you are sure of heat from an abscess.
Et repose la inflammation du membre, et soit ostee le douleur, puis recommence la réduction subtile, et un peu d'emplâtre, et ne l'étreinte pas si fort comme avant; et subtilise tant qu’il soit sainez.
And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are throughout the bone, and you need plaster and ligation, then begin again as before.
And if nothing comes to the limb that we have said, do not loosen it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it loose for 20 days, according as you see, as long as the fracture heals, and approach the bandage with care.
Then you must restrain it more than first and swell its flesh as I have said before; and if the joint dries out excessively beyond what is necessary, know that no healing can occur. Then you must immerse it in hot water frequently when you dislocate it, and do this each day, along with loosening the ligament slightly.
Thus, you should extract the splinter from the member and hastily correct what a bad doctor does by restoring the member properly: it is harmful; in my view, there are only two other outcomes - either becoming worse or being treated correctly.
Of various ways of fractures Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes, and their causes are distinct;
bone. Le bleus theye, and are: ougte à son les telle of the peret ist, that you can be meth la os:
When the sword cleaves the bone above and pierces, this manner of "absolute" fracture occurs; there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
And if it is impacted, cracked, or from striking against stone, falling on stones, or similar occurrences.
And if there is an open fracture reaching the skin just below or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
t s.  (et;
If the wound is made by being hit with a stone or falling, or similar things, and allows an osseous fragment to enter within, causing the head to be pressed as hot irons are when placed on them, if an iron enters among them.
And this happens more often with those who have young and moist bones, like the skull of a child;
And it occurs in all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are dislodged as such, and I will speak about them specifically.
All know the methods of fractures through pulling apart, and examination with tests, and by the corrupt bone that lies beneath.
The appearance of hair is known when the bone is discovered, and if it is rubbed hard underneath, an open black break occurs.
In the treatment of a break, beware in case of an accident with the patient; and if you see any malicious accidents such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever ague, eyes protruding outwards and reddening, and other similar conditions, do not heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an unstable injury with hope for healing, begin the treatment.
And when the inflammation comes first to you, and it is winter, then on the fourteenth day you should remove the bone that you can reach.
And if it is summer, then hasten to remove the bn before the seventh day so that the tissue around the bone becomes corrupted, and they come to the accidents we have mentioned.
;
When the bleeding progresses and exposes bone or an abscess, use what is necessary for treatment, and fill the area with wrung cloth soaked in oil. And let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed, and be assured of healing bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, as there are two ways of treatment: one way where you make an incision at a narrow opening in front, and this is the method.
And then make another larger incision than the first.
The second way is that you have various wedges of different shapes and sizes, some narrow and others wide, with points and made of forged iron; in gentle work, do not strike the head.
If the bone is dense and hard, it is necessary that you drill around it so as to provide wedges with tapered ends, not penetrating beyond the top of the bone, with a margin or circle at the tip to prevent piercing through the bone; there should be several, positioning each according to the thickness of the bone, and you must have tapers for all tests (types); these are the three ways of shaping the tapers:
The quality of drilling through the fractured bone is that you place one taper on the bone and turn it until you know the bone has been drilled; then move the taper a bit further, repeating this around completely, then use the incisors to cut the space between the piercings as subtly as possible, gently, following our instructions, until you reach the bone with your hand or any of the tools you have similar to tongs, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone and drawn it out, then one must reset the preparedness which is held by the bone from any instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be more sharply pointed and finer than other chisels.
And if nothing remains of small bones or scales, then carefully treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of treatment is that which the Greeks refer to, which is more powerful; and this it should be done strongly, as they say. It is necessary first that you open part of the bone where the fracture opens up, and when you have discovered that part, place atop its head a lens-shaped incision tool so that it takes this form:
And do not cut too deeply, and the part is in two sides, with the cutting towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet above, so that you lightly crack the entire bone while carefully guarding against the cloth beneath.
if it is loosened to the bebone, then crack the bone lightly, for we must not harm the bone greatly and feel fear.
If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate all the way through to the skin, and the bone is cut mostly above it, leaving small pieces, then you must treat the inflammation, and have various subtle rasps from which you should extract scales in each place as deemed most appropriate according to the work and shape of the fracture.
If there are many coarse rasps followed by more subtle ones, continue doing so until it is well done.
In each of the other hair and subtle fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its direction; and this is something that cannot be restored in one who has devoted their study to this art.
And if the sinew is uncovered, it must be that you sew a piece of linen cloth according to the amount of the wound, and grease with oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another piece of linen cloth doubled in two or three layers, and grease with wine and oiled oil, and place it over the first layer; and do this as gently as you can, so that you do not burden the sinew, then treat above it with a ligature, but do not tighten until it only touches the wound.
And leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is calmed, then remove it, and apply remedies such as lily roots, barley flour, incense powder, rhubarb, and similar things; and make a powder from these substances, and place it on the wound, and thereafter administer medicines without bitterness.
Ensure the wound is clean and do not allow pus to remain or gather swelling, for when swelling assembles over the cloth of the brain, it hardens and narrows, causing great harm; because when something biting is placed on them, they become inflamed above.
Therefore, be cautious because if anything unfortunate occurs to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if the pain is not due to the medicine applied, that it has effect, then one should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil mixed with linen cloth, and apply it above the wound; Then the treatment of appropriate methods of healing until it is sound again.
Say that never are the two parts above broken or separated by themselves, for they are bones; and one of them is cartilaginous, which does not break but swells or twists, then becomes sound again.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary to tie your little finger or thumb on top, and make equal the fracture within your index finger, and at the base towards the inside, until the nail grows back in its natural shape. se: t cpper sa;
If the fracture is in the part above the nose and it cannot be brought to its place, you should adjust it equal with a bit of a rod.
If the fracture is in two parts, do likewise and restore it on the first day if you can.
If the faux cest the dislocation of bles: a et les briseau le ou li sorses and is tost desceps que la mots, si tu esle choses qui les artres l'est lee de maintes eie dux à est lou est en lou chiés. Lespeces au lor mesle tret et fles disciant curez the ou a li se pluse ce que nes:
When you bind another part as well, if there is a fracture present; and let the tendons be thickened enough that they fill the pores with no sound.
And the restorer said that one should crush the tendons until they are broken, and change each day. I do not believe it to be good, but it is necessary for them to be ground in a mixture of wool's milk and flour powder; then leave the tendon, as long as the bone is set, and the cartilage hardened.
And never apply goose's quills in place of tendons, and if there is a feather from the sheep around it, and keep the fracture, and blow on it to weaken the patient; do as you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, then place a compress or cotton cloth in rose oil, or with a little bit of diachronic (ointment).
And if an abscess does not come to the neck, then apply plaster with wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place light gauze over it without binding the neck.
And if the break in the neck is small and it has been broken into tiny pieces, then extract as much bone dust as appropriate for this case, then close the fracture, and treat with things like charcoal powder and wax, and bandages and ointments suitable for this.
If it does not have denseness in the veins or any wound, treat with stitches and apply bandages of cloth until healed.
For fractures of the jawbone
When the jawbone is fractured but there is no open wound and the break is not too severe, as if it has been broken with a stick, you can see it lightly.
in the bl: ga (1; so f s.
And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated in two places, it is necessary to arrange for an expansion by two parts so that they are equal.
And if there are movements of the spine or twisting, then strain with a thread made of gold or silver or silk; place a cerate on the fractured jaw, and cover it with a double piece of cloth; also put a large well-made peg under the cloth, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the mandible, and bind above where you can move. Instruct the patient to rest, and give him light meats for nourishment.
And if you see that the shape changes, relocate it after three days and then fix what has shiftwed; place a poultice on top, with much powdered meal or barley flour after you have removed the cerate; cover the poultice with light linen. If the poultice hurts, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is well again; many times it becomes well in three weeks.
And when an abscess comes, arrange it as we have said many times before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure that no piece of bone remains loose; delicately stabilize the fragments as best you can in this manner.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fat according to necessity.
their;
The strength of arms The strength of arms breaks in various ways before the shoulder, and such fractures can occur in three manners: where it is broken and dislocated on both sides, with fragments present, and is easier to restore; or there is a break accompanied by a wound.
And the procedures are when there is a fracture with an accompanying wound, so that you have two attendants; one should wash the shoulder where the strength of arms is broken; and the other stretches out your neck towards the injured part. Then place the fracture against your ribs such that its shape is as it ought to be, with no appearance or protrusion left over.
s
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder back due to it coming from the front, it is necessary for the patient to lie over their sling, and place under the shoulder .i. arm splint with a middle hole, and push in the ministers' hands downward until the shoulder bone is elevated.
And then bring the break to your hands, and if you find fragments, it is necessary that you cut through them; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join by any support, place this instrument under one of the incisions you have made, but be careful not to harm the patient.
And shape it like a spoon, and do not make it pointed, and let its width be appropriate for the size of the bone and strength of the hand; and have two handles, if you see fit, with one wide and the other narrow, according to the direction of the wound when you set the bones.
And when you are sure of an abscess being hot, if the wound is small, or if you doubt a large abscess, dress the wound with cloths and bandages according to its quantity.
And if an abscess comes about, apply oil-soaked cloths, lint, and wine, and place it on top.
The tightening of bones when they are sensitive to wounds and growth is that you place on the bone plaster powdered wheat flour and egg yolk, and light bandages over it, and put a stick underneath the splint if necessary. Then take a very wide band of palm width, then place a doubled cloth over stitches and the splint; then take a slender stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band, ensuring that the head of the band hangs. Then place the stick over the fracture, turn the band around the neck, and below the healthy shoulder and the injured one; and the resetting of each part, and when you see that the break is held steadily, and it is clearly visible that the stick does not move above the broken bone, praise it every day, and if the ties loosen, then hold again.
And lay the injured person on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise the shoulder upwards; it will ease the fracture by aligning the shoulder, when you tie the arm at the collarbone, and not have any bad incidents come about accidentally until 20 days.
Then begin the plastering again if it is needed, and hold and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is usually restored in twenty-eight days, or less for some people.
Regarding a broken shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or widens too much, and it should not be moved except by touching; then fit it according to the pattern of the breakage, and bandage it as naturally as possible in all ways you can; then put on the wound powdered meal with plenty of egg whites, and light gauzes; then place a wide and delicate bandage over it, slightly wider than the shoulder, without leaving any parts uncovered by the gauze so that the linen threads are cut equally; and then tightly tie a large bandage on top firmly, so that the bandage does not move from its spot, and check each day for swelling; and every time it swells, re-tighten the bandage and ensure the bandage is still slightly wider than the shoulder, and rest the patient'angs. The shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days, And when these numbers are completed, release it and rest assured because this is not a bone that can be put back on lightly.
And if a piece of bone is felt before and not near the skin, probe further, and expose the bone, and do as we have said in the treatment for an abscessed boil.
In the breaking of the thighbone
The thighbone is never broken in one place, but this happens rarely; it often breaks as the end approaches. And when it is broken within, it displaces downward, and the patient feels great pain, weakness, numbness, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens cracks in the broken bone, which feels quite bad.
The restoration involves the patient lying on their back, placing a cushion between the shoulder blades, pressing the shoulders, and aligning the ribs with both hands, adjusting gently to all possible positions until correct alignment is achieved; then apply splints and pads over the fracture area using fine salt or another light substance wrapped in a cloth, securing it so that it does not move. Return the ligament to its rounded shape on the back, strain gently, and release every hour as needed, re-straining if it becomes relaxed; and if detachment is necessary due to corrosion or irritation at the site, swelling, pain, or pus, do so promptly, remove the splint, cleanse the area, then carefully realign using various treatment methods; afterward, reapply the splint and strain until it is healed.
The breaking of ribs
The breaking of the ribs follows from thereafter and beheaded are the head to examine well and it is not this done in order:
And the resets are such that you make the break evenly, as necessary. Then place the splint, and strain with a stake if needed.
And if the broken ribs are descending into the abdomen, causing the patient great pain and pointure, as from pleurisy, because the bone lacks flesh; and it is covered with swellings, and vomits a large amount of blood, indicating serious health issues, which our predecessors have treated with great care.
And if those who say it should be administerired meats that inflate the belly to push the fracture upwards.
We do not attempt this if there are no pus-filled abscesses present, unless they have already come about. And if it is present, proceed with the procedure.
And some say that they apply cups on the site to promote healing and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the cups may attract excesses to the site due to its weakened state.
;  the em (chief by:
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the bone which pierces the vein, causing doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to fracture at its original location of the broken rib, and it is necessary to insert a device to protect the artery; then one must cut open the bone, gently drain, and then sew the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with embalmment until healthy. And if an abscess occurs, apply soaked cloths in oil roseate on it; cover it at its original location; care for the area where appropriate treatment is needed for the abscess, and let them lie insensible upon the ribcage or wherever they should, until healthy.
Of the broken rib's bruising
No breakage of the bone occurs in the ribcage and it does not happen that it sags; and likewise in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take care if you see their hands softened, swollen, and lifeless, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick with a needle, it does not feel. Know that in some cases it is fatal, and if it moves and feels well when they are strained but not to the point of pain, know that the joint's bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if treated properly.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take care if their legs are softened, and there are injuries present in several places, and on top of their back they jump with stiffness and egestion without willingness; and when it has been soothed over its belly, it jumps with egestion without will. And when it is soothebefore the spine and wants to fall, it cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not hesitate in providing care.
And if this injury does not occur, then it is a lighter matter.
And the treatment is to apply soothing oil or olive oil from young olives if there is an inflamed abscess, then place it on one of the comforting and drying plasters, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is well again. And if any bone is dislocated, cover the area with a cloth; remove the bone, then stitch both edges of the wound together if it is large, then dress the wound with healing salve until well, and if the shoulder bone is broken, known as "chiés de la kowe", place your left poultice in one hand and balance it equally with your right hand at full strength, then apply a comforting plaster and elevate, if needed; then bind it, and if there are any dislocated bones, do so, remove them, and treat the wound until well.
For the fracture of the hipbone
Occasionally the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there's a slight reduction at the top; it causes long-lasting pain, declines toward the pelvis, brings pain to its place, and swells as though broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it until touching the fracture; and identify which bone is broken and its shape; if the fracture is solely at the head, then make an equal break so that it assumes a natural form.
And if the fracture is long or it inclines towards the pelvis, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that breakage is aligned properly. When you have placed it evenly, then place on the splint, then put under a wooden or metal stake and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and let down from above the ribs until it is level.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy ribcage or backside.
And if an abscess occurs there, do not touch it until the abscess is eased; and then proceed with what we have mentioned before; and after that, return to restoration, and hold (the wound) as necessary, unless there has been a mishap; this is how.
Of a shoulder joint fracture
The shoulder joint is what lies between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, then it must be restored in one of two ways; the first being that you take a straight stick of medium girth following this shape.
And then make two loops and tie them up at the top of itch, and apply to the patient; then gently break on the stick, until healing occurs as long as heals, and have a support sticks with something lightweight or appropriate for applying the stick applies to him, and then place them evenly.
And the other method is that one suspends the patient over his hatter, then ties his hands to his neck, and commands two ministers so that one dyes what is above the break in his hands, and the other dyes below with wool all around it, and stretches each part.
And if you see that the extraction is too deep, tie a wool thread below and above the break, and each minister stretches their part. And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, it is proper to place one wool thread under the armpit, and another towards the neck, below the break; similarly, if the break is towards the neck, you must gently tie a lighter thread without too much effort until the break is even on both sides, and then adjust as needed, unless an abscess forms.
And if an abscess forms, do not strain until after six days, and apply a linen cloth soaked in oil of roses to ease the abscess; then strain it again, and the method for straining is as follows: place the heated iron over the break, assemble the arm on top of the shoulder or near the breast, put your hand on the shoulder or chest, strain at the shoulder, and along the arm so that the arm returns to its natural shape unless anything prevents it.
If you suspect that the bone does not move, use splints, and place on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two spaces between each splint; so each splint is large enough to cross the fracture by three inches from either side; then strain over the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter on setting broken bones, more tightly and less spaced apart.
And if you see the condition of the splints and tightening as we have said, in the hour when you return the broken limb, and doubt that the sore is hot, let it be bound up until the seventh day as we have said; then check every three days for swelling or any signs at the site where veins cannot come due to excessive tightening, just as we have said.
And if no such events occur, then the bandage should not be loosculed until after three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, with his hands over his stomach; and place a pillow of equal wool under the shoulder, and check every hour during the day or night that there is no movement in the fractured limb or its bandages are softened. If so advised by the power of medicine, and give it meat as we have previously prescribed; and when it begins to regain weight. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be healed in forty days altogether; then loosen and administer baths and balms of ointments at the site to direct the place. And if the swelling is unsightly, delay until one month or two months.
Of a fractured arm
The arm is made of two bones called 'foscilia', one small that supports the forearm and one large that extends from below toward the little finger; sometimes only the large bone is fractured or the small one, or both together.
When the small bone is fractured, the restoration and healing are easy; but when the large bone is fractured, it requires poorer treatment and takes longer to heal than if both were fractured together. If only the small bone is broken, then minimal extension is required for alignment.
f; the mis they l's; & of that est il fait pouss but it d none.
And if in the break to pieces, place each in its place, and if any are dislocated that they grip their root, and you cannot restore them to their place, then make a cut above and remove the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the wound's breakage, I have spoken to each physician; they should take care of it.
And if at the beginning of healing, boils appear, then apply with a cloth made of rosemary oil and white wax; it should neither be too hard nor too soft. Place each piece carefully, until the boils are soothed. Then remove the bandage, and put on an ointment of fine powder mixed with plenty of egg whites; and cover the edges of the tear as well, making them thicker than the others; and know that it should have seven or more strips depending on how the tear is situated: whether in one bone or two; and pull tighter towards the tear than other places, and every day reduce slightly, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages be soft and damp, not hard or rough; and use thread made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And care for the limb and ligament after a few days. If any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes upon a limb, you must wash the limb with warm water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not be in strict rest. Then resume straining, and if the bandage is softened and the bone relieved, and similar things, proceed accordingly.
If care must be taken as the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it slightly and let some days pass until the swelling subsides, then resume straining.
And if none of these things that we have mentioned come to the patient, let them wear it until xx days or longer; then put the straps on their neck and make sure they are even, and watch for movement and displacement, and sleep on their back; know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxv., and possibly in xx days, depending on the compositions and constitutions of the substances.
Of a fracture of the hand
It happens that in the palm of the hand and in the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather a bending occurs many times.
And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary for the patient to bend over crookedly and lie directly in front of them; then put your hand under an extended table, and extend the broken bones, and align them with each other until they are properly joined; apply a plaster and use splints, if there are no abscesses, then place a cast according to the amount at the site; and wrap it in a linen cloth.
and I ne:
And if the fracture is in the lower part of the limb, it must be placed with a stake underneath and another above on the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight; then wrap it entirely around the wrist, keeping the ligament between the bones taut.
And if the fracture is in one of our forearm bones, and it's a simple break, position it equally as needed; and bind with bandages, keeping the joint straight; and if you see that placing a small upright stake lifts the fracture, keep it immobile. And if the faster is in one of the other forearm bones (such as the index or another), position it equally and secure with the healthy bone behind; or bind them all together into one bandage, ensuring proper movement, then place a stake on top; and be cautious during wound healing and abscess drainage, and treat any swelling that occurs as I have described.
For the fractured hip
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration involves placing a splint above or below the break. And the patient lies on their face, then each attendant extends their hands equally to all parts of his body; and this is when the break occurs within the bone.
And if the break is close to the thigh's root, then one line should extend towards the hand and the other below the break; similarly, if it is close to the groin, then there should be a line near the groin and an extension upward; then place the splint evenly with his two hands until they are in accordance with its natural shape, and then put on the cast, unless abscesses arise.
When there is an abscess, let it be soothed and then return to your work and care; the ligature is made in part. It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture with a durable double bandage of two or three bands, and manage any excess, then turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the knee, and wind a long thread between the thigh and leg, below the hip joint; then bring the upper end of the thread upwards. Then turn the leg and thigh with the bandage, then place an abutment on the fracture site, then place another abutment on the bone of the leg; then insert a slip between the leg and thigh using soft cloth to ensure even tension, then begin making three or four twists above the fracture; as you wrap more over the fracture, reduce the strain. Then return to both ends of the thread that was placed between the leg and thigh, then place three abutments that are above, then go back up to the top end of the thread until you reach below the knee joint; if it does not move from its place, leave it as such, then remove any swelling or pus-like discharge.
And if it happens that the joint is dislocated, and follow what comes out of this, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, then you should be able to handle them; but if they cannot be handled, it must be split open, and pus drained. Treat it as we have described until it is healed.
And at no time is the thigh broken as when it is set with nails, like in the shoulder and arm; however, in such restoration done, the patient does not feel relief.
And know that the thigh is restored within a day or so, depending on the variations of constitutions.
From the hollow of the knee
Know that in the groin area there is often little breakage but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's just a cut or a puncture, and occurs at any wound, feels like a wound, and this hurts terribeinly.
And the restoration if one puts equal what is left at its place as much as they can move; then they put in an inflorescence, and insert a round stake if needed, and strain it as required, then address all dispositions that we have mentioned elsewhere for breakages such as abscesses hot and other similar; apply to each accident what is appropriate until healed.
On the fracture of the leg
That there are two bones in the leg, one called by right 'mustelz', and the other called 'foscile'; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore its restoration is done just as that of the arm similarly, and its treatment is also.
And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg from all sides.
And if the small bones are broken, turn it forward.
If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and swelling can be seen; then reset without pressure. Then apply extension evenly, and set it straight, securing the ligaments evenly as well; however, if the break is severe and there are multiple fragments, the extension should be smaller and lighter; adjust according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of waxed wood that extend the length of the leg from groin to ankle on both sides; then wrap twice in layers, tying them together firmly, and at this tie the leg cannot bend to either right or left, thus it is well done. Anyone can administer a long bandage made of wood if necessary, placing the leg for immobilization, and properly doing so at the site of fracture with wound; daily move the leg to check for abscesses or other incidents, and treat until healed.
On the breakage of bone in the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot it comes to a fracture and the bones are slightly dislocated, with no injury occurring in some other conditions.
If there is a fracture in the bone of the foot and you see these bones protruding from one another, place it with such heavy weights on the ground as if it were to move, then now put your foot under his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and bandage over it, then securely wrap a small tablecloth around its abdomen below the foot for two finger breadths, and align the foot properly again, after which you have enveloped wraps all around, and other things as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, you may loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones to be equal again, whether fractured or dislocated.
If there are any of the fingers broken, then repair them as we have said for the hand; then put a rod along the length of the finger, and make it slightly wider at one end, then place under the foot the table I mentioned, and straighten immediately; and if there are 2 or 3 or more, break each finger and place a rod according to its quantity, wrapped in a single linen cloth, and strain the table beneath the foot; so that they be opposite the stomach of the table.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and treat each incident as it should be.
For a fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, have her sit with legs apart, then lean to the painful back and be held at the rear; then fill her bladder with cotton, and insert as large as one stalk; then let her stand up, and lift her back little by little, so that the cotton jumps into the entrance of her nature, and restores the bone with the stalk; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has relieved herself, reset it, and thus do this for seven days or more: the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a sheepskin bladder, tie on its spout a rag, and fill the whole bladader with nature; then blow into the rag until the bladder is empty inside it: her nature will return to restore the bone. Then let it be filled with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it feels right.
And when the bone of the arm or hand is broken, or in a woman, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these close fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and skill, and understand my book. For fractures indicate various ways to properly restore: thus indeed.
When the broken, and that you restore, que venter est fuit la.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for those with fractures and wounds, especially if they are large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be healed now so that the signs we have mentioned testify to them.
And if the wound is healed and there are no foreign bodies present, then again begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, unless an abscess develops.
When abscesses occur there, allow the healing until the third day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch or disturb it either on the second or fourth day, for you would bring about a harmful incident.
And if the broken bone is visible at its location, it must be carefully set with slight pressure from your hands in small extensions.
And if the extensions do not allow you to set it even with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has six or eight long claws and the width according to the size of the wound; thus the surgeon must grasp three or four (claws), as needed for each bone fracture case; and let them be round and a little thick so they do not bend when compressing the limb at your work site, and let it be blunt in front, and wide in the middle towards the end like this:
The head of the shoulder is called "palainge", thus it requires that the curved bone be placed over the visible end of the bone; and press down once, until it returns, so they are even on each side. And if the fracture is subtle, and the protrusions cannot properly grip the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone, so that the protrusions have power.
And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with an appropriate instrument for this, either incising or sawing, to your ability; then extract the one remaining in the hardened bone and small splinters.
And when the bone has been brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do as much as possible to return it to its proper position; then apply a cloth soaked with black vinegar tincture, and properly if it's a woolen piece; and do not put any cerote or other ointment on the wound that has oil, lest it brings forth putrefaction and corruption. Then provide dressings as you have restored the bune, leave the wound exposed, and cut off all coverings entirely according to the quantity of the wound, and be sure to take care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times this has been done by foolish doctors, leading to death or corruption in some cases. The tension should be softer and more supple than other fractures.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that an unforeseen complication may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then do not apply a poultice; but wrap around it, near the area of the wound, with stiff cloths. And when after one or two days you observe bending bowing over the wound, remove what you previously applied to everything, and put healing ointment for wounds as an unguent tetrafarmacist uses in similar cases.
It is necessary to loosen the limb two times a day, morning and evening, until it becomes loose and healthy.
And the limb should be set in such a way that the bow bends gently.
If more than one day passes and it cannot be joined but returns with pain, because there are small pieces of bone in the way, then you must carefully cleanse the wound and remove all those displaced fragments that cause this pain.
If there is an abscess at the location, or any other form of corruption, you must treat it as described in this chapter earlier. And when bone is broken and open on a limb, similar to the hip or shoulder bones, and other large-limbed injuries, do not attempt to suture it, for many times death occurs but let it heal until it hardens; after perhaps xx or xxx days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
Of bruises that appear around the sore
We often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and the unpleasant sight is to see the deformed limb; and sometimes cannot perform its natural functions.
So take care then if you treat us with medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, among other similar things; either one or all of these combined, mixed with stipulative wine, vinegar, or honey-water; put them in a nutshell without loosening it for days on end; then disassemble it and restart another until the inflammation is gone; or strain over a perfectly crafted piece of bone; because its property is that it draws out all the swelling from above the limbs; and if the inflammamoin has turned into hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, cut off the excess, then cleanse until it is healed.
When the broken bone is restored and remains after the weak and subtle members, much occurs for various reasons: one because it was tied too tightly, and not loosened as it should; or because there were too many ligatures and could not come to nourishment of the limb; or due to excessive rubbing; or from too large movements, not in their time; or because there is little blood in its body, so it is weak.
The cure is that you make the patient eat well and keep their body supple, until there are many blood vessels in them again; and administer a bath to them, giving joy and ease; then apply heat to the limb so that it attracts great nourishment, and often rouse with warm water until nourishment returns to the member; then let it return to its natural shape.
The twisted member after health is restored
When the limb is twisted after restoration and bone broken open, and the shape of the limb is unsightly, yet not contrary to its natural function: do not believe those who say that the entire member must be replaced with new ones; many a fool has done this in our land; such procedures are blamed, and often lead to great harm, and sometimes death; however, if the dislocations and twists are fresh, it is necessary to soak them in hot water, or mollifying herbs cooked like meadowsweet leaves, roots, and poppy seeds, and similar substances; then make a mild poultice, as with well-made diaquilon, and take the musk root of valerian and mix it with linseed oil or hazelnut oil, and apply the poultice; or take fatty figs, crushed with flax seed flour, and similar medicines that alleviate tension.
And there are times when bone dislocation is fixed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with damp hands. Therefore, allow some movement to the affected limb each hour.
And incession is gentle and apply the wound as it's treatment with antique d’estrop de tienne, ou il esmettre unc, beet les mors ne soie l’ou est sejolt a li sire; et poinz cil nulli.
This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint is out of its place, so it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
When any dislocation occurs, now you must return it without delay.
.
In any case, when this occurs, make the patient a poultice, then leave it; until the swelling is soothed; then wash the limb with hot water and oil, then gently bandage each part as needed when care arrives at its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder joint dislocations up to fractures.
Of lower jaws
Sometimes the jawbones become dislocated outwardly, and there are two ways of dislocation for both: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a bit; or they are entirely dislocated, hang toward one side, causing saliva from the mouth such that it cannot be held in, nor can close its mouth, enveloping its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through various positions.
And if it is complete and finished, one must reset it promptly and not hesitate.
And in such a way that the minister moistens the patient's head, and inserts a mirror slightly pinched from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth; if the dislocation is of two parts, the other hand should be ready to make it even; and instruct the afflicted to soften their jawbones and move them in all directions.
The mirror is placed to make it level, until it returns to its place.
And if resetting is difficult, especially if it involves the two jawbones together, soak them with warm water and oil until they can be moved gently; do not pull on the reset bone as we have said before.
When they are returned evenly and the wound of the patient is well closed, then place on moistened cloths in a bag made of oil-soaked linen and wax, and lightly bind it with soft ties.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, ensuring they do not move to either side or strain themselves in any way but encourage light food intake until the pains are gone and the jawbones have healed.
And then feed him what he desires lightly and do not allow him to work on opening his mouth for eating or drinking until the jawbones are fully healed and healthy.
If the two lower jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not restored to their original positions, fever and usual sweats may occur, and possibly intestinal obstruction, and perhaps they vomit clear fluid.
And when you see this, then know it is fatal; and many times the person for whom it occurs dies within seven days.
of the sinew.
The strong bone cannot be dislocated from within the ribs and at the end of the shinbone, and it is not dislocated even once by accident, but one feels it keenly.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and extends their arms; then firmly presses the place with your palm, and it returns; then apply a poultice and bandage, and bind.
and the head that is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if not possible, and if it dislocates once again, bring it back to its place as we have said; then apply a poultice and bandage, and bind, and instruct the patient to rest until they are well.
And likewise, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is displaced from its place.
Of shoulder dislocation
That one must understand that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way it dislocates from the ankle to above; and another occurs at the lower part; occasionally it may also dislocate upwards, though this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate backwards nor inwards affecting the nerves; and at times it may dislocate downwards towards the ankle, especially in those with little strength, for them it happens quickly; to those with enough strength, it occurs without much difficulty, and returns just as easily.
And occasionally some men may experience blows or fractures, and their shoulder swells with intense heat, believing it to be dislocated by this.
It is necessary therefore to try it out until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that with dislocation when tilted towards the elbow, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their various manifestations. and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and from the elbow to where the head of the shoulder reaches, as if it were two ears; and the patient cannot return his hand to his neck, nor move in any motion.
by
This method of dislocation must only be reset when it is new or if the child is unwell.
And this way is for the minister to lift the patient's hand upwards and then place his thumb under the elbow, lifting the joint forcefully towards the upper part of its location. The minister will then release the hand and extend it upwards as they position their thumb below; it shall come about promptly.
the empresso, it. And theirs, and hand la location, ester, lesse;
Then place a sling under the patient's back and put an even strip of linen on his shoulder, not too thick nor too thin, then position the footrest beneath the strap, and lift the head of the dislocated shoulder gently, and guide the hand with the malaise.
and other ministers wash the patient's head with the affliction so it cannot move downwards; this shoulder returns immediately now, and if you observe the resetting according to this method:
and that you have present a man who is taller than the patient; and stand to his left side, and bend the dislocated shoulder under the strap of affliction, and lift it upwards so that the afflicted hangs in the air. And other ministers rub the patient's hand downward towards the belly. If the patient is too light, do not weigh them down with anything heavy, and the dislocation returns at once.
And the reset is also done in another way: and it is so that you insert a long stick into the ground, of which the head of the shoulder resembles an earthen spindle, neither too large nor too small. Then it is placed under the patient's arm, but with cloths soft above it, and the shoulder remains lengthened its long bone; then stretch out his hand downward to another side properly, and the dislocation will return quickly.
If it does not want to return due to all the reasons we have mentioned, then perform this treatment: take a piece of iron from two arms, lengthwise 1 and width 4 fingers, which has its head recessed on both sides for insertion through the shoulder socket as follows:
Then cover the head of the fust with cloth so it does not chafe the patient's skin, then place the fust beneath the shoulder of the injured side; extend both arms above the length of the fust, tie the shoulder to the fust, and bring the arm over the top of the hand, then position the arm under a wide strap on an ointment bench, with palms facing downward, leaving the body hanging from the other side: the joint will be held in place now.
And when it is in place, no matter how, you must put a woolen thread beneath the shoulder, then apply an ointment cloth of powder from grinding, with incense and myrrh oil on all around the shoulder, then quickly strain undernehemenent, and turn the linen over the ointment, wrapping it around its collar, and let the hands hang in this manner.
And it is necessary for him to rest as long as the limb is comforted, because it will heal sooner; then have him rest more after 5 or 6 days, and move it; and if it is not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is severely out of place due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary for you to apply fire cauterization at three points, as previously instructed with the cautery.
And if you do all of this, and it is still dislocated after 6 days, and the joint cannot hold or lift either arm forward, then understand that the nerve at the top of the shoulder may be cut or stretched out or softened; and realize that the joint will never fit back into its place.
The dislocation that is towards the groin and legs, or behind, is made by impact, stretching of hands, and another instrument is used; and treated until it is set right.
And after healing comes weakness in the limb and delays in movement, causing the patient great pain many times until the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
It is believed that the joint of the elbow has been dislocated by pricking, and it returns to its place; if it has become completely dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, then the dislocation cannot be repaired because one can clearly see it and feel it; and it becomes dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated elbow with its sound counterpart, if it is clearly visible. For the joints are misaligned, and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary to reset them as soon as an abscess appears because if the abscess comes about, then its retraction would be painful; and sometimes they cannot be reset entirely at all, especially when they are behind; this is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and possibly death.
When restoration is such that it can be returned to its place, extend its hand between your two hands; and spread its arms wide, and the fingers as in the custom of turning it around, downward and upward, rejoin the joint with all its pieces, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its original position.
And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back after doubling its hand with its own hand and fixing the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then provide strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and they tie both arms so that they do not move during extension; then turn the arms in each direction, then wrap a wide and long piece of cloth around it.
When the head of the joint at its articulation reaches its end, then apply oil to soften the joint, and then put it back in place until it returns.
And when it is upright, then put on dry plaster with egg white, and reset it properly, and support the arm against a pillow at night, and leave for several days before releasing.
And if the joint is firm in its place, release the ligaments and let them be loose; and if you see that the joint does not grip well, restart with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is securely placed; then release.
If after resetting the joint and it moves again, then bathe and rub well, and press until relieved; or place a fat sheep's wool on the joint, leave for one day and night, then remove the bandage, and make them take a bath. If it sweats, then rub the joint and promptly reapply the sheep's wool, then make them take a bath; do this two or three times until they are well; if you see improvement, put moistened wheat straw heated with butter on it, and wrap. It will return to its proper state.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand occurs, and its return is easy, more so than other joints. It must be brought back to its place promptly, in the same hour it is dislocated, as well as if the limb is swollen or an abscess appears hot.
And the method of bringing it back is to place the afflicted hand under a table, extend its fingers, and level them out so that they put their palm at the sightline of the joint, pressing until it returns.
Of course, you must ensure it is properly in place; then the patient should put their back of the hand under a table while extending and moving it back. If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of their hand under a table, and the healer places their hand beneath the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
But if not, apply soothing plasters to abscesses and let them begin healing anew.
And if it cannot be tolerated, and you are unable to place it back in its proper position after several days, the dislocated joint remains twisted.
Et ne nuit niant au malade, for he may not grasp anything until his hands are softened, and cannot hold any object: then you understand that the nerves or arteries are cut; there is no other remedy but to grasp by cautery near the case, and perhaps it serves no further purpose.
And when the hands are placed correctly, place them on the plaque we have mentioned, then grasp it and leave for 5 days, then release and keep like this.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no loosening, then apply warm water to the area, and rub until it becomes smooth.
Of dislocating the fingers of the hand
Dislocations should never occur to the fingers of the hand on either side, nor at the back or front of the palm.
Once they are dislocated, apply pressure to the affected joints until it reattaches, then support the head of the finger and bend towards the part where it is dislocated.
Leave it for two days, and then place it level on the same day; and during this time bind it as we have said, leaving it bound daily, and make it move, and untie it nightly; and do this often until it becomes straight.
Do the same if it is dislocated in the hand's palm, and do as you have done before, until it is straightened; and do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
Double dislocation of the spine or backbone.
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several occurring, there is no remedy, as it hastens death for the patient.
And the signs are such that the excretions flow without volition, cannot be held in, and many times any limb is weakened or one hip, or either of the arms or legs.
And many times the spine moves in two parts; when it moves at the rear, it is called "gilboosities."
The treatment is to ensure that you reset it if the swelling comes from childhood; otherwise, there will be no healing or remedy at all.
And those that come from a fall or impacts or similar things are treated by ancient methods with great words, which do not yield much benefit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention and have formed plasters in various ways.
first paragraph by. ousd et de tous riglar.
And also those that come directly to two sides, and cannot be healed except the one properly coming along the back, as I say;
and that the sick person is stretched on their face at one equal place, and has support removed from underneath them so they do not sway.
Then the patient's hands and feet, and heels, so it lies other diseases.
And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the other at the joints, among the two fires;
lesquelles leesd and ests eus semblant on tru iez ils dries that they are; but aye pas si: he tolest the li celes en bailte est. Onlteste, and dele pesties: andre les quellis et ses lettres que sont tis and l'en leus eie.
If it does not return with this method, take a stick three hand lengths long and place the patient's head on it, their side against the stick, then position the middle of the stick along the spine. And securely fasten their legs to the opposite end of the stick, and apply pressure until it returns to its place; if you see this happen, make the turner rotate towards the hand.
And that you insert two pegs at the head of one arm lengthwise, and towards the other leg, with between each peg an ample space in length.
And each boil should have a pus point where the knot turns, and the boil be firmly in place so it does not move; and between each pair of boils there should be one turning point, on which the ligaments turn, and two small boils the size of a palm's length for turning the knots.
And then tie the ligaments that are among the joints at the knot towards the head, and the other ligaments towards the fingers at the other knot, and each minister turns its own knot along the entire ligament, and the master places the spine even as we have said.
And when they are made even, then place a drying substance with plenty of heat over it, and then the poultice, and then the plaster from a board three fingers long, that covers the leakage site and the healthy spine part, then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for healing until the patient is well;
Et si quelque chose arrive à la fin des soins, il convient d'administrer des médicaments calmants et assouplissants, avec l'aide que nous avons mentionnée auparavant; et jamais ne mélange on une pièce de plomb.
And never shall it appear in the back of the spine, and consider that it might be dislocations; and 'tis the bone that is affected, therefore one should not have any assumptions: perhaps it would bring death.
Des dislocations du genou
That the joints of the thigh and the shoulder do not come loose except by dislocations alone, nor as other joints; and the thigh's joint is dislocated in four parts: within and without, and front and back; and more internally than externally, less so at the front and rear.
And the recognition of inward dislocations is such that when joining the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens more on the side of the injured than on the healthy, so the injured cannot double its joint at fire. and is the swelling of an abscess hot because the hip's head comes loose.
The sign of it occurring to one is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of it occurring to one is that they extend their leg according to completion; however, do not double-fold the knee causing pain, and if you want them to walk, they cannot before, and holds in their urine, and swells the ankle, and when they go, passes over the heel.
And the sign of it occurring to one is that they can spread their knee should be loosed from above and weakens, and is the other leg, and are the shoe.
The resets of this type of dislocation are such that you should check if the dislocation is recent and it remains according to its nature, there is no remedy for it; and it does not require any assumption.
And in those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must quickly return the joint, push it outwards and upwards, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will reappear on its own without needing further treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, you must summon a strong assistant and support the leg strongly with two hands or with one bandage tied above the knee. and other ministering physicians extend their hand over in such a manner that they place their hands below the shoulder blades, then grip them with a light line above the hip; another pulls on the neck by the line.
and they extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground completely, and hangs suspended.
This method of extension is common in four similar cases; and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, it is fine.
If not, then attention must be given to its appearance. When dislocation is in the jaw, it is necessary to support the patient on their pain-free side, then place a bandage at the base of the thigh, and extend the bandage up towards the groin, and towards the calf muscle;
Then secure additional supports on their arms, and envelop the affected thigh with bandages, and extend them to the desired form; it will now return to its place; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then tie both of the patient's feet together with a strong ribbon undernee both heels and over the knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
Then hang from a length of wood on the head or have two long arms on the ground; then command one minister to hug the patient's chest with their thigh, and another minister(s) also suspended with the patient, who must embrace the entire buttocks firmly, for now the joint quickly returns.
And when the dislocation is below, if you place the patient on their back as we have mentioned in those with phlebitis, and properly separate a band around the affected leg and near the groin.
Then place two heaters, one on the head and another underneath the feet, then insert a tinder between the buttocks in front of the patient. And with the wrapping of moistened cloths around it, so as not to alarm the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the doctor places the dislocation evenly into his hand.
If it returns, this is good. If not, then place on a board as we have said in the case of fractures, and press until the patient lies down securely.
And when the dislocation is present, it should be extended quickly, and according to what I have said; place the minister's hand on the affected side, then press with the other hand, and extend downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in its natural place, one should not extend or lift the patient's arm, but instead let it hang as it would have after being dislocated naturally, as we have described when lying on two bent joints; and be supported by its face, the bandage is extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed on the joint against the board.
and shall be supported when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal; then place the heels together, and put on the plaster cast, and secure with a bandage so that the joint does not move.
For it rests for three or four days, then reset the dislocation and apply a poultice on top; if you see that they are evenly aligned, hold steady as before, and leave for three days; then reset the dislocation again, and let the limb move easily until it is comfortable.
For the dislocation of the knee joint
The kneecap can be dislocated in three ways: internally and downwardly, and backwards; it does not dislocate forwards.
And the signs are such that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if it does not reach its hip, say that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place your back to his face, and put your foot under his feet.
Then take his ankle in your palms and retract between your thumbs, then bend the two sides of the ankle gently; another assistant extends his foot until the knuckles return to their place, and the signs are that it easily reaches its hip.
And apply the plaster over it, and elevate the leg to the hip, binding them tightly together for 3 or 4 days, then release it; and do not allow the patient to move during this time until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb has not healed completely, treat it with firm binding as we have described in the treatment of the hip, until it is sound.
For ankle dislocation
The ankle is never completely healed or fully dislocated, but both within and outside.
And if the symptom is such that the ankle is ejected, and it moves towards the part where it was dislocated:
And such as est de.
When it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright, and tie them with a strap outside the leg, above the ankle.
Then draw the leg towards you with your right hand, and then twice with your left hand, then extend it upwards, and firmly raise the foot high.
Do this twice as we have said, extending and pulling the leg; if it returns, that's good; if not, resume the procedure, because it will return.
If it cannot return in this way, then lay the patient on their back on the ground and firmly place a stake between their thighs, and wrap them with cloths so they do not move.
Then dye the minister's thigh and have another minister extend the patient's feet with hands or ropes so they are tied above the neck of the foot. Then extend each minister equally, and the stakes be kept in place between the patient's thighs to hold them when they are stretched.
Then realign the joint correctly with the dislocation using your hands, and other ministering anoint the leg from below, so the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it reaches its limit, place the dressing and compress above, tightly bind with bandages around the leg, and watch over the veins behind the ankle to ensure the ligatures are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligatures become loose, re-tighten the bandage; then release on the third or fourth day and advise the patient to walk by four days. If it moves towards the end of this term, it is not certain yet that it does not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes to this place, it is necessary that you calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
From the dislocation of both shoulders
When both shoulders are dislocated, they should be extended with ease, which is a simple thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any of the shoulder or foot bones, one must make the patient sit with their back to a plain ground or table fully upright and place their foot under the joints that are affected. Then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
the d patient de so that they 1, and cont: or.
Of wounds and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one sees it must be restored, many times the patient dies.
If you are not overconfident in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassein and merciful and slow to act, then do not be bold.
the ine d. And when you see hope, reset the member to its place now, as if an abscess may arise there.
And when the member is in place, administer soothing things to an abscess there, and treat the wound as needed, with dry ointments.
And if the dislocation is in fragments and small bones are to be extracted, along with the bone, do as we have said in simple diseases.
her.
