O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is unknown from top to bottom, thus the science has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of the fathers except small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have changed.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I would revive it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I would bring together the forms of remedies for cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine that is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of bones, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of joints, and their movement and rest, and the course of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much with the name, and little with the work; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, if he does not take care, he will fall into error and harm people; thus I have seen many who undertake this science and abandon their sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Here is the translation:
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another marvel that treated a stone of a man's age, and the stone was large; if he carried with him a piece of bladder, and the man died within 22 days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called by the surgeon, and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and if one touched it well he would die soon.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another marvel who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the marvels blamed ignorance for holding the break against the wound as they were strongly tied, and did not let go of the wound at all, and they left it thus terminated; and he commanded that he should not loosen it; and thus the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I had released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all corruption was already confirmed in the member and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the entire limb was almost lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And you see another case which bursts out an abscess that had become entrenched, and then becomes inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can utterly remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into three divisions: namely, to avoid, to cure, or to alleviate the danger in various dispositions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you take care of yourself, so that the foolish doctor cannot speak badly of you. Take your arms in consideration, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and be praised; and leave behind the diseases full of grievous sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	Here is the translation:
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized according to the top of the foot just as the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid, and the harm, are the longest discourse and subtle science and secret responses; and from this they speak more to the wise ones, and agree with them; and I suffer little for their words, because I reduce lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally in every temperament where there is matter, few temperaments: it is to know that warm temperament lacks matter, and dry temperament lacks matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In warm and dry temperaments, they found matter in abundance, and some said that cautery is of great aid; and the others said the opposite: that cautery is not effective for diseases that come from warmth and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is warm, and it should not be used to cure warm diseases by heat, nor through dryness; and he who says the opposite that cautery provides great aid for warm and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it many times through experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And thus, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of the ten; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assembled and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of treatments, and of greater goodness than medicine's burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member if they can.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines passing from member to member alleviate and bring to the ailing limb diseases of grievous healing; and by chance the patient is harmed by its loftiness and by the goodness of its substance it does not do that, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	Here is the translation:
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauteries are to be done, and choose the right moment.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries are quickly alleviated by the aid of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains and swift ones that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think only, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no relapse; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are cause of pain, and is more effective than medicine through the hastening of its value, and through the virtue of its work and its sign.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes at some time according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and there are gathered in him the superfluities through the acquisition of foods and similar things, so it is not cauteries administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries are dense for pain, and similar things, and that pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization comes after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we have administered ways of cures to any disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a golden instrument is more effective than with iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the iron of cauterization does not cause putrefaction, but it is not true as I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauterization with gold works more than with iron, just as they loudly declared.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however when you heat the golden instrument, you do not know how it is heated by the color of gold, and it is immediately cooled down; and if you heat it too much, they put it in the fire; and thus there is enough of an impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cauterization because we have made it suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now you have ordered this chapter of the lofty chiefs just up to the feet, because it is easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	with the olive oil cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and in it there are two things that are done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for a multitude of songs and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and also for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, and sodic and apoplectic and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	Here is the translation:
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and where you will take your two fingers, if it bleeds from the notch, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is its form.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on the marked place of ink, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little in a twisting motion; then lift your hand gently, and rewind the place so you see the small bone; and if you do not see it, start again with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk thread, and put it in soft and wet cotton inside, and put it on the place, and leave it for three days; then put a warm poultice on top; and leave it on until the inflammation is gone away; afterwards cure the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old ones said that when one leaves the wound open for a longer time, it purges more; and therefore it helps many.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And one must leave the cautery so long on, and press hard if one abates from the bone as large as the vertil that women put in their fusee because the humors issue forth; and one must leave the wound uncovered for a long time; afterwards one must cure and soothe.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I would leave them; for the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other members; and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more saving and mending for me, and thus I often assemble salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the head comes with chronic pain, and lasts a long time, one must use the remedies of yesterday and pills that are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and of emplasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Here is the translation:
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After fire cautery on the corner of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and do a cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and it is placed where one puts ventouses; and lift your hand so you do not see just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the softness of the head, and that is the form.
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged by Mondifian medicines, and we have done the other treatments that I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not profit: then you do cauteries according to eight methods, that is to know medicine ague and to make iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine ague are that you take a dozen of hazel, and remove the bark and recook it in eight parts, as for the head; and then make the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can replace the dozen of hazel under the skin; and when it is replaced, tie it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then disengage and draw forth the dozen of oil, and leave the wound thus for eight days or nine; then put on a cotton cloth soaked in balm so that it penetrates into the wound.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you see that it makes use of certain burning medicines that I have written or described in the treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery to the form that it is in:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a hook or it has a little curvature, and in the middle there appears a small opening; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the thickness of the skin is raised; and lift your hand so that the artery is not touched, which is deformed, and an abundance of blood flows out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton in the opening of the wound, and placing it on the spot for two hours; then I put moistened cotton in a poultice, and then treat the spot with ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine do not suit it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" so that it becomes white; and mark thus on the aching eye a line half a finger long, and hold your hand once, and hold steady so that you do not touch the artery and do not go beyond the bone; and beware of the mandible that moves when one chews, and the veins have regard only for the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the disorder of blood in the artery when it will be touched, where touching has great fear and trouble for him who does not know himself, and is not a studied and experienced person; and leave the vein in its way; but I will tell you how to restore blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you on the eye where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suit the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the same way as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. cuts; and these are better cauteries than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold, and one has applied solvent medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not move, then it is necessary to use this cautery which is called "points", because of its form.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the ailing ear, or around the eyes, where the pain holds in both, and you detach a little below the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of the injection; and have ten points around each ear; after treating the place until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	from the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated by cautery is not fierce except for those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery on the similarities that come from scorching and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture that moves with inflammation and purgations of the head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third in the setting of the lips; and put the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on the head of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple just as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery as long as the middle of the heart is at rest; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the scalpel that we have presented before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the incision be a little larger; after treating the patient as I have said before, until they are healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: one on the horns of the head, one in the head, and one at the vessel called "vasselz" as we have said before, and place the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat as we have said before.
de litargie	of the sluggishness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clarify the brain; afterwards raise the chief of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput an emplaster of sinapi which is written or treated in the book of emplasters; and that is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus sane, it is good; and if he is not, do it three times: three cauteries on the skin of the head descending just to the neck, and have a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see that he needs to be treated, and the patient is suffering, do it in the middle; and if there are others on the horns, and cure until he is sane; and let the cauteries which are called "olivare" be done as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	Here is the translation:
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to modify the treatment of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patients are great and suffer from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, make them gargle and modify the treatment of the brain often with good meat; afterwards take the chief in a thousand, and do as I said before, and do fire cautery according to what we have said beforehand, and fire cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo fire cautery as I said to one who has paralysis and mollification of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and thus do olive tree fire cautery according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle fire cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	Here is the translation:
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by reason of melancholy the superfluous fluids are declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then they give to drink something which causes the brain to be purified, according to what is written beforehand in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you see that it needs to be cauterized, make points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery amends the brain immediately; and then put on cotton moistened with butter and grease of geese.
de l’awe des eulz	of the warmth of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient things warming the head, and ward off all moisture, and make them sweat or take a bath many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to reheat his head, and make him cauterized within the head, and make two cauteries on the temples if the descent of warmth is in both eyes together, or in one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a piece of powder as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery how you will proceed; and no one has ever made cautery or hastened beneath the two eyes behind.
dou cors des larmes	at the course of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear at the front of the head in the appearance; and one sees that it is superfluous cold humors, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the work descending from the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or hastening beneath the eyes; and if there is need for more, then they cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	at the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give a drink to the sick person .iij. nine cups; after he raises his head, and you make a cautery or a thousand good cauteries of olive oil; and make .ij. cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the .ij. sorcis, a little beneath the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not touch it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of that which it is in the form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you make .ij. cauteries on the .ij. sorcis as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	where hair grows to prick the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes is converted into pains, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries in several ways: namely, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if the foil of a mirror, and let it be the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moist cotton in the glare of an egg and musk perfume on the eye, then heat up the cautery according to its form.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then recommence the cautery on the same place, as you did before; and if the hairs are sparse, cauterize until the skin is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterizers of burning medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and lively chalk, one ounce each, and mix well together; and apply it quickly, so it doesn't cool down, and spread it on the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, one should operate on one, and also anoint both similarly; and put underneath the eye a soft cotton cloth moistened with egg whites; and let the head of the patient be in its natural position and show your finger indicating the medicine, and press it gently and move it all the times that the patient feels burning sensation from the medicine, for they feel burning sensation also like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the morification will be past, lift the skin of the awe, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted thus as it would have been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not, then reset the medicine on the spot where the medicine has not overlapped, so that your operations are even, and your eyes are fixed; then put a cotton pad moistened with balm on it, so that the heart's arteries are clear, after treating the spot of the joint which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you are careful to guard yourself well in your operation by great caution, so that no part of the medicine escapes from your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that spot which is softened by the proper skin, just as you did before; after treating until it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of dead myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constrictions accordingly; and do not misplace the direct way for him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Here is the translation:
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula is opened, and extracting the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, so operate, and extract further the bow; after putting fire cautery in the form of a hot iron, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail from which the eye is affected, so that your hands do not cause foolishness; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrodes.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this does not work, recommend recommencing the cautery once more, and another thing you have as a remedy, and let it be for three days; after that, put on a soft cloth in a gentle way, and treat the affected joint with a desiccative ointment until it is healthy, and if forty days pass without it being healthy, then apply medicine with a corrosive quality so that the bone is uncovered; and re-examine according to how it will come into its proper place.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Then make a fistula, and sew up the place; after put in the incision a subtle camphor of the same shape as it is the form.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the quantity of an ounce of lead; and hold your hand or camel-hair brush firmly, and do not move the patient's point, so that the melted lead does not run to their eye; and it is suitable to put on the eye a cotton wool poultice in a veil of egg whites or in water: the lead if it is well attached to the vein of the fistula, and it heals marvelously through miraculous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer pustules to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to how it should be in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "pilis", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks with what we have said in sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then scorch it. I. a small cautery scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then hastily apply it to those hollows until life reaches just up to the fount; afterwards cure the arm of the scabrous one so that it be healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes putridity and rot and becomes fistulous; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all: then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards boil or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron reaches the font of it, and behind the limb; and do it thus once or twice, afterwards curing what we have said in cures, so that it be healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the patient's head in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery to the shape that will come afterwards in such a way that you place a chain over the tooth; and insert the hot cautery hastening, and hold your hand so the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and restart the cautery according to your volition; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and hold it for an hour and spit it out often.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture is dried out.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and the treatments of medicine do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways: and cautery of borax and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Here is the translation:
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Here is the translation:
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good warm breath in the impression of this cautery, and then he should spit it out forcefully; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform fire cautery where you wish, according to what you are able; and that is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the tumors
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of fluid and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery that follows, and it has two openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on the other side; and apply the hot cautery once on the abscess, or where it is necessary, until it comes to the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply cotton soaked in warm balm as long as the ulcer is removed; after curing the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the chain:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture affects the channels of the forearm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be treated first with dissolving medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not approach too close to the throat, and do not harden the blood but rather soften it.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be called "clavicle" because we have described their shape before; and heal the limb as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the thumb
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the forearm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor shaking, and it is an old disease, then apply two cauteries on the wrist in their voids; and another cautery between the two marmots; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cautery by pricking at the entire cautery which is called "poles" because their shape is described before in the disease of the ears; and let the poles be up to thirty, or even more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment of the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are the lighter cauteries, because you make them in three parts at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, soothe the patient on their back and side; afterwards, lift the heart which is within the titillation of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves that it is in the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it penetrates just to the side, and the figure of the cautery is assembled with .iiij. cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, therefore the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and that is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And often is applied on this same nerve because it has seven cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the fire cauterization with a willow stick; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which thing happens little, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is reformed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach there come coldness and much moisture until it strains to its complexion, and multiply the cathartic to him, and are customary manners of cures accustomed and it does not profit at all, then it is necessary that the patient be supported on his back, and stretches out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From that onwards make three cauteries I beneath the cuiller of the pis for the quantity of a finger, to all the cautery claw, and two cauteries above the two sides so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and has such space between one and another that they are not joined together when they will make a curve; and let the cauteries be so profound that they pierce the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and sign on the stomach at that point according to the quantity that you see of it; then cauterize all the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, until it be healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver brings pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, until it is far removed from its natural complexion through excesses; and the patient is treated for what we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit him, so it is necessary that the patient be supported on his bed; and sign three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, removing the hypochondries, there where the seams of the body come; and leave a space between each cautery the width of a finger; and let the cautery be from the long side of the body, and do not press too much with your hand all over the cautery; and let it be raised sufficiently to relieve the quarter of the heart, and let the patient be straight on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lean, and stretch out his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you want to, if you cauterize these cauteries of the cutellaire, be subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the heart, for you would make it drier throughout the body; and it does not come just to the bouillon, for the heart is very subtle there, and one seeks to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it suppurates in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, they feel foreign pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment touches the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be supported on their head; and then show where the abscess or swelling is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to the reason, from which comes the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cautery as much as the heart is burned, and reaches just to the siphac, as much as the porridge is completely firm; after the cure according to the cure of the sweats as much as it is healthy; and it is not suitable that anyone uses this cautery unless he who has studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have often corrected.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can hardly work, and always it seems to me that moving is worth more than leaving.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cauterization of the lungs
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make full cauteries of root aristologe, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, as large as you can find it, dry and thick like your fingers; and grind it into oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize. Then, between the shoulder blade and the neck, make small cauteries descending slightly towards the area under the beard; and between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly backwards; and one cauterizes in the pis, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and one as the ribs of the pis defeat the cauterization which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, instead make a gentle opening as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And certain ancients said that no man should use fire cautery similar to the razor, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, as much as it reaches the abscess; and immediately the pain disappears, just as we have said in the case of the aposteme of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the left hand
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the meadow that we have said in divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they apply three manners of fire cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Here is the translation:
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After the fire is applied to the inflamed veins as much as the heart is perceived from the other side, and then the fire cautery is treated, and thus there will be four. And if you see it, if you cauterize the entire cautery at four veins.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when he has obtained purification by long tension, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not suitable for hydropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods that we have stated in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you do four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the piss; and let the cauteries be well close to the thickness of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, let the cautery be opened by gently piercing the long thin tension, and do not leave the treatment of the patient's disease after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the three intentions will be assembled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be a clavele, which we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been previously written.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of bitter yellow fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and lift your hand with the cauter without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not insert it too deeply, lest the bitter yellow fluid should flow out, and let the cauter be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing so, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterization be from top to bottom, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations uncovered for a long time without curing, so that the water exits; after curing with other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are afflicted, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, if you do. Then make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken before or cautery of the stomach, to the circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel to each subtle cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each eyelid, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and are old and of gross cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit if you make cauterizations: III on the spine of the back, which is all deflected downwards a little and a little in triangles, and I cauterize downwards the belly II fingers; and if you think that the stomach is refrigerated, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face inflating, then make a great cauterization on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the clave cauterizations; and let the cauterization stay overt for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the limb so that it may be healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the skin condition named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cope with thelul, if you heat the cautery that seems to be a rasp, and then place it all ablaze on the affected thelul area; and leave it until your hand feels the cauteries reaching the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows out; do this once or twice, and if there is much of thelul, then cautery each spot as we have said; after the treatment of beneficial ointments, they will be healthy again; and if you cautery with a large cautery on the affected area, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer tailoring or surgery, which we will recount in its place, if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes, and it is wrapped and cast in putrid and corrupt moisture, if you need to prove all of a subtle probe, and take care that you know the entire extent of how deep it has penetrated.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that seems to be a rasp, and putting it in the fistula according to the quantity that the probe has entered, and recommencing the cautery as long as the putrid and corrupt flesh are burnt, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of their need; and beware of touching the nerve that is nearby, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestines, beware of these parts, and do not make false passages in the flesh, and think that it is not personally affected; after healing the limb so that it may be healthy, and if the limbs are healed, and the materials are removed a long time, then know that the limbs are entirely healthy; and if the materials are not removed, know that the limbs are troubled, and corrupt the bone at the foundation; and thus one of these things that we will say about his limb.
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the loins, and of great windiness, and does not take hold of a woman, then it is necessary that you apply cautery on both sides of the loins at the cautery claw which we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is numb and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery on the upper part above the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as we need for a poultice; and make three cauteries above the back, or two if you have no need of them; and let the claw-shaped cautery be according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delayed; and when they come, it feels great pain: then one must apply three cauteries around the belly, just as we said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries below the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, just as we said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the moist vapors descend to the hip bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of the division are visible, then one must apply a cautery to the patient on the hip bone with a cautery similar to a circle, and mark beforehand the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you are not present for these cauteries, make three cauteries of the olive branch, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the wounds; and heal until they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the ankle
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the ankle joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is not cured by what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of doing cautery is in two ways: it is to know combining medicines burning, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the surface of the thigh three triangular cauteries in this form, and make good depth and width, and leave between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be oval; sometimes one does not make cautery in the middle on top of the thigh, because there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if you cauterize with a circle of fire that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the skin are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And it is the manner in which one does on the thigh, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it reaches to the knee and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers, a little to the left side; and let the cauteries be cellular, and let the thickness of the burn be moderate; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near the ankle, cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the mastery is, make more of it; and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery at the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have undergone cauterization on the shin of the foot, and they let it be until the leg was completely swollen, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a burst of belly which he got death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cauterization on one and the other, in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the cauterization of the thigh, that this is the method: make such an iron rod as thick as a little finger, or a little less, and it should be between two irons, and it should be like a nutmeg, and there are two irons, and they should also be like a claw, and it has a well-made handle of iron; and this is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is totally red hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the diseased hainch's boil, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a round cautery and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and let the wound stay open for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is fully healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its effect, and we see few who use it; and however, this is one of the good cauteries, which can alleviate suffering, and there where it is effective.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The fire cauterizers are such that you make the instrument between the fingers in the margin of the gate, and be it of iron or a long arrow, and in the height have II among us, and among each one the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and be open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing on the box of the hip of the patient lying on his good side, and after putting your hand much on the box of the hip; then insert between the II circles of the warm water which is warmed by fire I poke, and let it for an hour and a half, and suffer the patient to have heat and dryness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is true that he finds moderation as from fire; and when the moderations are past, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip of warm water, and let thus III days, and put on a poultice so long as what is black from the wound is opened; and leave III days that the putrefaction is straightened; and this would be the last aid after the cure of ointments so that he may be healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that you hold according to what you have done in the same way; and this is the method of warm poultice, and I have written about treating with medicine for rectification.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of alkaline and living chalk, as much of one as of the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Where it has a small hole for the point of a razor to enter; and put on top of that pot another well-plugged pot, and put above the alkaline and chalk and sweet dew above, until there is a duo of powders as you have well prepared with your hand; and let it sit thus until it descends into the watery and clear pot, then take all that dew, and pour it on the chalk and on the alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And when it will be very sharp and is administered in many medical procedures and in cauteries of other members, because it performs another work like fires, and if there are other medicines that one cauterizes well the hainche thus as thesis and honey and anacardi and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us about a cure where a man was cured of the pain of the hainche and sciatic vein, and the doctor said that there is no other cure, and he was healed at once when they did this cure, and he was bathed as it is described hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner that you should take fresh and dry litargire, and crush it much with a little fat, and apply it to the hainche and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bind; and let it be for three hours, and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the bitterness.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into a warm bath so that his body is somewhat relaxed, and make him enter into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And beware that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fiery iron, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be performed in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and the old oil of a elder tree, and apply it to the hollow which is between the thumb of the foot and the other called the "fossil".
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take dry iron of a dry tree, and heat it in the fire until it is charcoal, and apply it to the linen, and let it stay until it is warm; and do it again thus, and do not cease from doing thus until you think by sensation that it reaches the ham, and that the pain has ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of a dry tree".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by fall or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar signs of cold expanded matter, none of these signs is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting after this that the patient is emptied of filthy pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterizer called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauterizations at the cauterizer claw-like middle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a contracted limb when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you find in the upper part of the spine of the back and in the appearance that comes upon the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize at the cautery of that according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery penetrates deeply into each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that, if you cauterize around the spine with a piercing fire cautery at two or three lines, and be the points close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply fire cautery in a curved manner which is in a spasm of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-like according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you prick on the surface of the foot, make the fire cautery at the entire fire cautery which one calls a "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come near the knees and other joints, and this happens often, make the fire cautery on each knee three or four times, at the entire olive-fire cautery; and if you have need of more, do more, but do not hold your hand too long, only as long as the space of the heart is warm.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, one administers the cautery that we mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger II lines; and if there remains a point of pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the wrists or just to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good governance for the patient and prepare medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good governance and you purge evil humors, it will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of this face
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes from anger, and the belly descends to the hips and it is newly formed, then you must ensure that when you want to cure it, it does not harm anyone on that day; and that it uses things that ease the belly, so that the filth descends from its belly; afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his flanks as long as the belly is being repaired, and reset them with your fingers, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then apply the cautery in the form that it is.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is clear and it casts a healthy scent.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the boules to their place; and the minister holds his hand so they do not return again; and work well on the hips of the patient, and put under him one cushion and one strap on the hips, and another on the foot which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign of the whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so recommence again until you come to the bone; and be subtly wary that the boule does not slip when you make the cautery; lest you burn it; and lest by this the patient may die or have another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their bones, and for large people also large according to their measure; after three days cure the limb with a warm cautery so that the stiffness is removed; after curing other wounds so that they are healthy, and let the patient lie 40 days on his back so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that their bandages be loosened gradually, so that the boil does not burst when they get up to go to their chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when they want to get up, a well-made splint is applied to them, and for another 40 days; and let them have good rest, so that they work little and beware of too great repletion from drinking and eating, and from too high spirits; and when they follow this teaching, they will be entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell you afterwards about the treatment of a wound in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the route of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come to other parts and are acquainted, and you see that they do not grow anymore, have the fire cautery made of double fire according to its quantity, and be prepared for the third day of the treatment; afterwards, treat according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the angle of the fire in three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the level of the notch and make a line for the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized places.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to a member, whether from a fall or a blow, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no value, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauterizations be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twisting and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is sufficiently healthy for the first cautery, that's good; if not, begin another cautery on top of that one, because such is the custom that it should be moved to the adjacent member, since it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of sickness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The limbs are often helped many times by cautery with great assistance, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see that cautery should be applied where the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the entire disease, then you make five cauteries on the head: I behind the ear, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and II at the II horns, and I at the back on the hairline; and you leave it so long as your hand until the cauteries come just to the bone, and until the scabs issue forth, so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth; and you cautery on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the sickness is scattered throughout; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you make cauteries of these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in the soft part of the nose, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. great on the chest and .i. another on the ribs, and .ij. on the shoulders; and .ij. on the hips, and .ij. on the tendons of the foot, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the rear calcifying, so you do not burn them; and many times make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and .i. another on the bone of the stomach, and .i. another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do of cauterization, the more you do of aid, and it benefits him; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from cauterization if the healthy person feels it, because the body is already totally corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of fires.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After healing the wound with flour of various times with honey and other treatments until it be sound.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to a member and is treated with medicines and ointments and emplasters, and it is not sound, then you make cauterizations on the member according to its size and the smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little inside the skin of the heart; then treat with unctions until it be sound.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And often one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is swollen; and in no way should one interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of abscesses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "abscesses" is inflamed, and the engines of medicine are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour of veal and lentils with oil of rose and leaves of plantain, and blood of colon and blood of almond, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a dressing, and apply it to the wound until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre (cancer or ulcer) appears at the beginning, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that seems to circle around the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And wise men say that one should perform cautery also in the middle of the chancre; and it does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to avoid it; and a more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circule", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing because of the superfluity which it causes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see hasten to heal: then cauterize extensively with many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards let them be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it hastens to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you perceive the fire cautery to be entirely burnt, heat the cautery of wood that is its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" so that the cauteries penetrate to the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels them piercing in some manner that the course of the purulence is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment so that it may be perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a withering of members, for it withers the members just as the fire dries up the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in someone who can suffer from cautery along with fire, then heat the small and large cauteries gently according to what is suitable for the person or the disease; after cauterizing all parts so that you eradicate all corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and apply the cauterized areas with a warm poultice made with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of swollen limbs generates scar.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy skin does not grow, it's good; and if not, then resume the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has often been cured by medical treatment along with fire cautery; but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medical treatment in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	the pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large swollen thing which blisters the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are in two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is that you heat the cautery iron as if it were a pen of vaulted fire, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle edges; afterwards, you put it totally hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the font of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot and decay; then make a plaster of malve savages, boiled with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound of inflammation by burning so long as it becomes healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by evil humors of the body, and many times it happens in hands and feet, then you must apply warm cautery; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or a piece of heated wood, and place it on the nail and the heel, that is to say for removing warts; and place the cane so that it surrounds everything around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and then find the warm water deep into the root; and let the patient suffer a little the burning of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot everything to its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, as you stretch those who are in the body, then heal the wounds that cause shame.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you apply three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cauterization between each vertebra; and one fire cauterization or foot, and one on the stomach for olive fire cauterization; if they stop shivering, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never appear by default on the body's surface, or pus-filled boils, which come from gross corrupt matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	it is necessary first when they appear that one makes cauterization on each head of the boil: a subtle cauterization of fir of myrtle, whose tip is seized by fire, or of root of aristology long, or of lentricular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from the evil humors beforehand, but are dislodged the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Here is the translation:
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it so much that the blood is pacified beneath your finger, and does not issue more; then apply fire cautery, small and large as much as they are all red; then take into account, whether great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and apply the cautery on this vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery so that the blood is restored.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens to be when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take quickly another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows out of the artery, it cannot be well stanched unless the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines applied that have the power to stanch blood; and thus it will be tied and held in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the stanching of the blood closely with cloth or puts things tightly on, or similar things, it will not be of much use.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then you must put your finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well so that it rests above the wound and above the vein; and do not move your finger, but let the cold froide moisture penetrate so that the blood is congealed and thickened and rested; and make an inquiry beforehand about what he needs of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter all about the disease where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the tools and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter at the head just below the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because one finds it easier to follow what one desires.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one of the cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come of those who harm themselves with their illness so that they die easily from the frenzy that they find in their disease, and from the greatness of their evil; and of these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there is one who gives his opinion, and says: "wait, I am cured"; and the disease is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but place greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of those things of which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of long duration.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and direction, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Here is the translation:
dou chief plein d’aigue	Here is the translation:
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Here is the translation:
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and of those that I have seen, death hastens them; and therefore it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work on certain treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day so much that he could not hold it up; and the moisture was so great that it became mortified, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatments are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as our, until the moisture runs; and see there the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe the commissures of the head overcome by each part, and the water flows out when you press with your hand inside, and it does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture thoroughly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding together the edges of bandages and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be so until the fifth day; then disengage, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be aligned properly, and give the patient dry food free from moisture as much as possible until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look to open the greatness of the abscess, and assemble the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and do it according to what you have the power; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and let flow blood, so that the patient may die from the corruption of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of swelling
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the foot, and the disease is chronic, and the medical treatment does not benefit, then the last resort is cauterization with fire, which one will cover the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, when you have seen the wounds close, that the patient makes their head rear; after rubbing the place of a rough bandage until the arteries appear, then reset the patient's neck with all the bandages; then look where the vein beats, and the veins on one side and the other are behind the ears, and a little are responded to; then sign the veins of the wound, then cover one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument of two edges, until the vein is reached near the bone, and that should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cover above, cutting thus as .ij. two fingers in width.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, then the blood flows back continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign from the notch and make just to the bone; and it is necessary to put six drops of blood, or by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the syphac, then cover that abscesses do not come, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of the migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient migration comes, and catarrh arrives, due to the moisture of the tears and the warmth in the temples, and the old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by methods of cures of medicine and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauterizations, as we have related.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples fall, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little restored unless in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then extract from the neck of the patient some drapels, then scrub the skin with some rough cloth, and raise the skin with warm water so that the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula made in this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then lift it up with pincers, and separate well the tissues that are beneath each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the unguina, then cover that part according to the quantity of two inches.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Because she is not bandaged, if she does not feel the wound entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Here is the translation:
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For fire cautery is aid to finish the swellings: because it is of great aid against swellings.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the old cotton with a lot of cotton and places well-made tents; and when they are removed, if they are treated with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healthy; and if without cutting the artery so much as you observe, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or you fill the old cotton with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is stopped; and if you do not have this present, place your finger on the spot until the blood is congealed, and raise the cold water spot so the blood ceases, and be steady as necessary; and what is more gentle and easier in extracting the artery is that you cautery the vein of this trenchant cautery, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid longer delay.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less their warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you should have between the .ij. knives .i. a thickness of a finger, and then when you have signed to engrave the .ij. veins, and you place the hot iron on them so much that it reaches just up to the bone, and covers the vein in .ij. veins; and they should be spaced between the .ij. joints because it is not necessary to cauterize all of this cautery throughout; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are overflowing from veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not profit from any medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient become red, and feel an uneven walk as if of a tremor; and since they are tense and moist so that the hairs of the papers are bent, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, it is necessary for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it an "injured cure", and it is that you make a scratch on the patient who has this disease the hairs so they have at the front, then make three incisions or at the front equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as if two eyes are entirely in the forehead below, descending to the nose, and the others two on the sides above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are two on the sides above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound have a quantity of three fingers at the joints; and apply a piece of sponge and much drapery to suck out the blood, then put the spatula bent at two parts where it is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Of the incision that is to be made at the temple just up to the second incision; and scrape off all the crust that is between the two fissures to the entire skin that is on the bone, then make another cut of the middle incision just up to the other second, and then extract this spatula-like thing.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the scalpel cutting towards the airy flesh at the heart, and the soft part towards the bone, and the end as far as it reaches the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut to the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision is continuous up to what opens at the heart, and then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, and press the flesh for the blood taken; then put in each incision a tent of old cotton, and put on soft drapery soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that abscesses do not form; and on the third day, loosen the lien, and apply great plantain water, then cure with ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes' humour
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When the veins are customarily cauterized, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and the vision is obscured, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head aches in front of a painful spot, and the patient is stunned; then know through these accidents that those materials and that cathartic do not come from many veins, and the wound cure is what it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a great incision in the forehead, and another one just as large on the other side.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision just up to the bone; and separate your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the two lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and apply a dressing of millied drapery in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone as long as it starts to grow, then cure with things that expel evil humors.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take three parts of flaxseed flowers, and of colocynth three parts, and make an emplaster; and apply it to these wounds to inflame the flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains, or beasts, or stone dust or similar things; or seeds, like jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing things like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls in the pierced ear or another manner of thing that does not join to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if you distill some small amount of violet oil or sesame oil, then you prepare extraction; and when the condition is stern, and the nostrils are stopped up when the sternness comes, and put pieces of drapery or wool around the ear; and hold the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it happens by this treatment; and if it does not happen, you prepare extraction with subtle pinches, because that is the form.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, that's good; if not, then you will make an extraction with a subtle hook of small double curvature; and if it does not come out through that, then you make a reed cane and insert the head of the cane or perforate the ear strongly, and block what is inside the cane so that nothing can enter with the cane; then you pull it out forcibly, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then you take glue from where you take the ears, and put some instrument that is pointed for doing this, and put a piece of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not know how to do all these things that we have said, hurry to open the ear thus, so that an abscess forms and spasms; and the manner of opening is that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on the fat or flesh; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until they are healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is in and swells, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a spatula with subtle strokes according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do it when you think that the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then you extract with subtle pinches and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case where it falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient first uses the sternness of condition, and fills the ear with much cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it be examined on that same ear where the needle is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps for fear of that, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, then take many piercings according to the length of your thumb and fingers, and heat them a little over the fire; and put the patient's ear on one side of their ear, and elevate it from another part, and make a hole in another piece on the piece that is in the ear; and do not cease making holes from piece to piece until the needle is completely hot, and thus jumps entirely hot; and if you see, take the joint, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head takes fire so that the most tender joint is burnt; then remake another joint of others as long as the needle is completely hot, as we have said in the piece.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small in body, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large in body so that one can feel it, then gently extract with pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, but the cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sun: if no worms appear, take them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the candle of which this is the form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the most subtle instrument in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck formally to the entire vein; do this often until all the veins appear.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to come out, stop up the vein with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not jump out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat them with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with this entire instrument, thus it is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be of silver or copper, narrow below at a small pertuis, and above cover for distilling; and to press within the distillation with a well-made instrument of copper for this, and if you see take the rasp and envelop it in cotton thread; then pour your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the candle, and the candle is in the ear; then put within the rasp all the cotton, and press your hand temperately so that the oil is distilled or removed from the ear; and feel the patient's sensation within, and be the distillations not too cold, for the medicine would not be good if it were; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with no holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a boil formed inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes form deep in the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes it happens that the hole is nearly closed, and one sees them well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which forms deep in the ear, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which one sees, you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opacity, if the work has all this spatulation from what its form is.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be smooth and clean before and behind the entire plain, so that it does not block the ear; if the opacity is from a boil or abscess of the ear, if you hold it as pinches subtly, and lift it lightly, until the boil is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the suppurations are deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle, light razor and heat it slightly over fire, then put it to the course of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the obstruction where the patient feels gripped at the ear, perceive it lightly, and beware that you do not press on the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the hole, and apply the Egyptian ointment to the affected area.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the flow of blood comes, one plunges a sponge and wraps it in cold water, and places it on the ear, and uses other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are or deal with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	It is the ulcer that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it happens that you treat them with tongs and tweezers, and cut off a spatula-like instrument from their roots; then put on the eye a glassy balsam.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they do not decay, then the cautery of a subtle lenticular fire is good, and the cautery operator afterwards makes incisions wisely; and many times they repair, for nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not grow back.
de la gresle	of the sprain
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times there come in papers of the eyes things that seem granular in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below; the operation is such: take care that the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make the donation of the large width, then lightly scrape off each part, then take it with pincers, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing a little the paper, do not hurt anything to the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble it with a bandage, and cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the ointments restore it quickly and in this way.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine descends to the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and hold the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by incision, do not hurt; and when the grandine is covered, anoint the eye with salty water, and cure the place of what causes harm until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fatness of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Here is the translation:
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand against yours and feel the hernia between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position; and then takes a piece of linen, and arranges a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that the extremity contains, then places it on them; and presses with both hands on one side and the other, so that the extremity is gathered within the circle; then makes an incision at the midpoint of the moisture with a sharp instrument, and does not make it larger than the wound made for opening a vein; and makes the skin fold over as far as you reach the extremity; and in many dispositions the extremity emerges from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then extract at once a piece of charpit cloth between your two fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as far as it is spread; and beware that you do not press on the incision, that you do not reach the entire spatula up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extremity does not appear at the beginning of the incision, so slightly enlarge the incision gently until it appears; then extract as we have said, then wrap in a veil and in water, and place on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break their own arm and put it back to correct the moisture that has accumulated.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to the arm, then the treatment of emplasters soothing until he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs grow unevenly other than naturally, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring about ways of diseases such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so that it is cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in three modes: either by cautery with assembled fire, or by medicine agreeable according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and is made either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then insert a needle at all .i. fil above; and be it on the margin of the paper where the hairs grow from those hairs, and pull .i. fil above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the uneven hairs, all the spatula coping, from the great tearer just to the small one; then extract .i. fil, and put under the paper a small piece of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper an image of an inch, like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper which is divided into twelve.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you have a task that requires a great quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened; then apply the entire spatula on the two lines that you have signed, and begin with the great larder up to a small point; and let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the heart, then strip everything; then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle and all the subtle thread of wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows disappear into nothing sticky, if you want to do this; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the stitch and threads up to three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches of things that are dry and constricting, for the paper relives suddenly at the assembly of the wound and its joining, but the stitch is mortal (as the ancients said), and it's a work without fear; and if there's another way: and it's that you sign the paper with a figure that is just like the flower of myrtle, as we have recounted, three ounces of powder according to the form that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take that which overhangs with small equal forces according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle or have it with thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread under the large artery, and the second thread under the small one, and assemble the threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments; and often it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it deep according to what I have said, and then make .ij. wounds by art, and .ij. subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and cut as .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what rises from the parchment of the eye, and extract the .ij. wounds of the .ij. parties strongly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which was stretched will die and putrefy and fall off, until it separates on its own.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then apply a strengthening agent, and cure until it is healthy; and when the wound has healed, and the parchment is lifted, and the hairs will not grow again; and this is the form of the two canals that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and insert a fine silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the hunt another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the two ends of the thread; then place the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it dry in the sun so that the operations are clarified, for this is a subtle and minor operation; then insert the needle at the root of the hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as much as you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the head, and put it in the head if there is one or two or three or more; then extract your hand as much as the hairs come forth entirely in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the head is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull the head back to the entire thread that you had ordered, so that the head comes forth entirely through the opening above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then pull the head and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for twelve hours or thirteen, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows on the flesh; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair from the natural whiskers, and let it grow with that which you left, so that it is elongated and then set free.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the porridge of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease that is called "aleacrati" or the porridge comes into the eye, it has two manners: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cutting, or from a cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you sew up that wound, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and bind it so that it may be healthy; and it does not seem to me that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the disease returns worse than the first; but I work with softening things, such as fenugreic; and rose water or altaea and linseed oil are heated, and ointments of dyalquilon founded in no eye, and I envelop it in a tent, and this is the cure for that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of its treatment is that you take heed not to let it settle according to the form it had before; and these operations that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it had before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is beneath and truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cracks and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and stick it into the flesh, and make it pierce through the left arm vein as far as the right, so that the threads meet at the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all of the needle, and cover with a large spatulum.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the papyrus returns to its shape as it should, that's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the crack, and turn the papyrus, and make two cracks or cuts within the papyrus; and let the heads of the two cracks be at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter that has no "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then join the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then cure with those medicines we have spoken of, mollifying and tensing, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or cut or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain wound beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to have the skill to make the figure return to its natural form; and the same diseases, according to what is necessary for the work and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	you should apply a poultice of paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this application has to be made by men in such a way that the paper on top is soaked with white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold it as pincers, until you catch what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too rough nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the spatula being too rough or bleeding the oil; and make your incision, gently scraping off the assembled one, so that the paper regains its natural form; and it is all healthy, and never becomes watery or salty in the oil, and raises a gentle and calm tone; then put between the paper and oil a linen thread, and put on the oil a soft and abundant ointment; and after three days use sweet cologne and soothing things as long as it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the corner of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the corner of the oil is in two ways: it is nervous and seems like a hard, rough surface, and another which is not nervous, but seems like a soft, congealed moisture, that when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be overcome; and one and the other seem to enclose towards the great artery, and gradually contract until it covers all the vein and all the light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware that the spatula does not touch the raw flesh and breaks it, and that the pruning is not perceived; and after the incision pour a little warm broth into the oil, and make a dressing of litargy, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so that it may be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, often this type of nail is cured with medicines; and grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the oil of the patient, and take the lighter spatula according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail subtly, and if you see that it is diminishing and the reason appears, then distill from your mouth into the oil a dressing made of litargy and red collier and warm broth, and stop up the oil until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method of opening, so that it may be entirely restored.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the oil, then as an abscess forms, afterwards milk it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the work as before, so that it may be healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh is harmed by great injury at night in the eye through great nuisance, if it suspends on the onion, and covers one part but not entirely, that the course of tears does not come; then distills in the eye a red collier made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows upon the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Here is the translation:
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But however it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and take away its function and blind the eye completely for a long time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary therefore at the beginning that you examine the eye in which the vein is, whether it is strong or weak, and there is no other malady besides the vein; then proceed in this manner: instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the veins be subtle and double according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two threads by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then you should coil the forces of those veins subtly, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and beware that you do not blind the eye at the points of the instruments, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not grasp anything but those veins; and when you have done this, then distill in the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is remaining of the blockage.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things appeasing the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are appeased and assured of hot abscess, then recommence according to this manner which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with fire cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not yet healthy, if it is engendered in the eye that you open on the abscess, there where it must be drained, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take out all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "asper chief", and it must be made from iron indeed a chief reont, and it must be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the diseased limb of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little so that you feel that the corruption is relieved; and do this several times, then restore the limb with exciting medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the eyes are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not improve and is not abscessed, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the perforated nose according to this form: and it is that you discover with a second attempt by iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is discovered thus take the forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be attenuated up to the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the patient's arm where the nerve is, and withdraw your hand from the eye quickly, then turn to the entire forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by what the veins are in that place if he holds his hand near his nose; and then restore the dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and endures the limbs, thus you see the material at the nose; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs are open everywhere and do not disturb the nostrils, nor diminish them, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then apply a poultice, then put on suction cups or heated irons to suck out, then place over the eye; make an ointment of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and bind with bands and drapes; and the way of the drapes is that you take drapes quite soft, and double each in three, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the hairs have most need; then hold it steady with a hard bandage shaped like a circle, and restart the suction cups to suck out without making a wound; then remove the suction cups and let the eye be held steady day and night, and if they are not inflamed, it is good; if not, then restart the binding and drapes and the suction cups until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	because of the tearing of the web-like membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come to the web-like membrane, then open, and come from papers as if it were a grain of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then if you want to cover it, the operations are such that you put a needle in the root of the upper part just below the edge, then put another needle where there is a double thread on the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then cover the upper part with the double thread and tie a part of the membrane around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place it over the cloudy eye in abundance of water; and let it be until the threads adhere with the membrane, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy; and often the wound is held back by the membrane each part of a circle of drapes, until it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes take on a great appearance, so he perceives at the subtle spatula which comes in front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginean and descends the eyes, and goes between them immediately; then he restrains it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This illness called "alcunnati" is not more than a swelling that gathers in the eye, appearing like descending water, and it is not really water; and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat, straight and upright, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it so that you see the swelling come up to your eyes; then be fixed, and do not let the light shine, and see if the patient sees things as he usually does; and if it does not descend thus, know that it is water, and if the descents of the swelling are not apparent as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des aigues de l’oil	of the humors of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the signs of the wounds in the division, and this is what it takes to perceive; if one works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye firmly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a thread in that white part of the eye at the lower edge of the eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand until it penetrates into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the clear thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be equal to the measure of the spaces which are from the prunelle to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the woven fabric, and then place the instrument just where the wound is, then press one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation:
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, and if the aqueous humor rises through the second path, put the fire with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, then extract a little of the albumen in turning your hand gently and slowly; and then put back into the aqueous humor a little of the clear gem, and remove from that the inner oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by default the oil of Esther or a similar oil in rose oil and in abundance of egg whites, and mix with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our kind, put on common broth with an abundance of egg whites.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the gemstone cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose form is this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce then the conjunctive soreness, and do not go too deeply in fear, but make it subtle, then extract the albumen, as we have said; and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient the dormitory approaching, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be aware of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then disband him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see no things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate this, because the aqueous humor rises hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Here is the translation:
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he leaves the house little by little, and turns back to his affairs; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Here is the translation:
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly arranged.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of the bone is from this same subtle refinement, and the rear is in three angled points.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No times are born or nails adjusted in various ways, because there are some that resemble scorptions with many feet; and if there are such or they have an encrusted skin of dark color, and if they have soft skin of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those cases of soft skin that is not encrusted, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and pour a little oil on those skins, and treat them gently; for it is necessary to sustain the subtle spatula with one part, as long as you know that the skin is completely cleared.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains something that cannot be coped with, open everything .i. of subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and without swelling above, or abscess appearing, drain it as it is fitting; and if it's malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned, then pour out or apply cold water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nails do not open, and moisture comes up to the palace, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is a new skin on top, which prevents the instruments from coming in through cutting: then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen a little thick, and be guided by our hands, and have between each span of space I will or less; and put the patient's head at the end of the thread in his nose as much as possible, and treat with fragrant things until it comes out through the nose into the mouth; and many times children are instructed thus in schools, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other while being guided by us who are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this as much as you know that the ninth has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian embroidery, and reset it again in the nostrils as before; do this for three days or more, until the embroidery corrodes all that remains of the flesh; and then put a lead cane in the nostrils for some days until it is healthy, and if it needs medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where they distill the oils and medicines into the nostrils.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp overturned, like a pipe, and guide them thus; and if you see, make a closed pipe, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it while one heats the oil or some liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" appears on the head above the nose, and grows and becomes large, until it is visible to behold; and therefore you should apply a hot iron at the beginning, and remove everything fully, then place above the hot cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in applying it until it is large, take care lest it be hard, of dark color, of poor sense: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, for when you apply it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that you can fully remove it, then behold the patient and apply sense without fear, and cure the head of things drying and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is burned and scalded
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when continuous flow comes from one of these cartilaginous openings, it profits little, because in some homes.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary then to chant when it has come to none, if you see that the wound is fresh in all its blood; and then adjust the two lips to a seam, then cure until it is healthy; and if the lips are already separated from one part and another, it is necessary that you cleanse all parts of their skin until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a seam, and hold fast, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and incense bruised; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other suitable plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with embroidery until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the treatment is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the treatment of the belly wound; or by thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have dense abscesses on their lips, similar to grains of peas, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each wound, and take them as pincers and cover each part; then apply the remedy of vitriol ointment after the incision, so that the blood may be staunched; and then leave it to heal, and cure the wounds of dry things until they are healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Here is the translation:
des sordens	of the ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and bitter; and sometimes the black, citrine, and vers teeth, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and their heads be in your holy, and take out the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains, until they are cleaned; and if one removes what was at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have everything taken out; and know that teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments to reinsert, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one takes out from the teeth have other forms than those that one takes in between the teeth; and these forms and others are equipped with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay doing so for as long as you can, because this should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to then that one has no excuse to rush.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained by two tractions, it is necessary that you be certain of the two aching teeth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he believes it is in a healthy tooth, and makes the good tooth ache; and meanwhile the pain does not depart from him, as long as the bad one remains, for we have already wanted to do this for these health issues; and when you are well certain of the aching teeth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides with a spatula strongly to ward off the gum from all parts; then move your fingers or subtle pincers at the first small spot and small spot, as long as they are well loosened, then fasten them well; and so the head of the patient is in your healthy position between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each part lightly, and remove it as you did at first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perceived and gnawed, it is necessary that you fill it with drapals, where the roots are; and if you hold subtly as in tongs, so it does not break while holding; and it is necessary to work carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you do well to beware that you do not break it, and leave a part remaining, and reveal to the patient through the malice of the root more great pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act thus as the ignorant healers, who through their haste and hardness break sometimes the cartilage, and do not amend what we have recounted; but they come sometimes through the obstruction of this great illness by the roots that remain, or through the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, if you rinse the spot with wine or oil and salt; and if blood flows, which often happens, if you apply the spot with vitriol powder; and if it does not work, if you cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, which are used to extract teeth first, should be long and pointed, with large handles, so they do not slip when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the pulling, and let them be of iron well made, and let them be strengthened by muscles to hold.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the wound, it is necessary that you put a moist cotton cloth on it immediately for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wounds are softened, then apply the tongs called "algefri", which make the head seem like a beak of a bird; and thus they are made as if with a file, and that is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to issue from all these clamps, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and you put the instrument called "althali", which is to say a polisher, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps by itself, that is good; if not, then aid with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one aids with this instrument that has ten inches, from which comes the form.
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other firm instruments that are presented in the ratio of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which comes the form.
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the patient shows them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach about instruments for diversity of wounds, and it does not break at all in the cartilage or in other bones, or it rots, if one searches for the instruments that they need, as I have told you, and aid with gestures, from which comes the form.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let it be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but can hold and remove; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, if it happens that you know the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in its right place, and one cannot straighten or file: then take the file; and if it is sharp with the tooth, take this instrument which has a small iron point, and is similar to a little beak, and let it be of iron made into a point.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And take the file little by little in your hands daily for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file a part as it is its natural form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in your hands daily gently, so that it does not move until it settles; then smooth it out at the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it happens to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth falls out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth are loose, whether by percussion or by falling out, and the patient cannot press on them so they do not eat, and you treat them with constricting medicines, but it does not work; if you need to hold them together with a thread of gold, because silver threads turn green and decay, but gold never moves; and let the middle thread be not too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you want to adjust the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the head between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then restart the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so it does not move at all; and let your binding be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then gather the heads of the thread to a tin, and assemble them, and reattach them between the healthy tooth, and position it so it does not blister the tongue; and then leave it thus straight as long as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the thread breaks, if it stays and serves all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the two healthy teeth, and of the two jaws, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not interfere with those who are not wise and suffer, and never make the form of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it in place as we have said, and it will remain and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the thread of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never is this ligature which comes from beneath the tongue or nature, that it grows thus; or by accident of a deep wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue; then gather the nervous thread of the large, so long as the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is stiffness or numbness, and it is suddenly a wound, if you anoint with unguent and gather the large ligament; and beware that the suture is not too deep in the artery which is beneath; and when you have done, lift up the aqueous rose and of ash, or cold water, then put beneath the tongue a linen bandage; and tie the patient's each night, so that their jaws cannot gape.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the flow of blood comes, place on the vitriol ointment broiet; and if the blood does not come, cauterize with the slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see the color of fusion, black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it declines to a bluish color, and there is moisture, then apply the uncinate, and make a subtle spatula-shaped instrument, and deliver from one part and another; and if the blood does not stop in your operation, apply vitriol ointment until it is staunched, then return to your operation until you treat everything fully; then lift the lever of hazel and of seed, and treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there come ulcers in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called II ulcers, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, take heed: if it is an abscess with a small sensation and a fleshy color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of the flow of blood; but let it be until it is ripe, and then you will divide it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of a white color and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument for covering, but first see that the abscess has cooled down and is appeased.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be in good health, and he should open his mouth and grasp the instruments between his hands, and press the tongue beneath all the instruments, because this is the form; whether it is of silver or thin iron as a delicate knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Here is the translation:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a candle flame, because it is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting on one part, and name on the other part; and when you have cauterized one of the armholes, cauterize the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and hot and easy, and if there is an evacuation of blood, gargle the patient with hot water, or scorchings of green pommes so they are cooked, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is stanched; then cure until it be healthy; and no other time grow in the throat other abscesses than the two armholes, if you cauterize them thus like the two armholes immediately.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, it is to know the small sense of the abscess; and had almost completely closed off the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained like that for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had grown so large that it had already sent two threads through the two openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then, and thrust in one of the openings, then the thread went further, and drew out a large portion of pus; then I made another attempt through the other opening of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I thrust the thread into those abscesses, and cut away a part, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not cease from cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess decreased again, and filled up the space that I had emptied, so much that it became very large; then I deceived her and cauterized within the throat: thus it stopped growing; and I departed from those regions, and knew not what God would do with her after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the vein descends into the tube, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called "tube".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is purified as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit at all, and you see that the painful abscess is appeased, and it is subtle; then it is necessary to cut into it; and the one that is round, assembled, and not long; and it is sanguine or of dark color or black, then it is necessary to avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before; then put the hook in the tube, and draw it back, and cut around one of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two handles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluous flesh which is beyond the natural term; for if you cut too much, it grieves the voice and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the II amandres, and cure until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of cutting, it is necessary that you use gentleness at the cautery of the senses fearing pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of burning with the cautery is sharp and pointed.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient places his head in your healthy hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confides with sharp vivid heat, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in employing the management of this instrument, whose form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	Here is the translation:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it is with silver or tin, and one of the heads is thrust into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the vein, so that the eye is mortified; afterwards, you recommence often, until the eye dries out, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of hot abscesses, for many things occur; and do not do it more frequently than at the decline of hot abscesses.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a piece of egg white in the chief's mouth, so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; for the egg white does not let the vapor pass into the mouth, and it is a good cure, ensuring complete health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens that the gullet or spine of a fish, or something else; thus you should treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun in every instrument, so that you can see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the gullet, you should make the patient vomit thus so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it casts out the thing through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and there is the sponge with its filament, and then it transpires; and when it comes to the place, thus it will be; and then you will treat further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take the instrument of ponching in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter more lightly into the gullet, and hold the head high lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it does not come to life, nor does it push the bone within; and it is of value that the patient pushes the instrument, because it is seen or the thing is cast out; if it casts out below, or it treats further throughout all the instruments equally, until it is cast out.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the sound of the gullet
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No medicine is suitable for the patient, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not benefit, then gaze into the patient's throat in the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, if it draws to a small vein, or subtle tendons that hold fast to it.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it does not hold, take a curly-haired cane, and insert it into the patient's throat, then insert or remove the curl of the cane with hot iron, and make it so often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you tighten the patient's water throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full sight of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in as if swallowing, and move it with their hand often; and if soon the wound feels the water, it scabs.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not scab as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with assafoetida, at the instrument that I said in the fumigation of the urine; do this many times, for it will heal without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible charcoal, and it is covered with a pierced covering in the middle, and in this perforation is the head of the instrument; then you throw the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not exit, but goes up to the sanies; and the sanies will fall now, and if they do not fall, then recommence the fumigation many times; and the patient suffers thirst, and eats salty and bitter things, and drinks no water; and then it is necessary that it be done by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it is, when one can see it, resembles a curved tenaille for entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak of a sign, and it has the roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the lancets for abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many abscesses are similar, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own semblance, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is by the eyes where they are at the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the bowel is tender according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are near the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near the joints, and one leaves them until they are ripe inside, perhaps because the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near the principal member, and you delay perforation until it is ripe, it will hurt the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, you should pierce it when it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for one that is near the foundation, which does not ripen inward, and becomes fistulous, and cannot be healed in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the hole of the perforation of the abscess which is according to its completion, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the diminution of the pain and of the redness, and the debate and the settlement of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the abscess, and where it opens mucus; and so the perforation of the long body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or in joints and in veins, and in all equal places where there is no putridity.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these that swell, according to the affected limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the raw flesh, if it is necessary that you allow the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce before that, the body will be full of much filth; and by chance they harden the lips and the depths of it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs have need of.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you make small incisions for small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many fissures according to the appearance of the greatness of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the skin, and cut; when it has become thus as I describe, and is amortized, it is necessary to do thus as one does for blisters: and if there are those that are cut into three angles, and if there are those that are cut as the foil of myrtle, as abscesses of the entrails; and if there are those where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Here is the translation:
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expert often kills the patient with the issue of the bowel, which by chance would kill the patient, and you do not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Abandon therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if you evacuate the wound, and examine whether the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, if you apply tents of linen or cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put a tent in each one so they come together; and if you have cut into a part of the skin, and you have shaved around, then it is necessary that you fill with much soft cotton or dressing of linen thread moistened, and leave it just at the third day; then apply ointment, and treat with unction until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if you remove blood that has come to the surface, apply cold and still water, and wipe with a cloth, and place it on the limb, washing it many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood removal persists, apply governing treatment and cure, and the powders I mentioned in my book, and if it is winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then you must put on warm and oily tents and cloths; and if it is summer, and the limbs are weak, then you must put on cool and oily cloths, or warm and oily wine, until the third day, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and the discharge and the treatment, as it is necessary, until they are healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to cauterize completely in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one should proceed beforehand in the treatment of abscesses, and see here this chapter.
des soros	of wounds
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the crust of the wound comes off small abscesses, and there are ways for us that are in bandages, just like the joining of a cut, and many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some fatty ones and such ones where there is moisture also as in the case of pores; and if there are hard and stubborn ones on the incision site, and there is no doubt that the arteries do not act against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the incision site are such that you experience with every instrument called "incisor", from which the shape comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they make it dry by applying pressure from above and along the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, they scrape off everything leaving no skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately if one leaves nothing; then they insert cotton in an Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and in wine, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and they cure what has been delayed from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then recauterize the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain any longer do no harm; then treat the wound of piercing conveniently, so that it be healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscesses hold in a thick nut, then cut according to this form, from afar; and you scrape your nails, and clear everything around, and put all your treatment of drawing for the cotte where it lies; and if the artery makes you oppose, then do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And thus do with the abscess if it is pierced, and prune and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut into the pierced abscess and the moist, if it is less severe, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there are some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and among these were the abscesses that I cut into, or the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a sour, bitter, and white stone, and could not break it; and if one had touched any, one would have done as much harm as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	Here is the translation:
des scrophules	of the tumors
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often it happens that an abscess forms on the neck, and beneath the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come to another part of the body or limb, and are numerous, and are intertwined with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly located on its side, like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are those that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	when you see that they are of good disposition on the touchier, and resemble the color of the body, and move from each part and do not stray from the nerve of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and are not too deep; then it is necessary that you cut into them from above, and scrape off each part, and stretch out the two lips of the heart as oncines, if you have mastery, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and pull gently and gently, and be sure that you do not cut into the nerve nor the vein, and are not too shallow, lest you cut into what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut into the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to operate, then put on the wound vitriol ointment, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is calmed, and the wound becomes soft, and begins to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work, until you complete it; then search with your finger to see if there remain small scrophulae, if you cut and mend them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrophula, it does not behoove you to cut that scrophula at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire tumor, it is necessary that you reassemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no more excess flesh due to the greatness of the tumor.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you understand how to cut at the root of it, and draw out strongly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those tumors that have excess flesh, pierce where it appears to die; and pierce thus as we said before, depending on the circumstances, then you will mix with ointment and similar things, so that they corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, if the treatment with ointment cures immediately, so that it be healthy.
de squinance	of scalping
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old people said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and it is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have scalping, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cleansed; and one must not do it by aid of this, because all the veins and the pormon of the patient are at risk of having an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the gullet, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss which comes from the strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it beneath three circles or four with a small cut across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cut through the syphac, not in the cartilage; and thus it is convenient at the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough to be free.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the entire neck, then cuts the heart as far as it comes to the tonsils; and clears the veins of blood, if you see nothing, and then touches the syphac, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the flow of the tonsils which jumps forth from the broken place, and from the lack of voice; and leaves the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with good care, and sew it whole without sensing the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so that it be healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	One must not do this just so long as the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to be mortal, and the defect lacks wings.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then touches the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and for this reason the ancient one commands to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then they command to sew the wound and cure, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden took the cautery, and inserted it in her throat, and touched part of the sinews of her arm; and I was called upon to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and I saw well that it had not been covered with a bandage nor conducted further than the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and sewed the wound, and cured her until she was healthy; and I didn't find in the maiden any fever except that she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition; because it is said that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large gullet
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and it is a great abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women; and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or naturally it has no pain.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which seems like a fat swelling, and the other manner seems like an abscess that comes from the artery; and there is fear, and it does not seem possible to operate on those who are small, and prove and search everywhere: if you find it thus as I said gras, and it does not go into any vein, if you cut, if you cut them as one cuts the veins, and draw it out of its entirety, if there is no point; and search well everywhere, and cure it as it seems, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of the nose
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways for us to heal, of which I will describe all the similarities; and now it is necessary that I explain the entire difference between them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the illness is heat and fever, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it completes the purification; then restore the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the patient having no heat nor fever nor pain, and containing yellow bile, which is their own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes thick; and are according to these similarities, whether grave, or moist, and much of the color is as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its shape will come or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring into the abscesses of the wounds is that you take or make the moist place where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you know that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the greatness of the abscess; then extract the suppurating matter, and take care not to force too much.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	Here is the translation:
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it stays nothing, it returns to us many times; and if it stays a little, and the wound does not grieve you, if you apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and hold the wound steady, and put soothing things on the hot abscess, and treat other wounds until it is healthy; and if the wound is great, so sew up the lips of the wound, and treat what bothers you.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is beating strongly against your hand or another, and you hasten to employ the virtue of broken vitriol, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and then restore the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterize what has been left behind.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of inserted instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quadrants which are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula; and they are also like the needles with which one sews up the sores, and are made of citrin, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more experienced for sewing up black pustules; and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of onions are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are onions that have two curvatures in three ways also; and if there are onions that have three curvatures, and are also of three ways; and if there are onions that have two curvatures, and onions with a single curvature only, and are of three ways; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these instruments is sharp, and there are those that do not cut more than one part, from which the nails are scraped, because one does not cut into the vein or nerve; and these introductors are the lancets placed in the hands, so that the patient does not feel it at the opening of the abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses them no more than in the charnut, such as legs, arms, and limbs, and similar places; and never do they make another small instrument, resembling scrapers of fistulae, according to this form, at which blood is staunched.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and he puts it back into its place that joins the veins, and the arteries, and it does not return according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Here is the translation:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Here is the translation:
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses of the sitting bones
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from beneath the sitting bones are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors or they have ribs, and if there is only moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be treated according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire abscess is emptied, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until another day, then remove all the cotton, and heal by applying ointment so that it becomes healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, do so as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound becomes hollow, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is injured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then often come abscesses, and it also happens to the inflamed vein with an abscess; and if you recognize thus that it is because of the artery, then the abscesses are long in depth; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the strangeness; and when it is because of the vein, then there are obvious signs appearing; and it is foolish to try to remove this abscess, and also when it is under the muscles and near the bones and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it is necessary to abandon the treatment with iron, and the one who is at the head must also abandon it, and in the one who is inflamed by an artery make a incision above the skin of the affected limb; then open the incision as wide as possible, and carefully separate the artery from the surrounding tissue, until it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath, and make it pierce to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then touch the place which is between the two ligatures of an intromission, so that the blood flows out, and the abscess is freed; then apply the treatment that induces a crisis, until the ligature is cut; then treat what is coming from the incision, until it is healthy; and if the abscess is due to the vein, you must hold with your hand what you can of the abscess under the entire skin, then insert the needle underneath the place you are holding, and make it pierce, and use a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I have told you, or the ligature of one of the two parts of the artery; and if you doubt that the thread is not firm, you reinsert another needle through all the threads underneath the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in three places; then touch the abscess until the superfluity flows out, then touch the superfluous part of the artery and leave what is tied; then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments with tents and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And it happens more often to the joints and the two and in all the joints where they have joints, and it's the grief of apostemes, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many dispositions without pain; and when one strains it forcefully, the patient feels pain, and it's not at all in the depth of the body, but beneath the skin; and it moves well from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor beneath nor above, and he who is in joints does not want to be treated with iron: by chance it would cause contraction; and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin spasm.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the apostemes are small, hold them with tongs, and cut at their root; and if they are large, suspend them from the ankle, and scrape, then oste and assemble the wound to the suture, and cure until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of large bulging swellings
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Here is the translation:
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weigh them and found in one 18 ounces heavy, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is that you examine if the patient's moistures are wet, and the color of the joint is pale and moist and of subtle root; if you apply the spatula large, and be in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Because the blood-letter comes too frequently with great evacuations of blood, and if you do not have the skill, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient fearing and anxious about the incision of the iron, take a well-made thread, and bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain it, and do not cease from restraining the thread until it reaches the joint, and thus works without trouble; and if the roots are large, fear not to cauterize in the middle of the belly, but you can well cauterize most of it, then cauterize so it does not return; then cure the wound, and beware that you do not cauterize the thin skin which is of false color and of poor sense and of little regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted sores later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the abscess comes from fire cautery or breaking of the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the skin folds, as if it had been caused by other injuries, or blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or windiness; and if it is due to the breaking of the skin and issuing of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens with diverse discharge.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it swells up, and then returns, and sometimes it is narrow, and increases much at the entry of the bath and through strong effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand, it does not constrict at all; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It seems necessary to let the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary to instruct the patient to hold their belly, and be straightened out entirely, then sign across the navel; then instruct them to sit between your hands, then go across the place you have signed all around the spatium; then bind it with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and hold the limb steady; then uncover half of the abscess extended over the limb, and touch your index finger, and feel the intestine; if you find it taken by the limb, then release it, and put the intestine back in its place; and if you find the bowel, take it to the navel, and cope with the superfluity; and if the artery or the vein does something against you, go gently across, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with a strong cord, and thread the two needles in what you have done in a cross that you have made pierce; then stretch the abscess across four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the belly heal as much as it can, and expel the dead flesh by itself; or cope with it when it is subtle and porous, then cure what is necessary, and dress the abscess as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the belly of what is necessary, and repair the belly.
dou chancre	two ulcers
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division of similar ulcers, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure with iron; and we say that an ulcer is in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in the limb or where it can be reached if it is like an ulcer which is in the muscles, and in the skin, and in similar places, and one should remove everything when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I cannot heal any of them; nor did anyone ever heal them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in the limb or where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make them healthier if they show manifest repletion, then make the patient healthy before doing the operation; then cut off your ulcers or cancers, and shave all parts, and scrape all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and carefully feel the limb with your hand or with something else, and see that the remaining blood does not contradict the incision of the artery or vein, so cauterize until the blood is stanched; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Here is the translation:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And a point, and never be so inside that it cannot reach the intestine when you thrust in, and do not let it get stuck; then see if the drop is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary to make a perforation above the belly, three fingers' breadth directly above the navel; and if it is for liver disease, make the perforation on the left side of the belly, three fingers' breadth; and if it is for the spleen, make it on the right, and do not let the patient lie on the perforation so that the superfluous liquids do not flow to the weak spot; then pierce all the skin with an instrument, and the belly, and lift your hand at all the space between the skin and the peritoneum, as if scraping out a quantity of an ounce or more; then pierce the peritoneum until the space becomes empty, and that is the water of the abscess, then drain it forcefully, and this is the form of the instrument.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a subtle silver needle, and it is of lead or lighter archer, and has a small perforation at the tip; and where one side has three perforations; and two on another side, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a pen, and this is the form of the incision that writers cut with the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the tip above is the scalpel, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now descends onto the instrument; empty it then, half or a third part, for if you empty more than it needs at that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit due to the arm, or he falls powerless, or approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then touch the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held back by the cord that stops the perforation which is on the syringe, as I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then reinsert the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take from the water a small quantity; do it no day, and guard yourself from fooling until it no longer remains but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much of water, if the treatment of the grave or tomb is hot, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and you abstain from drinking; and the treatment with drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the flow
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never is a child born who does not have holes in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If you want to pierce it so much that it does not feel pain at all, I will show you a very subtle spatula according to this form.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or make a hole I close subtly with a plug, and tie it thus for three or four days, and when he wants to make urine, if the plug is opened, and make urine, and then replace it; and by chance it does not close, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Here is the translation:
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have a perforation in their body are afflicted, for none are born with a perforation at the head of the penis, because they cannot urinate before lifting their penis high; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the marrow, and it's a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the surgery is that the patient lies supine on their back, with the head of the rod and the handle thus like the size of a pen, so that the perforated skin cuts in the middle, as it is necessary; and beware of the flow of blood which comes often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding of that which bleeds, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the pimples on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times cysts come on the rod, and it is a sign of bad blood; and in them there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if it is necessary that you take them with a subtle finger, and scrape all around, then put on cotton cloth in Egyptian ointment; then cure with ointment diafinicon until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you must apply fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and the ulcer is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is sewn, then cure what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you cure it all at once, the head of the penis is not assured that it will not be perforated, and blackness and corruption come to his penis and in his groin; then you must remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour, which is made from the scorched crust of pomegranate seeds and of veal, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a flow of blood comes, then temper the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries aid in two dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood and at the corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you apply or guide a tube of lead onto the penis, and urinate into the patient; and when the skin is erect at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, either due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape with an instrument, so that the ligaments are disjoined and freed from all parts; and if this is a difficult thing to devise, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula at the head of the penis and the skin; then separate gently between them, and place a subtle drapery of linen in a cold fountain, so that it does not become erect again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of my masters and surgeons who performed circumcision in the following manner: with forces, and all at once; if the skin was too delicate, for it had .ij. layers, and by chance if one cut on that which is above and delays that which is below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the mundification which is done from above it is not assured of the point of the member; and in the mundification of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrupts the vein, and many times thus they do not need mundification and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mundification which is done with forces all along the thread of wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut exactly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces for the mundification is this: the two heads should be twisted and should be trenching, and the heads should be as large as the equally balanced handle.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	Here is the translation:
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is swollen, let it be so long as the apostemes wounds are appeased, and lightly scrape off; if you touch thus as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then the place of sudden wounds with powder, which we have said or treatise on powders, and if you touch with a golden needle beyond measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	due to retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of the lancet or scalpel, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and remove the superfluous part of the lancet and tie it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and almond milk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod of moist olive oil and watered tede; then gently insert the syringe into the rod until it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod above towards the blister; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient come to the void thing, and this is not done according to this order because that which conduces or leads astray; then stretch the thread all along the lancet little by little, and the urine follows the lancet, then it is issued forth, and make the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is alleviated.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood or pus comes into the bladder, where putrefaction is assembled, and you see distillations of bitter and medicines, if you make all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	Here is the translation:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below at the breast or the tendons are cut; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you see clusterizing the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts in the form of a double thread coil, and heat that moisture over the fire; then put the head of the cluster in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has just come into the bladder; and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes into the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stones, and their extraction with medicines; and I have told the difference between stones in the kidneys as they fall, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder often falls in children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtle signs; and it appears suddenly, and greatly troubles the patient's penis, and they urinate frequently, and then become constipated; and most of these symptoms are the foundations; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very difficult in old people, and it's as if it's a middle age, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient through evacuation, in order to expel all the bad humors that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders the recovery of the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift them up and move them downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and often falls down from the high place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then touch and feel inside; if you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall to the toucher from everything, if you move your right index finger of the left hand, if the patient is old, or your left middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and feel its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and feel at the limit where you want to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand to clear the skin which is under the loins in the area where one makes the incision; then he puts on the spatula-like instrument, so that it is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between this which is between the hip and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh; and be straight on the stone, and both feet are thus or foundation, and be the girth of the traversing so it is large by default, and within is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great; perhaps the press if both feet which is or foundation, that it feels beneath the labor; and knows that there is a part of the stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is heavy to extract; and if there is a part which is underneath, similar to a ball, and rounded, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If the stone has angles and margins, make the girth larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract it with pincers that are like a lime at the head, for extracting the stone so it doesn't escape; or you put beneath it an instrument subtly curved at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the little passage, and if the blood does not flow, then extract with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, then remove first the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cope with, then pull strongly, and the small ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it needs to be treated with care, and to make a bigger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Because these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through the wound that the abscess cannot suppurate; but in any case you make an effort to treat it, or to break up the tendons, so that you treat it piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, if you apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it steady, and put on top a dressing of soft oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess; then reposition the patient on his back, and do not undo the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, rub in very well the oil and water, then apply the ointment of galenon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that the urine is known to exit in such a way without a sound with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and putrefy; then lift the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and aid him in all ways that you know, so that he may be healthy; and it is necessary that all the holes that you cure, you tie the two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot flow out; if you cure this as I say thus, that you repeatedly cut many times, it is excused from cutting through this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a forest of iron according to this form and be at two angled points fixed in the thigh:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and wind it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the thread into the rod gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the thread with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can feel the stone from another part; if the urine comes soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is within the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this because of something that deflects it, then place the thread beneath the stone and another above, then make the rod straight over the stone between the two threads, then extract it, and undo the thread, and cleanses the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Because the stone is often found in women, and if it happens at any time, then the treatment is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method is that sometimes one cannot find a woman who knows well this art of hands; and the fourth method is that the stones of the woman are more profound than those of the man, because it needs to make deeper cuts, and great fear is there. And if you need to ascend to this, then you must take a wise midwife, and grasp the true vein on, and if you do not find one, then ask for a subtle test; and present a wise old woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instruct her to do what you command from the inquiry into the stones; and observe very well if the woman is a virgin: then she must thrust her finger or foundation and search for the stones; and if she finds them, then constrict beneath her finger, and recommend that she thrusts her finger or with the malady, and squeezes and presses her left hand on the bladder strongly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary to move the skin from the entrance of the bladder up to the root of the thigh, so that it reaches the base of the thigh; then press on the stone in the root of the thigh against the soft confluence, where it appears misplaced, and feels the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or below, and let the wound be at first small; then put the ointment on the wound, if you feel the stone if it increases the pain so much that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you recognize the symptoms in order to know the disease.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the wound does not heal, set on it a vitriol ointment, and hold it for an hour so that the wound is stained; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as remedies to aid you in your operation; and if the wound does not heal, and it is from the artery that was cut, set powder on the wound and bind with bandages and compresses, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone, lest by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the veins are purified, so return to your work, until the stone is loosened.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The watery humor is nothing other than a mixture of moisture or white syrup, which is beneath the skin of the hips, containing the egg-white; and it is called "syrup", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg-white, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the hip between the white syrup that we have said; and this does not happen rarely.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this remedy is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it's declining yellow to jaundice, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and that happens more; and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is or becomes white as we have said, the abscesses are ripe, I don't think it takes long like the figure of an egg, and doesn't open the joints, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in its own membrane, the abscesses are ripe with part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white surface, then it feels very well; thus when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should try all the inner quarters, from which the form is presented before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the internal parts, judge from what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the fullness of his body; then he should sit on his back, on something slightly elevated, and much drapery is placed under him; then he sits on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extends the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart; then take the spatula in hand, and cut the skin of the ribs through the length of the loin up to the point where it touches, and make a straight incision in cutting the skin of the ribs just to the white skin, and carefully remove the skin according to his power; then pierce the white skin plain with water, and extract all the water, and then put on ointments, and apply the white skin above; and do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the white skin; cut out all or in pieces, if you do not cut it well subtly, the white skin will return; and if the ulcer becomes inflamed because of your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the white skin; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the ribs to one bandage, then treat it like the other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the vein corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspensions, and extract the vein, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equalization, then let out the blood, and put on the painful wound a gentle ointment made with rose oil; and put on another gentle ointment made with wine and oil, and put on the two gauzes, and put double drapes over it, and bind everything together according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two gauzes and fill them with lint in this way, and assemble them by stitching at the throat of the arm, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just to the back, and another at the part of the finger; and another head on the two angles, and so everything is assembled in the loop of the arm; and no medicine is made with this cautery iron rod, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the gauzes, and be careful as we have said, so that the white syrup that contains the wound is uncovered; if you take the cautery in this way, and pierce that white syrup as with onyx, and scrape it with this subtle hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And you should burn in all the ways that you can, as much as you stretch everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salutary; and beware of the deterioration of blood, and dread the operations of cutting; and if nothing makes you counter, or abscess bursts or deteriorations of blood or another thing, cure what makes you counter, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to attend to this operation due to its horribleness, so perform perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the watery fluid is there, so make the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the thick part of the whole spatula large, and put the perforation from a long cord; and let the openings be wide, so that all the watery fluid flows out; then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and leave to flow the remainder of the watery fluid, then cure until the wound is healthy; and if the white fabric does not let the watery fluid issue from the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you use a pipe or instrument with which one draws the watery fluid from the hydropics, so that its form is thus before; and enlarge the wound, and know that the watery fluid returns, and is assembled after six months or within a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the loins
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Here is the translation:
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and similarly from wounds; and it is in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know by excessive and bitter sharpness, which spreads to the joints, or from percussion; and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no finding of pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and by chance some abscesses are greenish and pungent, and of bad color, and sometimes they come from a narrowing of the artery, or from an inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to a narrowing of the artery, it is recognized by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers; and it does not seem that you should touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those that are made from an inflammation of the vein are recognized by their disposition to the expression of finger touch, and one can well take the measure on this similarity, and on the other parts; and it is that you cut out the kernel of the joints, then the egg-white rises high, and the traitor flees from the white skin, and delivers the suspension from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the vein is suddenly swollen with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you treat the vein, and the wound; and if it is higher up at the ankle, or in those which are beneath the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all this tension, and the wound rounds again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is at the back, then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the humor, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of lime and rose oil and wine, then treat with other treatments until he is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the loins
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	These are enveloped abscesses with an envelopment similar to a scorpion's tail, with the softening of the surrounding areas, and the patient suffers greatly when they walk; and the treatment of this disease is very close to being fearful as it was before, and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high chair, then bind them with suspensories of linen threads below their two arms, to all the vessels which are near the edge, and tie the master veins, and extend them forcibly; then cut into the spatula trenchantly and widely through the area where the vessels are discovered, and then strip away from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then fix a needle or thread with double twist, and bind it to the first joint or where the veins come together, and bind it again at the other end; then bind them in the middle directly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moistures; then treat the wound as the others do, so that no vessel shrinks away from nourishing one of the vessels; for by this means no harm comes, and if all the vessels come together, it is necessary to treat the vessels at every point; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of this face
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Here is the translation:
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of pus, which brings about sudden severe pain at its onset, and it is the diverse appearances of abscesses beneath the skin, close by, and it is due to the issue of the intestine and the body being worn out by the pus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it settles beneath the ribs with the intestine, and is retained there, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron to fear, because they think it will scare them away.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the cautery of the swelling veins, as we have said, after the incision, due to doubt about the removal of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the abscess form until it bursts of its own accord; and if it delays in ripening, then apply warm water, and put on what we have said, until it bursts; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case I never saw anyone who could make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old ones said that it is done like the scythe that is assembled near the vein, in such a way that you tie the veins, after cutting lightly underneath; then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess with what opens, until the veins heal; and treat as we have said, until it is perfectly healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and opens the veins; and do not descend into the intestines with any coils, and if you do, it is little, and repair all hours; and always if it stays too long at this point, the wound or siphac will swell, until the intestine descends; and this happens by extending the siphac that is in the groin, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and enlarged the veins and opened; and the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies supine on their back between your hands, then cut the vein of the rupture swollen from the large according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the siphac that is beneath the skin which is inflamed, then take the rait and put it on the apparent vein of the siphac; and press at the bottom of the belly, then cut the two apparent veins of the siphac on the head of the rait, and cut one and the other; then extract the head of the rait, and do not touch any point of the siphac that does not extend to another thing, as I have made you know in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines; then treat with the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the veins, if it is wounded and cures the wound, so that it may be healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The abscess is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterizations are moved in this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the groin
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the groin is softened in some men, because the flesh that is within is mollified, and it is a pleasure to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on his back, and cover the softened skin with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips to a suture, and if you see, cut first the superfluous soft skin at .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it like other wounds, until it is healthy, and sews the thread.
dou chastrement	of punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	It is known that cauteries are mentioned in our law, and for this reason I prefer not to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to force them except by two means: one is that the masters respond in writing when asked about the cure; and the other, because we often have need of cauterizing certain beasts to aid us, such as goats and sheep and cattle and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that cauteries are made according to two methods: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we make by attraction, we seat the beast in warm water, until the skin is softened and pendulous; then take them with your hand, until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des hermofrodites	and the hemorrhoids
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Here is the translation:
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way is with women, and it is on the little finger as if a rod and they bind.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of a man and a woman is that you dress the wounded parts all together, and the treatment is like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the loins, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tents of the genitals
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tentigen is a wounded part on the natural area, as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tentigen to your hand or to the onions, and dress lightly; and do not go too deeply in fear of causing a flow of blood, then the treatment of another wound until it is healthy; and there is another wound that grows at the mouth of the marsh, and the example, and by chance it jumps forth, and it is similar to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to operate, as we have said concerning the inflammation, and the treatment so that it may be healthy.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is an error if the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the pertus is small; and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has come; or it is by chance ajostee, or subtle dou syfac, and it is made deep in the marrow, or in the sides, or below, or whatever; and it prevents conception, and infant development, and by adventure the flowers have; and the knowledge of this is by the examination of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the symptoms are approaching quickly, then look at your fingers or in the vein.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is subtle dou syfac, and it is approaching as the liver, then hurry, and arrange thus: put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then stretch out the two livers formally, so that the subtle dou syfac may be rounded, and overcome the symptoms; then take a thread, and wind it in oil, and put it on the spot, and guide the woman to each house every day, so that she cannot conceive.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the skin is hard and thick, it is necessary to apply cupping glasses similar to a foil of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscesses are of new flesh, then suspend an onion and a cup; and among the medicines that staunch blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and ensemble abundant water; then apply a large poultice of soft cloth, so that the wound cannot suppurate; and thus it will be lengthy, and apply a tent of dry linen; then be cured by other cures until it is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when new flesh appears in the wound, then it is necessary to cover according to this method, if there are no abscesses that become inflamed.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that becomes inflamed in the wound should not be touched with iron.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are overgrowths of veins that without sharp custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thellu; and we have already said in the division the similarities to those, and the signs, and I will tell you here those that receive curation.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the thigh, when they are deeply rooted in the marrow, and do not appear to the sense, if it is not the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then stretch out the thigh as tendons, and cut into its roots, then powder on medicines that stop blood flow, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet in a cold bath for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if the blood comes out, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and of galls and similar things, and then take oat flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and apply it as a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he is steady, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him straighten his back and arms without striking; then take a lancet, and apply the juice of plantain or of angelica with old wine, and make him straight.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess breaks, heal the wounded place so it is healthy; and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough-headed chief, so you must cover it as I have said before; and then heal until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come to the marrow, such as cancer and piercing abscesses and herpes and stitches and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary therefore that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess which comes to the marrow, which is not like the abscesses that collect pus; and if you want to know the work of iron, look if the abscess is agitated at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make the patient wait until the pain is alleviated; and then have the patient sit on a chair, and let him lean against his back and assemble his feet as parts of a broken limb; and let his thighs be spread out, and put his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a linen bandage; then suck out the swelling from the right side, and prepare the instrument by which one opens the mouth of the marrow, so that afterwards the form appears; and it is necessary that when you have prepared this instrument, you make a first trial to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not come more than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instruments are larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapes, so that the instruments do not harm; and it is necessary that he puts the cornet of the instrument on top, and holds the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one makes a poultice with the softest part of the hand, if it is necessary to cover the head, at the gentle touch; and when the wound is empty, if it is necessary to put ten moist applications in rose oil or green oil; and put the application firmly on the wound at the edge of the marrow, and put it under the marrow and on the clean skin, netting with a subtle or mediocre skill so they may be treated; then heal afterwards, within two days of applying, as long as it is healthy; and never lift the marrow and the wound by cleansing with water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and aristological treatment so they may be treated; then return to the application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed in the marrow, it is necessary to guard against cauterizing with iron, but rather treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Here is the translation:
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it happens sometimes upon his feet, and comes to the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes to his belly, or swelling, and is turned by bad luck around his neck, and by other evil figures; if it is necessary for the patient to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes onto its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of it are weak, then make her sit on a chair, or where the women hold her; and let her nature be of oil or fenugreek which is cooked, and then put the baby between her two little spatulas, which is its form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and feel the second one, and touch his finger as much as the moisture that is in the running flux; and take hold of the belly of the woman as much as the children are descending, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman of muscillaige of fenugrec with oil of sisament; then make her take a purging draught and be confined for a condition, and keep her mouth and nose an hour: if now the children come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands are swollen, it is necessary that you reset them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet high up; then remove the chair from the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall when getting up; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant dies, cut the hands at the cutting board that is placed before you, and extract the child, and reset evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to lift them up high; and then turn them little by little, until they are even; then take one of the feet and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it jumps just to the hips, instruct to take hold, and make them straighten with good sense; if it is swollen, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump far as we have said, then turn it a little and a little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, take a poultice of heated wine, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and pound everything in the mortar; and place it on the woman's nature within and remove this ointment, then make her sit in hot water until beneath the ribs; and when she is softened beneath, make her wear a belt of myrrh, and put it beneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the chair, then make her sneeze and hold her nose and mouth, and take her belly lightly, for now the infant will come out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the escape of the child onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the infant comes in this form, then place the basin under her hands little by little; then let it be placed on her neck, and hang the feet down, and make her lie on the bed; and bend her hands little by little, and then take her hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from beneath, until she is prepared below; and if the infant does not come out, take its feet and move them gently, then move the belly above, then bring your hands out; and rock the infant little by little; and instruct the woman to push as much as the infant comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes with a wide hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	Here is the translation:
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I think that the bail should hold his hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it lightly; and when it is even, place on the natural muscle tone of the thumb and finger, as we have said, then instruct him to move it little by little; and when you have done this, make him sit on a chair, and instruct him to take hold; and make him steady.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for the entire second one
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to the second stage in this manner, place the second hand on your finger, as far as the moisture is evacuated; and if the infant's mouth and neck are bent, hold the belly so it is not retained, and kill the infant; then put the child inside, as you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to take hold at no time: then it will be set lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Here is the translation:
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	They are strange things, and do not live well, if they have little name; I know that, for they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the bud; and sometimes they issue naturally like all those beneath, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue grievously, thus the cure as we have said, and let the subtle balm be, and make it thick and light in what it does; and do thus as it is worth to bring salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is necessary that the balm knows all this, for it happens that similar things have occurred; so do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman who has had a stillborn child or a miscarriage, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to perform manual operations; then it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has no accident or fear of death; then it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her head be inclined downwards, and her legs be raised; and the minister should anoint her hands with oil made from athelia and fenugrec and flaxseed, then apply the bandage to her arms with these oils and muscillaiges; then put them lightly in the marrow, then take the child out of there, or she takes out what is conceived there, and appears to be born on her chief; if you fix the nails in her eyes or in her neck or in her mouth or in her palace or under her beard or in her strength or near her ribs, and it is born on her feet, then fix or prick them and cut through her sides; and it is necessary that she holds the nail with her right hand, and puts the curve between the fingers of her left hand, and applies it lightly to her whole hand, and fixes the nail in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the nail.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then you find another bone, where the third is in a similar position, so that the extractions are even; and then they are evenly set in motion from one part to another, to issue forth, and the bones are held firmly, so it's like this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it remains in one part, then anoint the boil with some of its oily drops, and apply them to that part, and treat the other part; and if it does not remain at all, then put this bone or higher up, and do thus until it issues forth completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be reduced by stretching, then you must wrap around the drapil, until it issues forth completely; then put a bandage on the joint of the foot or at the heel, and thus you must do with the other hand, and so for the two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted in the exit, or if it has an assembled sharp chief, it is necessary that you insert the spinal spatula between your two, and make the chief and extract the sharpness; or you rotate it to the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter which follows this one; and thus the same makes the children have a large natural chief; and then treat the bones as tenailles, and if the head breaks out and it holds to the forceps, so be careful that the moisture which is in the worst exit; and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces at the joint where you can; and if it is stuck in the belly or below the ribs, it is necessary that you pull as far as the moisture corrodes.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is on its feet, it is light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the marrow are lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is twisted in the belly or at the breast, it is necessary that you extract it with the drapil enveloped on the hand; and make the belly or breast, as far as the moisture which corrodes there; and if the other limbs are oiled, and the head remains, put the bail in your hand in front of the marrow, and treat just up to the mouth of the marrow; then you put I or II, and treat again; and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by a hot abscess which has come, do not bother to work, but rather prepare moist and greasy things; and the administrator places enemas, and thus in soft mollifying and moisturizing.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, so amend what we have said about the living infant; and if one cannot do it, so let it be treated in parts, and leave nothing of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, amend what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow; and if blood flows out, let it be restrained by a narrow bandage, and amend other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that, and rejected the other dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, a swelling came to his abdomen, and it inflamed so much that it opened, and began to discharge greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the case, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong plaster, and it drew out a bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled greatly, because this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I touched the wound, and I inserted my hands so far that the woman was in a better state; and I examined the woman at length thus, and I sucked out a little of the bad humor from the wound; and I did not recall this chapter further except for what, when the masters find an extraordinary thing, they know how to put it to use.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the hammer back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one weighs the books; and at 10 turns as 10 heads of the ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle in the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; and let the mouth of the tube be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees as it should be, and a palm and a half long; and within these two joints of the same tube, which are fastened at one end and the other, half a palm in length or a little more; and these two joints are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Here is the translation:
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all elevated above, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the mirrors have them aligned, so much the more hasty is the work, and higher are the homes according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not aligned, for its necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained in infancy, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold their wing, and then make them steady with condition, and hold their hands at the mouth and nose; and if they cough through this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take the pot, and make a pertus or covercle, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marris, such as calmant, rue, anise, camomile, cassialigne, and centoire; all these herbs, or some of them, being cooked or poached in water over the fire; then put a cane or pertus in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marris, and hold it as long as the vapors come out of the marris; then make them steady, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second inflammation hurries.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure, and is not yet feverish, instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesament or muscillaige of altee, and then put it in the nature, and seek the secondine; and when they have found it, take it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the marris does not slip at the extraction; but it is necessary to move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then draw; if it comes and disentangles.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have said that the treatment involves cleansing and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not respond to everything we have said, beware that you do not cause harm in the treatment; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the womb, you apply it to the cervix of the woman, then cliterize with four-drug ointment; if she takes it and recovers, and becomes fertile again; however, when she conceives, a bad smell comes from the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Here is the translation:
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument is thus, where one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second one, this is it.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like seeing a dog, and placing the subtle head in its natural state, and widening the jaws over the fire; and let there be fumigation on the coals, and the tincture until it is exhausted, and recommencing another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not received the foundation perceived, thus it is obstructed by subtle suffocation: so it is necessary to apply a poultice that perceives this subtlety with its finger, and does not touch the spatula of ague, and guards the ligament so it does not touch; then place on a warm linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not stiffen, then put or apply a plaster of lead, and leave it on for many days, and let it be removed when the infants want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes suddenly comes this swelling of wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cut into that sudden thing: if it is cured, as we have said about the treatment of a painful blow.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the bottom
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Here is the translation:
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at the foundation, and does not miss it: and it is that you bend your index finger on the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twisting, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or horse hair, until you feel the probe or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from pertussis or windiness or vermin, as we have said: know that it does not pierce well; so hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and cannot be cured by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just up to the joint of the thigh, then the probe comes just to the place; if there is no twisting and the invention of the pain inside, then it is that it is always swollen, and nothing avails medicine or sudden application by ointment; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through labor, and vanity of the foolish doctors who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one who is not fully conscious and not ancient, there is hope of health through cautery, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and lift their legs up to their hips, and bend their hips towards their belly; then apply a tent of iron, or of lead if there is twistedness, until you know where the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it in their fundament, then you must put your index finger there, and soon you will feel that the tent has penetrated; and be careful where you feel between your fingers the sphincter or flesh, then know that it is conscious; if you do not work well, you cannot heal them.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One cannot well heal anyone in every way, but this happens rarely; and the help that one does, if it is heating the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was said before; and apply all heat into the fistula, until it reaches the fundament; and do it two or three times, until you know that these worn-out characters are burned, which resemble a bird's feather; and then treat with moist tents in mud, until those characters are worn out, then treat with ointment, softening and drying.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, it's good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is thus, he cannot be healthy; and if you stretch between, and do not perceive just up to the finger that is at the foundation, and place a thick covering of flesh or skin between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula that shows the covering of the wound; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and cut beforehand the tent, and then apply the cautery, until it reaches the head of the tent; and the tent will be delivered, and fall; then remove those faulty skin that seem like a bird's pen, and do not leave anything.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you feel a vein, and cut between the finger and the nail, then cauterize with fire or medicinal water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery assembles two things: it is to know, the burning of those joined skin, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then the treatment of swollen tents in mud or in broken choz, until the limbs bend, and they throw away the burned skin in the mud; then treat the wound of sudden fingers inserted into hard skin, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near the base of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should apply your finger to the base or foundation, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes they are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is where the cost of the foundation beneath the skin on top, if you take a perceived tent at the head according to this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I push the twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is piercing in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that perforation, so that you put your finger or foundation; and pull the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it go for a day or two; and restrain it sometimes, until the threads cope with the wounds that are between them, and heal; then cure the wound until it is sewn and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pass through, then make it pass through in all ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper setting for the fistula if it is too deeply embedded, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spinal fistula that one makes when creating a fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side not, because one does not cope with what one should not cope with, as you see here.
des emorroydes	of bruises
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Here is the translation:
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	to dry the wounds or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there occurs a withering of intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to reset a dislocated finger or toe, which does not allow it to moisten; then treat it so it becomes stable if it is possible; and if it cannot be stabilized, start the reduction again with more force than before, until it becomes well-set and is restored to health; then treat it so it becomes healthy.
dou fremit	give friction
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Gangrene is a small, foul appearance that eats away at the body, and it spreads much in depth; and often one finds the coldness, and feels it as if dead from frostbite, and it comes to affect the whole body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a thread of a bird's feather, or a strong thread from a vulture, and place that thread on the frostbite, so that the circles constrict the frostbite entirely around; then turn your hand all around the thread until you grasp it entirely around the frostbite, and insert it deeply, and extract the frostbite from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make it in the form of a vein of copper or iron, and be subtle underneath and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, for you must hold with your finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the forehead, as it is before or in a chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never does one make a cluster of silver or copper, or of molten tin or lead; and never does one make these small and large instruments, according to the ones that are needed.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those therefore that one uses in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cluster, small and large, is above large, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there is a separation where the abdomen should be tied, as you see, and the head should be perceived inside; and it has two openings II on one side, and I on the other; and let the abdomen or womb receive medicines from a bladder of beast or parchment, and be entirely surrounded by small openings, and have between each opening I inch of space, then insert in these openings I strong thread twisted into X or circle, and assemble the abdomen as if it were a sheath; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then tighten; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cluster with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then insert it lightly; then sprinkle the minister's hands together, until it is quite visible, then extract the cluster, and lift the patient's legs to the partition, and if the medicine wants to issue, let it flow as much as it can; and if it sleeps one night at all, it is more great aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cleanse him of a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to issue, so recommend it as much as he may be healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the humors are in the foundation, or abscess, so is the cluster as subtly bound as for an infant; and it's the subtle form of the cluster bound on the skin that holds it steady.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicines, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Things which wounds are made by are by piercing of stone, and stroke of sword and of dagger, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things; or that are made according to the laws of the body, if such a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, beware if it's from piercing of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is large, and you doubt the appearance of an abscess: if you make it immediately healthier by means of cephalic treatment, even if little blood comes out of the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the wounded part; and avoid the patient's repletion with wine and gross meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to be healthy, if his flesh is weakened, and he does not drink any wine, nor eat any meat; and put on the wound, apply a poultice of hot oil or rose oil, or in a stiped wine; and if there is no abscess, apply it to the wound, so it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, that I will tell a little later; and if he has moved his arm, apply it to some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a spear wound and similar ones, and the lips cannot be assembled by tugging, if they are assembled by sewing, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is uncovered by the bone, and it is painful, and only holds for a little while, if it suppurates; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meat, like you test and roast cooked, just as with poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a wounded skin, and it does not have an opening, so cover the entire wound, and throw far, then cure; and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without delay, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, so heat the artery, and if you find it dislocated, so bind it with a thread; and if that does not profit, so cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in such a way that the wound heals quickly.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; living chalk three parts, and powder subtly, and apply to the wound, and hold firmly, until it adheres well and joins with all its blood; and then bind well, and leave without loosening, so it does not inflame; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never does one make a poultice of chalk solely, when one has not incense nor dragon's blood, but rather the arsenic has not touched the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved to a worse state, especially in summer, so do not put this powder; but put on some digestive ointments, or poultices made of wheat flour and water and honey, until it throws off; then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then hold it steady with subtle pinches; and I will tell you about breaks of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve or artery of the neck is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, then there is no other technique than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not put on the wound something cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but be the soothing medicine, if you wash it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and wash it also in warm water, and other mines according to this manner, and apply moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and lay on bandages, then treat until it be healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, then pierce or cut lower into them; and if the artery is severed, and blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize where necessary; and if the spine of the throat is severed, or the veins, and the conduct is guarded, so that the flesh goes, then sew the vein onto the gullet of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural figure; and then hold it steady afterwards, and leave it for some days, then treat with ointments and unguents as long as it is healthy; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then seek it out; and if there are pieces of bone, then remove them thoroughly so that you can, and those that you cannot have, then leave until the wound closes, and be diligent and alleviate the issue; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle with the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then the treatment follows as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from a wound of a lance or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	Here is the translation:
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Here is the translation:
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, either on the chest or back, then treat what is in front; if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, then clear the wound, and remove the decayed flesh if they are rotten; and if they are not rotten, then leave the wound to purify, and ease the extractions; and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	because of the obstruction of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the belly are large and medium and small; from a large wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, are injured by the intrusion of aus; and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one, because they put the intestines back in place with more points, so they don't put them back in a hurry; because the intestines swell immediately when they feel the cold, if they are put back in place with more points, and therefore it is better to have a medium-sized wound, because you restore the intestine to its place like other II And know that the ruptures of the belly are according to three manners: the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds on the body and two other proper stitches are common as other wounds; and however they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will tell each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing inside the intestine is putrefied, and it is easy to repair, this is by one of two methods: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is frozen, warm it up in this manner: moisten a sponge or the cloth with lukewarm water only, or cook it in lukewarm squinant and cipre and spique, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed; and never make the veins constricted, and it is better to relieve by releasing.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, soften the intestine with lukewarm water or a little honey and so that it be cooked, for by this the entrance is eased to a small thing; and if it cannot enter, make a small opening in the wound with an instrument, from which one removes the morbidities; and the first cure is better than surgery, which one should not perform without great necessity; and these are the instruments for splitting: if you cut within the curve and do not dig too deep, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, so you can have power over it, for that is worth much.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, you should make the patient sit on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, you should raise the head and chest higher than the lower parts; and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, you should arrange so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus you should manage what I say about large and moderate wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, take what is apparent to you, then hold it between your hands and gently pull out the entire rupture with your hand, and bring the lips together; and this is the common method of suturing, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the largeness of the wound, then leave a space from the head of the wound of about two fingers, and pierce it with a strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the siphac, which is beneath the skin, until you make it pierce through that part, and bring the two sides of the siphac together; then strain it with a double thread around the needle of two parts, then bring the two sides of the wound together, and then leave a space from about two fingers, and pierce it with another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is restrained; and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse, for the subtle needles take in all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well: therefore they should be moderate; and do not push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they take in and open up the wound before the suturing; and then cover the ends of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put tents or drapes on the ends of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is soued; and this method of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for it takes one or two needles at most for the second suturing, which is common, and it is that you bring the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the siphac together to one needle or a strong thread; and when you have pierced these sides all together, then reassemble the needle at the part where you began, in the manner that they sew the drapes; and put about the thickness of a small finger between each suturing; this suturing is suitable for men, and I treated a wound on a man who had a cut in his belly, which was wounded by a knife, and it was a wound more than a palm in length, and it was two palms in length from the intestines, and it was a wound in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I will return it to the intestine then when it had been obstructed 24 hours before, and the wound was sewn up just until the 15th day, and it healed, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the masters had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not care about ointments, for I was in a place where they were not found, nor any medicines; and I put cotton on the wound very frequently, twice a day, and washed with honey water until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle, and pass it through the defective part up to that depth; when it has pierced the right heart in the right direction, if you have passed the head of the siphac or sewn or you have passed the needle, and make it pierce another part of the defective area up to that depth; and the intention of this suturing is that you sew just as the pelterer sews the pelts, and that you leave once the siphac of one part, and retake from another, until the suturing is completely accomplished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galen described properly, is like some fonts that naturally assemble the two parts together, and apply one head to another head in this manner: take a needle or a mirach near the suture, and make it pierce the soul of the other head, and let the two heads of the suture; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the defective part up to the innermost part, as the two heads of the suture; then make it pierce one and the other from the defective part up to the innermost part, in the other mirach that are on the other side; and this is the most common method of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this and none of them testify that one should sew the belly with two needles, or that it has a thread in each; and one should push one needle from one part, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew corroies; and know that when the rupture is within the belly, it is the suture more grievous than others in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, thus that the artery has moved, if you reset the intestine, and the skin; then put on a powder made from charcoal, and if the artery has moved, if you put on no ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the filament, and be sewn the suture, and the marvel; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healthy; and if you have no medicines, if you put on, as soon as it begins to heal well, cotton very little, and reset it twice a day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	Because you have no other medicine in many dispositions where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will not make a community with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten a light ointment in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil, and put it on the veins, and beneath the seats; and if it feels pain or pruritus in the belly, and often happens, the clusters of red wine are administered, and meanwhile the pruritus reaches just to the intestine; and pierce deeply, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it's because of the delicacy of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach to its natural strength.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the intestine jumps away from the wound, put it back in place like the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned towards yellow or black, then you must lay the black area flat, which removes blood that comes from the veins, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligament, and place the two heads hanging down from the part below the wound until the extraction can be done to separate the intestine, and the wound will heal.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, then one can restore it in some homes, because I saw that a man was wounded or had a belly injury from a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and blocked the evacuation and windiness; I put a cure according to what I could do, and did not cease to treat subtly until it was healthy, and the wounds healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it being sewn up, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such a manner: take thick thread with large stitches, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has covered the mouth, put it on both lips, so that it draws in its mouth; and then cut the head, and hold it steady so it cannot come loose, then put another stitch afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is fully closed; and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the head is stuck in the intestine, and no nuisance comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner: take the head of this intestinal thread which is very delicate, and then tie it to the head of the twisted thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reassemble it in its natural position; and this method of stitching with threads is not foolish according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the hollow intestines, so long as there is no sense of health, rather than subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or where it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it swells up, is universally called a "fistula", and likewise when it is hairy and rends hollow.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the true nodulation that is hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is hairy like the feather of a bird; and sometimes it appears clear and hollow, and other times dense; sometimes small, and other times sufficient; and I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healthy, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the eight causes: namely, by the smallness of blood or flow; or by its malice; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much hollow; or the leeches are porous, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the property of the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and weak by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Here is the translation:
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Here is the translation:
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	Here is the translation:
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or principal members do not grieve you, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, so let it be until the corruption is entirely removed, then cure things by gradually cleaning so that it becomes healthy; and if it does not become healthy, and return to the beginning as before, know that you are not yet healed: if you uncover and seek as much as you can at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb; and if it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If that does not work, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot overcome it; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature; and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can extract it with tongs, then remove it with a suitable instrument, and if there are many bones, then extract them all, do not leave a single one behind; and if the moisture makes you act contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cut and moisturize and dissect, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot dislodge them within an hour, then put a poultice on the wound that promotes suppuration, and let it be until the pus is formed around the bone, and then they will have less difficulty with the bone; and if it's a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, remove as much of the corrupted tissue as possible until the blackness is completely removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great deal of corrupted flesh, and it reaches almost to the marrow of the bone; you must be careful to cut out all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is fully healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in my own leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	It was in my youth around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so much that the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to open it; but the doctor, in their foolishness, operated so much that the abscess opened, and they corrupted many materials, and it became a fistula, and it brought many pus that completely emptied and moistened the body; and many doctors treated him for 2 years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands, so much that I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and what corrupted through the pus to a great extent; and the body of the young man became red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I thrust a probe into one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that one vein was meeting another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and probed into one of the holes as much as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption went up to the bone within; I knew what seemed to me to be the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except for that which I saw; and I began to restore the wound with medicines applied over a long period, but could not heal; and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continued corruption in the bone, and knew it, and then removed it, and thought of healing the limb; but I could not do so much that I probed into a palm of the bone, and extracted it completely from its socket, then restored it with medicines; and it was quickly healed and mended, and did not need to recommence the work for the feebleness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because the evacuation of blood often happens, but it was entirely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction at all, neither in going nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: take a bandage, and bind it around the head of the bone that is open, and instruct him to stretch it upwards; and put another bandage, thicker than the first one, on the crust that is above the bone, and bind the head, so that you draw out the rotten flesh from beneath, and uncover the flesh on the bone where you want to treat, so that the bandage does not touch the rotten flesh; and put a splint or a small table beneath the bone to cover the rotten flesh; and it must be treated until one can see and feel the corruption, and treat again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Here is the translation:
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Here is the translation:
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Here is the translation:
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Here is the translation:
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Here is the translation:
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the senses are disturbed by indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not yet clear.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if you have subtle cords afterwards for a long time, do not despair of health, because the healthy approach.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Because there are men who delay in healing their wounds, and of those who do the opposite; and if the indigested wound becomes thick after many days, know that the wounds do not heal; and if the wounds delay in healing, and it is prolonged, so apply medicines made from moist substances and dry virtues, as we have said before, because there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take a medicine made from diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and mix equal parts of old wine in substance; then confit and use; and this same thing makes the honey thick, when the medicines made from diafinit are not present, or you take myrrh and aloen and incense, and grind them, and powder over the honey when it is on fire; and then glue the drapel, and apply it to the breast, and often administer it to a long aristologe, and celestial roots, which is also like farina of vezes and centoire; and use simple or composite: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey I said, and use; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep, and makes an impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the limbs; if you cure a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Here is the translation:
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, it is necessary that you cut off all the useless flesh that remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauteries are great aid if the bone is healthy, and the finger is healthy; and if the finger presses on the flesh inside, and begins to point, and becomes white, it is necessary that you put the right underneath the finger that does not touch the flesh, and bend it upwards, and cut subtly and lightly, and apply medicines burning and corrosive to destroy everything; then treat with ointments as long as it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out, and remove the decayed part, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed; and if you see the finger decayed, cut it off as we said before, then treat until it is healthy; and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and it causes great pain, it is necessary that you heal it first; then cut the finger carefully in a gentle manner while cutting across above, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh beneath the finger, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that comes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that grow in the hands of some men by chance are all flesh, and by chance they have a part or they have bones, and sometimes they have an angle, and none of them grow from the root of the joint, where growth is in none of us from the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those that grow on a certain knot of the toe do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the toe, by chance they do move; the size of the one that is fleshy is light, in such manner: it measures by its root from a large spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold two fingers together.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one that grows on the back of the toe, it is necessary that you cut first the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable joint for that, then cure until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden pains that come in the back come from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut this joint, so that the toe repaires according to its natural forms; then put between two tender or moistened drapes in rose oil, so they do not stick together; or you put between two pieces of subtle plaster, until the toe is stuck, as it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you see that sticking, as it is necessary.
des vils	of the hairs
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	They are large, swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic humors that come into many members of the body; and more often they occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes a purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron is in two manners: one is that they cut, and draw out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The surgical incision is in this manner: first raise the leg to a hot and very strong fire, so that the gross blood is subtitled, then stretch the leg of the patient from above the thigh just to the part below the knee; then cut the vein at one, two, or three places with a large incision, then release and draw out the black blood with your hand from one end to the other, until as much blood has been released as the virtue of the patient can suffer; and then let it be, and command that they abstain from eating black-colored food; and recommence the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and tangled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must bend it straight, but do not cut it; and pull it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut, so it does not cut the vein; and it is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is engendered in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs nor tree grow, and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that arises beneath the skin, as it comes from the serpent-like and worm-like courses, engendering between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the veins, and begins to issue forth like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the head is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of wood, two and a half inches long, and the nut, and leave the wood on the leg, and every time it does not reach the depth, if you wrap around the wood, and the nut; and if it is too long, cut off part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut into its root, until it is all issued; for if you cut into it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess or putridity in the limb, and great illness; because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the course; and it often happens with this vein when it is treated with five palms long, or ten, and a few men came to me who had it issued from ten palms long, and when you cut into it, it bursts forth like a root, and pierces deeply, so that everything issues forth; and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and administer medicines to prevent putridity any day, then cure as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And many times at this vein of the hand, and likewise when it opens in the joint of the foot, or of the foot itself, and a lot of pus comes out, and from which it springs; cauterize the wound thus as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of wounds that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often has ox-like swellings, and it is a small wound that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, ascending and descending, and one feels it well as it spreads from member to member, until it destroys the skin or it breaks out; and it is caused by putridity of certain humors, like worms and serpents and lice and ascariases in the belly; and one doubts its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it reaches the eye, by chance it returns, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot force it when it goes: then it is necessary that you bind the limb above and below with a strong lien tightly, then cut into and treat forcefully, and if the verse is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies; and the greatest harms it does, if it corrupts the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, hold it firmly below with a formed brow, then cut into, and treat forcefully; and it is necessary to use the patient's mundification of bodily medicine solutives for the bad humidors porries, and beware of eating rotten food in putridity.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm; and I soon saw it swell up like a vein at the shoulder, faster than anything, like living silver when it flows from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then soon spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it turned back into her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed how it moved in this way from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had wanted to know more about how the pain moves from one place to another, but I did not know, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and therefore appeared constrained; and it did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and restored veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you want to cure this illness, and the patient feels that pain, it should appear as we have said, if the vein above and below is hastily opened, and then cut into it so that the constriction of the vein is relieved; and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see with your eyes, treat what drives out the constrictions, like fetid pills, and serpent pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of the arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Here is the translation:
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are those with large points, and small ones, and notched ones, and soldered ones; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are pieces; and one which falls in no principal member falls according to many ways: whether in a principal member it notches, like the head, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls into no place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appears: if it happens that you extract this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not deeply set, then pull it out, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the brain when the arrowhead is in it and pierces the bone, and then the syncope falls who is above the brain, are stuttering and swooning and turning upside down in eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it loses the function of the nostrils, or of the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and then there is a whitish moist wound resembling a pustule, and then it also resembles a bruise of flesh; and if these signs appear, then attend to the cure, and pull out the arrowhead if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the seat when it falls on the heart, is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in a hard thing, not soft; and by chance the seat moves as the pulse, and in short black blood, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: be aware then without doubt that death draws near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the arrow wound that never leaves the forearm are that without flatulence, it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and breathes deeply and quiets the frosty air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead sticks in the covering of the piss, it is beneath the small ribs; and casts great anguish and great pain and breathes; and moves all the members of the loins.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if it happens to him that his stomach or stomach hurts, perhaps because of jumping from an injury something undigested in the food.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if it happens to him that his stomach or belly hurts, and there is a blockage in the intestine, if there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the obstruction.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if it happens to him that his bladder hurts, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulders and the joints and the spine of the back and the arms and the hips and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several different dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the vein is in a tender nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you that it happened to me, because you should do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that a vein broke out at the root of the nail: I touched it, and drew it from another part beneath the fat of the ear, and was without numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I drew out a vein that broke in the fat of the eye beneath the skin, and the vein was bent back, and could not be touched except at the point towards the hollow, and it was a large vein like a Turkish bow, all the way to the iron leg without ears; the game was successful, and no bad accidents happened to me.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I pulled a shaft from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic shaft to the ears: I seized the bristles, and subtle as I pulled, and the Christian was cured.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I pulled a shaft from the man, which was stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die; and then after thirty days had passed, it did not move from its position; I cut around the shaft, and extracted it, and pulled it out strongly, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if I saw a man with a shaft fallen into his back, and the wound was sewn up over it; and the shaft remained inside him, and did not change its natural disposition, nor did I find harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man, who had a shaft fall into his face, and the wound was sewn up; and he remained thus without suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated a wound on the hand of the prince's king, which was stuck in his nail, and it was slightly declining towards the right side; and the wound was completely healed. I was called to care for him after he had been wounded for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I searched for it with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; and he felt a sharp pain and ache beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I put on the place a plaster attractive and digestive, because the wounds did not swell; and the appearance of the wound showed itself to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on for many days, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained in bed for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead one day within his nose; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put the medicine on the wound with corrosive power for many days, until it was open, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which had stuck in the flesh; then I applied the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly; and it traversed well the terminals for three months, and then relaxed if the wound that I had put the tongs, and the flesh on one side and the other, and could not issue; then I did not cease to subtly and ingeniously use devices, until I took it out one day with well-made tongs, according to what its form would come at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the mirror showed that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows do not enter the limbs where they are fixed unless in two ways: either by the direction of the limb or they enter, or from another part; and the one that enters through the flesh, it is an arrow entering into the muscles, and it does not enter now for the first time.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not enter now, let it be until the flesh is purified around, and the issue is alleviated; and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and the swelling decreases each day; and then it enters, and if it does not enter, if you pierce around with a subtle finger, as much as the flesh around is enlarged, and then pull.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and none of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: do not pull it out, but let it be until it is even after some days, for if the arrow comes just up to the forehead, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed in the bone under the socket, and does not come just to the surface, and the patient remains several days without bad accident, so the engine of two treatments.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very firmly fixed and cannot come out, administer tareres around it, as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the flesh of the body so that one cannot see it, if it has taken all its tension; and if you feel it, if you draw it out with no suitable instrument; and if you cannot do so due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve, if it seems as though the wound is large; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears where it holds, if you remove the flesh that is embedded in two parts as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can extract it; and be careful not to break the arrow, that you may extract it more grievously.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, then leave it until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the blood flow counteracts, so amend what we have said about the cure in this chapter; and beware of the incision into the nerve and vein, and do not trust how you can easily remove the arrow without danger, whether it is sharp or dull, or firm or loose; and place the patient according to the form they were in when the arrow fell on them, for that is the greatest aid, and if you cannot, so arrange according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears with nothing of its own, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it: cut down then, as much as the tongs can grasp, and then extract it: if it does not come out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, as much as it enters into the bone, and widens the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if the residue of the arrow is there, push it all the way through; and if the residue breaks, and you need to administer a push, if you administer an instrument with a curved end, so that the point of the arrow enters the curve of the instrument; and then push it out, and if the arrow is curved, push the instrument in with its point entering inside, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it convalesces.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls in the foot or in the belly or in the bladder or in the ribcage, and it is near the surface, and you can cut above it, so you cut; and beware of cutting into a vein and a nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, as is necessary; and heal until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they are made in many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the instrument for cutting is like the claw of an eagle, to cut at the point of the arrow, as it is the shape.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for cauterizing and for scaling if it is so:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one bleeds, of which there are XVI in the head, to know: two that are behind the ears, called "herbech"; and two arteries that are in the temples apparent; and two veins that are in the eyebrows, called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the back of the nose; and the two gullies that are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly sained in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and people call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side of the chest, and people call it "vein of the belly", and it is near the armpit, and it is the one that is sained, which appears manifestly on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and anular, and has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch on the left side of the chest, and the second is at the ankle on the right side of the chest; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sanity of the vein at the forehead is worth as much as the sanity of the cephalic as ancient maladies of the face, and in migraine, and in redness; and the quality is that the patient strains his neck twisting, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again inflamed from a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The sanity of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with the eyes, and in the tongue, and in redness, and in the corner of the eye, and as maladies of the face; and the quality of their sanity is that the patient strains his neck twisting without any strain, as before; then it heals, and so the sanity of the crossing, a little above the long flame a little large, for there is no point of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make a correction of blood, as much as you have mastery, and then lay it on a cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The health of the two groins helps with the straightening of the ankle, and at the beginning of massage, and for many illnesses, and for pustules, and for corroding, and for herpes, and it is suitable; and the quality of the health is that the patients stretch their neck on one side and the other, as we have said; and so the masters standing above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat, then healthy vein of a length somewhat broadly, then draws out blood moderately, as much as necessary; then do another part in the other vein, then disentangle the ligament, and hold both veins moderately, so the patients are not strangled; and leave it until morning, so the wound is healthy.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins above the liver helps with pain in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks in the lips, and bad breath and inward.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck as I have said; then turn the liver, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right liver and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that there are small black veins around them: therefore take one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then take the largest part of each, and thus make two veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	about the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's about the constriction of the throat, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the healthy one is that the patient places themselves between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks beneath on each side a black vein: heal then one and the other, and do not go too deeply, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that one commonly heals are healthy in two ways: either by pricking into the entire flame strongly, or by subtly feeling with a subtle touch as you feel the pulse, and it is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the largeness and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is large as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins full of gross blood that appears, and which contain gross blood and turmoil; and this is the form of the Olivia flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for purifying the subtle veins, where there is subtly citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids the illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and it behooves the healer to bleed strongly, and to beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, it behooves him to staunch it, as I have said; and one must not be pricking the flame, but cutting thus as by anesthesia.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica vein does not appear manifestly, it behooves that you extract it, and change to another; or you want some rest from it, or you bleed in the place of the vein in the arm: it appears manifestly; and cut into the flame anesthesia, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to examine the joint of the vein, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the joint as much as you recognize the pulse; then mark the joint with an inch, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein at a gentle flame; and beware not to strike into the artery when you see the joint swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it swelling upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not of the artery: hurry then, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops; bind the arm, and let it be, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stagnant, and it flows well, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins retreats; and stagnates the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a poultice of fistula, and apply it, and take one of the medicines and lay it on well just next to the other day; if the wound is stagnant, that's good; if not, then cure, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood; and the staunching is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possibility of a strong liaison of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The health of the vein is in a thousand ways if it helps to draw blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the healer to be aware of the nerve that is below, and if he presses too hard, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the health becomes grievous, and by chance cannot be healed; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any homes due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you anoint the instrument with oil; and chase away the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two fingers, then they make it two inches long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The sanity of the head is helped when it attracts blood from the chief vein and helps the eyes; and one must help by pricking in the vein of olive oil or in the vein of myrtle, for it is the safest of all veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Always, one must seek the lightest vein, and not grievously harm oneself on the first attempt, and start again; and by chance, one inflames the veins in some men, although it happens on the first attempt, but it does not grievously harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is not administered for the sake of causing harm, but to preserve health and to prevent diseases to come; and so bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins that are on the arm: namely, cephalic, fastidial, and basilic; and one must bleed at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of repletion appear; and one must bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The wisdom that is ministered to the sick has no hour determined, but only when need is by day or night, in all hours and in all tensions; and it does not suit to heal children up to 13 years, nor a woman carrying fruit for less than seven months until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	One should not consider as healthy those who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to heal, in whatever manner it may be, one must first purify the intestines with a light clistere, if they have much flatulence retained, so that the veins do not attract superfluous and harmful humors to the principal members; nor does one heal those who are too full of meats, or drunkards, as long as it may be, nor dropsical people; and beware of healing after colic passion, and vomiting, and stomach decay, and multiple childbearing in women, and labor, and watching, and fasting, and all such virtues, or by means of the arm or whole body; then subtle humors, if the blood is gross, through meats and drinks and medicines, if you have much power; then take a bath, so that nothing defies, to subtly purify the blood, and heal the vein from the third vein, as we have said; and guard against that day of labor, and pain, and luxury, and similar things; and be gentle and joyful, and let the healer be more elevated than those who are healed, and rub the arm II times or III, then stretch out the lien moderately, because when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the blood; and then rub the hand as much, until the veins swell, and feel them; then anoint the healer with a little oil of old wine, then put their left hand on the vein under the hand a little while they want to heal, so that the vein does not flee or fail to strike.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Here is the translation:
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the hastening, if the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the patient's eyes are inflamed, and the patient is spasmodic, let them sleep for a day or two, and do not bind their arm: perhaps abscesses will come; they should not enter into a bath, then recommence the healing as it pleases them; and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that there isn't so much blood as you see, if you make a fist on that perforation in the entire right direction; and hold it steadily, thus the eyes are inflamed; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the eyes inflamed, do not recommence the healing, and put a little oil of lily on them, for it alleviates the body's flow of blood, and is moderated in this eye by the oil; and thus administer the oil of lily to each wound that you heal the veins, to staunch the flow of blood; and this same thing makes triacle and balm, when one puts it on the eyes; if subtly the blood flows and separates when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes, which often occurs, especially when it is not healthy except at the time or when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on the limb a wet sponge in water and a little hot, and hold for an hour; and you must do this after the blood issues from the vein, and if it remains on the limb after several days without any blackness or greenness, do not harm it; and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, masterwork, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the health of the basilica: put your hand then, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put on anything of those things that we have said, for it happens in court without an artery; but the made .i. a plaster thick to harden the spot, then the treatment of another treatment, until it be healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw each one according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Here is the translation:
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is suitable for one who is full and strong, and has a task of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and let the flames be large; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and hold it healthier little by little, and you must heal it by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of healing is free from decay of blood and copulation of nerve, and is better than the healing of a long or large wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose body fails at the vein, it is necessary to give a gentle poultice made from juice of green apples; if they are overheated, then draw out three or four ounces of blood III times or IIII. And if they have a cold complexion, then administer before the vein a gentle poultice in muscat syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if they swoon at the vein, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that they have a broth of beef, and subtle, fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to recover his arm, and be healthy again another time, it is necessary, when he is afflicted by great health, that he cures himself little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to wash their arm after the first bleeding, and it has a strong course, if they bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to bleed from another place, if they should bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that is already overheated, and it brings on fever; if you need to draw out a large quantity, and widen the opening as much as possible; then you must fulfill all the conditions of the vein, and place your hand on the pulse when it beats, so that death does not come into the body, and this happens many times, when the surgeons are negligent; and do not try to release the arm, and let blood issue out a second time, and the opening is closed, you press strongly upon it; nor if it is curved, should it extend the arm hastily, for that would be bad; but leave it until it beats a second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, as much as the blood that is congealed at the mouth of the vein flows out, and place on the small remnant in water, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it too much, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed twice, let the blood flow from the same place, or from another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bloodletting is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the veins become red; then they should be gently touched, so that the vein appears well, then the blood flows now through the passage, not too large nor too long; and let the openings be wide, and let it be bloodletted close to the joint of the hand, and if you cannot get it out, then put the hand back in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough; and if it is in winter, do not reuse the hand in warm water, for they put it more in spring than in winter; and the bloodletting of this vein is safer than all other veins, since there are neither arteries nor nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bloodletting of the little finger of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is the method: hold the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein becomes swollen, so that you can see it; and if the blood flows through the passage, and if you take it from everywhere, do not grieve anything; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are almost bare of skin, and then put the hand back in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot get out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out enough blood as it is necessary, then put oil on the vein and sew it hastily, and thus do with each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein on the left hand is suitable for the disease of the thigh, and do everything thus as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The treatment of the spine is effective for all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its treatment is that the patient feels pain in hot and cold water, and rubs against the vein until it perspires, and lays above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot many veins go to the rains; therefore, the treatment is given where the vein is larger, or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you apply it to the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and the vein that runs across like a bow; and let the flames be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sans (sinew or tendon) cannot come out, put the foot in water, and let the vein be well cleansed.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the treatments fail the first time, they recommend the second above a little, because the veins are salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make it like the spine of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein for sciatic pain is at the seat of fire, and its health is worth the pain in the thigh, when it is due to bad blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of his health is such that the patient goes between bath and stretcher, and extracts above the pillow three fingers in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then he healthily in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is worth more that you take care of it, for the veins are healthy, and it is much restored to many homes.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then healthily some vein that opens or gives two fingers below the small toe, and towards the little finger, and guard against the nerves; and make so correct the flow of blood that you see, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and bind; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	the healthiness of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping is made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is without piercing if it is according to two methods: either it is with fire, or without fire; and cupping that is done by piercing and by extraction of blood is done in 13 veins of the body, from which one is all in the head; and another is in the neck; and two others are in the sides of the neck; and the cupping under the chin; and the cupping on the shoulders; and the cupping on the hips; and the cuppings on the arms; and the cuppings on the legs; and the cuppings on the ankles; and the cupping does not draw any blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one should not be afraid of it, as one does with health of a vein; and it is not necessary that it be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to evacuate, either by habit or custom, if we delay each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every season; for there are those who, when they have mastery over evacuating, have a heavy head; and if there are those who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and taste blood; and if there are those who sigh, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to bleed them after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The health of the nose helps with the greatness of the head … which comes into the eyes, and it is not suitable that it be after the evacuation of all the body; and this evacuation is in the place of the health of the cephalic, and it is not suitable for those who are of cold complexion or have catarrh, because they make great harm to themselves; and therefore it is not suitable for the weak to use it, nor for those who have colds or evil diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are often sane, if they become oblivious, and therefore it is suitable to put the cupping glass a little further down due to the doubt of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is in the place of the healthy head and the basilica, and for this reason it has strength in the extension of the chest, and in the splitting of the channel of the arm, and in touch, and in repletion; and it must hardly be touched, because if it holds too firmly, it injures the oblique or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilations as the ribs of the neck have strength against the pains of the head, and obtundity and migraine, and in strangulation, and in pain as roots of the teeth, and are in the place of the healthiness of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healthy one to put their hand, so they do not touch the artery, and do not show signs of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The bad breath that comes from the mouth is a sign of disease in the mouth, and of gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the veins of the gums.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The bad breath from the palate indicates a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilations of the joints have strength as much as the three veins of the arm, because they attract blood from these large veins; and instruct the healthy one to not make too many movements in the font, because the joint is nude of flesh, and knows of nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping that is on the back is useful for removing excess from the foundation, and for illnesses beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of a good quality, so it can treat well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cuppings of the legs are useful apparently, because they attract blood from the whole body, and alleviate ancient pains in the kidneys, and in the marrow, and in the bladder, and restore the flow; and they are in the place of .ij. sophenes, and of .ij. chevilles, and altogether they refresh the body after long use, and bring forth pus in more favorable dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on first void, and suck immediately, and place hastily, and remove evenly, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the red and inflamed spot, and appear the rosy color of blood; then firm, and reapply the cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have tender skin, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deeper; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is abundant, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to subtly open the way for the abundant blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike three times; and when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, then we suffice with striking only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to remove much blood, we often recommend it; and if the blood is thick, we make a fontanel, and the ends are so that the coursing is perceived suddenly, and it is necessary for one who has coarse skin and hard, and who have stiff pores, that you open the veins of oil apertif and dissolutif: if it is in summer, of violet oil, or of almond oil sweet, or of cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, of cress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of aniseed, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if it is for one who has tender skin and large pores, it does not need oil, but rather washing after the vein opening with rose water, or cold water, or water of morelle, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if it rises from the ashes, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have gross superfluities lift themselves with wine vinegar, or water of elder, or decoction of anet or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not fitting to apply a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and one should not sleep after the cupping, and it is necessary that he warms himself when he must be cupped and when he is being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware of those who are healthy and choleric, and their blood is too agitated and inflamed; if it is necessary that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuce in the shade, and similar things; and eat few pucins, and flesh of pike, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat few pucins and small birds and pigeons; and on the day they are to be cupped, they should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some people three or four times a draught of triacle or muscat before the cupping, or after, to comfort the principal members; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not fitting that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Here is the translation:
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of administration of fire cautery is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And have two inches and a half of palm in front, and have the edge cut into the middle of the small perforation, just as if to put a needle, and be of iron, soft in front so that it does not bother the patient when putting it on the limb; and have in the middle a crossbeam of iron or steel, to put a bandage in place, and they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them; for the bandages of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin than the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should put this bandage on the limb: take the wax or lime thread, and put it in the bandage across the crossbeam which is in the bandage, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the bandage lest it burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and these two are on the small perforation as we have said, so that when one wants to remove it, the vapor goes out, and one removes the bandage; and take the thread as before, and often reapply it, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the application of cupping when it is administered in disease of the lungs, at every ague, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered except when it is full of ague, and is placed on the limb only slightly; and that is its form.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without veins, they are not administered except in members where you cannot put cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and jaws, and similar places; and in the naked skin of flesh, such as fingers or toes, and similar things; and the quality of the use is that when you find without veins that are in soft, gentle, and smooth skin without porosity, take them; and put a nut in a soft and gentle cup, so they become familiar, and have nothing in the way of veins; and then be healthy with vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the without veins; and when they will be full, and desire, it is the place where you can put a cupping glass, so put it, for that is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	Here is the translation:
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the sinews do not want to take, then rub the vein of fresh blood, or you fix a needle as long as the sinew is in it, and then set them up, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will be strengthened; and when you see that they cling, sprinkle a little powder of alum and of crushed brooknute, or of cinder, so they will hold now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This cautery is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a restoration of breaks and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish mirrors themselves of this chapter, which they did not see in any of the ancient books, nor did they read a letter; and for this reason is the science strange in our land, because I did not find any good in it; and I do not know anything, except through the science of the ancient books, where I have so studied that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habituation of my life; and I have described to you here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise men put their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when breakage or dislocation or twisting or bruising occurs to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, so nothing harms them completely, as from weakness of body, or faintness, or old age; or if their tension is not very strong, or too cold; and moderate cold foods, these are to know frozen juices, and flesh of capon and goat, and do not drink any wine, and do not eat many greasy meats that fill the veins with blood, so you have no fear of hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first governance which they had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with foods that provide great nourishment, where there is viscosity, just as if one would cure a wound with water, and rice, and bread, and pike, and salted meat, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a complete nourishment represents more and quickly heals the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reattached or reunited according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, as with the bones of small children; but there is no cure, reset on the broken bone in large tendons which are separated and join the limb together, so it strengthens as it was before; and do not touch any part of their work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish them with thick meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, just like the shape of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small crack throughout.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the remembrance comes into its place; and it is known the breakage of the bone by what the bones are twisted, and appears well by deficiency, and sounds when pressing with the hand; and when there is no tortuosity in the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no point of breakage; but it can have tortuosity, or crack, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not possible to move the hand, but rather apply medicines that come hereafter, and then hold it steady subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the breakage that goes into a ravine, and are the two disjointed parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that the abscesses do not come to life; and if the abscesses come, if you leave it for some days, until the abscesses are appeased; then put them in the same place where you can lift gently and carefully, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restorations of that one which has pieces; then hold steady, as it must be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it's two parts, whether it's a hand or foot, or a small limb, or two tendons, or a tendon and your hand; and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are rejoined, you rejoin them with all your skills in their proper places as much as you can, and take care not to cause harm to the patient or lesion through your work; and adjust the two heads of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: so dress it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come with their work of abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in a point, chastise the patient well so they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning, nor in another way; and take care that the limb is so secured that they feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when they feel no pain, it is not in a point, and you must put it in such a disposition that they feel no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Here is the translation:
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is inflammation or abscess, apply something soothing to the abscess that heats it, and removes the inflammation, and lets it be thus for some days; then hold your hand steady, and be guided by a large cane reed, or a stick made from a tree, or palm fronds, and conform to this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the stick one places on the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others; and let it be as long as it needs for a small or large wound; then hold your hand steady, just as you did at first, then tie above with a thread, just as in the first binding on the fracture; the tighter it is, the less it will move; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and made of linen thread; for if the threads are thick, like I have seen foolish people make their bindings with twisted cord threads, that's a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it's too subtle, and it doesn't matter that there is less than two fingers' width between each stick.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the staples of the stiles after the constriction in their healthy areas, then put under them lint or linen cloth, so that it does not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And beware that it is not fitting to strain these broken members with excessive movement on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to treat it is with torsion: take mugwort and vismalve, in the shape of X; mix and boil, in the shape of VIII; add acaice VI; bollic armenic X, and grind well, and concoct with water or abundant egg white, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to treat joints and dislocations of their places, and to alleviate sudden pain, and the size of the bone, and the fracture: take new flax, and grind it in a mill and in cooked oil, and apply it to the affected place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore at first, but they are good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly reducing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to apply plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to treat for the restoration of the bone fracture and to reduce the remainder of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of treating more forcefully than the first, when a stubborn abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balauste, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and camomile, of all one part; and crush, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb anything but cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems according to Galen that one should put on a broken limb, to restore, warm dry things, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat that is good for a wound and pain: take mugwort and chickweed of the decapitated omes, or feathers of a bird, and violets, and make them equal, and pound them, and make an emplaster and put it on the limb.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you loosen it by hand for many hours. And if pain comes to the limb, or inflammation, without rest or swelling, if you hasten, and loosen, and remove the dressing now; and take a lighter bandage, and a moist sponge, and dip in water, and lift up the limb, until the inflammation ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry linen cloth, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, until you are sure of a hot abscess; and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then recommence the subtle treatment, and a little dressing, and do not strain it too much as before; and treat subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are all over there, and you have the task of applying poultices and bandages, then recommend it, just as you did for the first treatment.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb of what we have said, do not dislocate it further than after three days or four or five or seven; and no time leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is consolidated, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh on; then restrain more than before, and enlarge its food, as I have said previously; and if you see that the limb dries out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come; arose from the warmth of hot water, all the times you dislocate it, and it is each tier day, and ease a little the ligature; by this work then corrects the nourishment to the limb, and immediately remedies what the foolish mirror does, which restores the limb wrongly: it is bad, and if it is painful work, and I do not see other things than to leave well and open correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of diverse manners of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of breaks and diverse figures, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks that are made by percussion of a sword, and the bone is totally broken just up to the joint which is beneath the bone, as if it were shattered or crushed; and because of this, this type of break is called "shattering".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the spear head strikes the bone from above, piercing it senselessly, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and these are the injuries of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or crack or blow to the stone, or fall onto the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating wound, which approaches just near the membrane that is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound is made in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the crack is small, and because of this it is called "capillary" fracture; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or similar thing, and makes the piece of the bone enter below, and the joints are so arranged as if they were forged when they strike against the stones; if between the stone within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens more to those who have soft and moist bones, like a child's head; and there are all these types of breakage where small pieces are dislodged as if they were shattered; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaks through the traction on them, and the inquiry into the tendons, and by the rotten flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the fracture is known by this, that when one has discovered the bone, and one rubs it gently, then the black break appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fracture, beware of accidents harming the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and swelling, and feverish ague, and the eyes issue forth and redden, and other similar things in many dispositions, if it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a threatening accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nave comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hurry to open the bone before the seventh day, lest the tissue under the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the break in the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut open the affected part thus: and it is that you take hold of the chief pain of the wounded head, and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound more softly than you can, and if a flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess forms, then it helps with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with medicated ointments in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to treat the bone from the outside, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut straight before, and it is the form.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then you make another, larger, cut than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various cutting tools, some being narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron indeed; and in using them lightly, you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer cutting tools with caution, not making too deep an incision lest they penetrate beyond the bone beneath the skin, and it should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and it is necessary to have more of them, if each one comes into its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have cutting tools for every test; and this is the form of the three manners of cutting tools:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place a cutting tool on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then reset the cutting tool elsewhere a little afterwards, and do so throughout, then open up the incision to the space of the bone which is between the pertusions, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments you have, such as pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the vital organs.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone, and drawn out, then it is necessary that you reuse the instrument that remains from the bone to all other similar instruments, but it needs to be more delicate and more subtle than the other incising instruments; and if there remain none of the small bones, no scales, if they are lightly attached to one of the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another manner of surgery is what Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it very much, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so when you have discovered that part, then you will put under the head of this lance-like incision, from which it is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and the affected area is in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently tap all around the bone, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath; if it is attached to the bone, lift it gently, for one lifts well without harm, and feels no fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break of the bone does not pass just to the membrane, and the bone is covered so slightly by above, and there are small pieces, if it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to remove the scales with a subtle rasp, which you must have in different quantities, to prepare each location as most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use large rasps first, and then finer ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not readily understood by one who has not studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the swelling is uncovered, it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled dressing, two or three times, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first dressing; and do this more gently than you can, so that you do not irritate the swelling, then administer from above another ligature, and do not constrict it further than necessary to hold the wound sufficiently; and leave it thus for a day or two, until the abscess is appeased, then dislodge it, and administer medicines such as roots of iris, and farina of wheaten flour, and powder of incense, and aristaloge, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, and put it on the wound, and administer gentle medicines without biting; and beware that the wound be very clean, so that you do not leave the infection, nor leave it to gather pus, for when pus gathers beneath the membrane of the brain, it corrodes and festers, and causes the patient great harm; for when you apply something irritating to the swelling, it becomes inflamed from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, lest some evil accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no blackness comes from the medicine that one has put on, which has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue it in the dressing; then apply the cure in various ways so that it be healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that no matter how many times the two parts of the nose are broken above, or one part is dislocated by the other, because they are two bones; and the cartilage beneath is not broken, so it does not make a swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your small finger or pertus of the nail, and match this breakage within your finger index, and in the pouch by default, so that the nail regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot be straightened to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a rather large vein.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the breakage is of two parts, do it again, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscessed heat is appeased, then put on the tip of the nail, stretching with dressings of linen, if the breakage is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you apply it on one part, another part breaks instead; and let the tautness be so great that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that one must soften the tents with butter, and move each joint daily.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It doesn't seem to me that this is good, but it's necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg white and powdered millet; then let the tents, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages are strengthened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And at no time apply on or near the eyes a poultice of egg whites in place of tents, and if it has a sweet drapil wrapping, and holds the breakage, and soothes the patient within; or do as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you apply cerote or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of diaquilin.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come, put an emplaster made with flour of sisament and powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then apply light poultices, and do not bind where there is no bruise; and if the bruise of the knee is small, and it is broken into little pieces, extract as many comfortable strumens as possible for that, then sew up the fissure, and cure the things that are in the wound, and suddenly, as with emplasters and ointments comfortable for that; and if there is no inside bruise on the knee, put a plaster of tents, and apply cannes of lead, until it be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated downwards, and there is no point of injury above, and the break is above only slightly, and it is not broken in two, except for the small pieces that remain inside, if one examines it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your index finger of the right hand, and gently feel the break, and hold it with the other hand above, and set it evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is dislocated in two parts, it is necessary that you apply extension to the two parts, so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth have moved out of place, or are broken, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double wrapping; and put on the wrapping a large and well-made staple, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and bind it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then disengage it on the third day, and then reset to the point where it changed; and apply a poultice made of powder from the mill with abundant egg white or flour of six herbs, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices adhere, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in eight weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses occur, then manage them according to what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken bone in its place; if you subtly remove the extraneous growths that obstruct the union.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is constricted, then enlarge it with flame according to the need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in two ways: either it is broken and disjointed in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, if one holds the shoulder that feels the strength broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or disturbance.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have mastery of extending, then put under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or of wool, and let it be large according to your need; and hold steady and lift the force, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot bring the head of the fracture to the forefront, because it comes in deep, then it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and put under the shoulder a small pillow, and bend the ministers' shoulder down, until the bone of the fracture is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel the broken pieces, it is necessary that you bind them together; and pull the lighter fragments, and if the bone cannot join due to any excess flesh, take a coping from one of the incisors you have; but put under the forcele this instrument, to ward off the swelling.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it seems a spoon, and is not a chevez, and be as large as the hollow of the bone and the power of the instrument; and have two heads, as you see, and one is large and the other narrow, as is the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are assured of a high abscess, if you cut into the wound, and if the routing is small, or you doubt it is a high abscess, if you fill the wound with drapels and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, apply a dressing with rose oil and in axle grease and in wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The strapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster made of powdered millstone and egg white, and put light bandages on, and put a splint underneath, so that you have mastery; then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then put double drapels on the bandages, and the plaster; then take a subtle stake of three fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is hanging; and put the stake on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy joint, and underneath the diseased joint; and you reset each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture in place, and you clearly see that the stake does not move above the broken bone, so reward it every day, and when the ligatures are relaxed, so restrain it; and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow underneath the joint, to lift the shoulder high; if you lighten the fracture of the limb by lightening the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and no bad accident comes, until twenty days; then restart the plastering, so that you see it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it thus, until it is restored; and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and less than any other homes.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Here is the translation:
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and not beneath the heart, if it breaks out, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscess hot.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the skin instead
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is sometimes broken in a thousand ways, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the ankle.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken within, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and all, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the fracture in the broken bone, and one senses it is not well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and join the ribs of the chest to your hands, and subtly adjust them to fit all the ways you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on plasters and bandages above the subtle layer of salt, or another light dressing, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward every hour the treatment, and if it becomes unaligned, then restrain it; and if you want to remove it, due to corrosion or purulence that comes from the blood, or pain or abscess, hurry up, and remove the plaster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the plaster, and hold it until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breakage of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It happens that the breakage of the ribs does not come from elsewhere but from the large ones behind the back, and at the interior of the head, and they do not feel it except through this because they are slippery; and one feels it well in the inquiry as it should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the resettings are that you make equal the fracture, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, if you are skilled in this.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels very great pain, and numbness, just as if it were bruised, because the bone touches the membrane; and there are sharp pains, and a great deal of blood is spilled, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great skill into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the stomach, in order to soften the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, for warm abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have arrived, then let them be soiled.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that some of those whose veins are opened on the limb, to suck out the ferment, and it seems like a reasonable thing; however, there is doubt that the vein does not attract the superfluities from the limb due to the weakness of its disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one must cover the limb of the affected member with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to put the liver in its proper place, then it will be cured of the treatment for pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the bone that touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to break into the region of the broken rib, and one must put underneath the instrument to ward off the blood; and then one should cut the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with plasters, until they are healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come, put warm ointment on the affected areas and apply it to the limb; and treat meanwhile the limb of those that need to be treated for an abscess, and place poultices soothingly on the affected side where it should, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a break comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will swell; and thus it has a curvature of the spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one touches them and presses, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so one puts a cure there.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if the feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation; and when one touches it on their belly, then there is involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is swooning on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: do not labor in vain for his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightly.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of roses or oil of lavender, as much as it is appeased; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and tie with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover over the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, with a bandage, then the treatment of anointing with charcoal, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you should put your pouch on your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the stake above, so that you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make them straighten up, and remove, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Because the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it is, then there is not a small amount of diminishment at the head; and make a long delay, and decline to the paralysis, and come to the patient's pain in the limbs, and swelling, and inflame what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, so that you are above the fracture; and know what is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is at the head only, then place equally on that fracture, so that it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is very long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture can be facilitated.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of osier, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move; and apply the remedy under the ribs, until the ligature is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses come, do not touch them, until the abscesses are appeased, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulders are what is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take a full handful of grease, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And lay the shoulders thus, and hold them high, and sit the patient on a stool; then put his broken arm on a stick, until it comes to the seat, and has in the middle of a curve of wood, then lean against something heavy or the attendants hold it steady below; then place the mirrors with the fracture even at their hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one wraps the patient in his sheet, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands the attendants that one should hold what is on the fracture at their hands, and the others should hold beneath all the ligaments, and each extends to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold the ligature beneath the breakage, and on the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put the ligature in the middle beneath the joint, and the other towards the spine, beneath the breakage; and also if the breakage is on the side of the spine, it is necessary to put the ligature lightly, without labor, until the breakage is even on the level, and on the spine; then put the breakage in place, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that apostemes do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, do not hold back until the seventh day, and put a mild ointment on the affected area in oil and rose oil, so that the abscesses are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you place the plaster on the break, then assemble the arm at the joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and place the dressing, and hold steady on the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper position, so nothing can displace it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, use a splint, and place on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have between each splint two fingers' width of space, and let each splint be as large as it passes over the break in two places; then hold steady on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on setting breaks, more firmly and less tightly.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the alignment of the stars, and the straining, as we have said, at the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each for three days, so that the swelling does not inflame the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too straitened.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you approach it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, do not undo the dressing until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put his hands on his stomach; and place the joint on a cushion filled with down in an even layer, and examine every hour of the day or night, so that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the bonds are not loosened; if you approach it by the power of medicine, and give him the food that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is most subtle at first; and when he begins to recover, let it be abundant.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg joints should be taken in hand for 40 days from everything; and then one must disengage and administer baths and medicines of ointments to adjust the limbs.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the joint is lazy and swollen, it delays disengaging for 10 days or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "radius" and "ulna", of which one is small and is the one that follows the pouchet; and the other is large, and is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large radius breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fractures are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings; and when the large ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and worse than when they were broken and put together again.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's a small fracture that is only slightly broken, then you must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's a large fracture, then you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers like an arm to the part below his hand, or at the lien, and another minister above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts his mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is none that can be restored to its proper position by pricking the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, make a splint and bind with a bandage, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breakage into a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses and swellings occur, thus glue I apply a cerote made from rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and I apply it subtly above, so that the abscesses and swellings are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then I remove the cerote, and I put on the emplaster of powder from millet with a lot of egg white, then I apply the splints, and let the splint for the fracture be stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have six splints or arms in more positions: either the fracture is in one bone, or in two; and hold more above the fracture than another part, and always less in alignment, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, which it is strained from linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rewind the limb and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident happens to the limb, as if numbness comes to the limb, it is necessary that you warm the limb with hot water, so that the numbness is appeased; and let the limb not be tightly restricted, but rather repose.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then recommence the strapping, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones are disjointed, and similar things, adjust it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take a ward, the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too contracted, so it is necessary that you relax it a little, and let it be for some days, until the numbness corrects itself, and then hold it steady.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not unstrap him until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	where he turns inward, then he puts his hands to his neck, and makes his necks even, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleeps on his back; and knows that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have said before, there are few fractures, and it does not come but rather often occurs.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient should be crossed, and stood straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and put them equal to the mirrors, so they are well joined; and put the plaster and the poultices, lest abscesses come, then he puts a staple according to the quantity of the humor; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the palm of the hand towards the belly of the plant, make a sphere of cloth strips, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken plant; and then tighten with a long cloth strip, and let the staple be of soft skin as well as large as the plant of the hand, and tighten, as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a staple above, and another below in the plant, so that the hand is overlapped and straight, then tie everything together around the hand, and tighten the linen between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to one of our two bones, it is the pouches, put them equal, as it is necessary; and tighten with the plant, and if you see that you put a small straight staple to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in the other two, like in the index or one of the others, put them equal, and tie with the healthy bone which is afterwards; or you tie all three together, holding it tight, or you put on a staple, as I have said; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of the abscess heat, and avoid what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen well when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration is done by binding above the breakage, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient puts his face, then each minister stretches out his bandage equally on his part; and it is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, one of the ligaments will turn towards the finger, and the other ligaments beneath the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, and then the ligaments will be beneath the knee, and the extension will be below; then put the mirrors with their equal nature, according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that no abscess forms.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down, then return to your work and your treatment; the ligature is made in such manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you envelop the break with a doubled bandage in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, beneath the knee below, and make the head of the thread above; then turn the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then place these on the break, and place a stick on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft drapery to tighten the binding, then begin to bind strongly three or four times around the break; and when you go above the break, and lessen the constriction; then take as two heads of the thread that you put between the leg and the thigh, and three sticks that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, so that you reach beneath the foot; and the constriction, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or inflammation occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes about, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it is necessary to extract, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the bone, and draw forth forcibly; and the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way, as we have placed straps, just like in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not hide the pain of the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the scab is restored on the same day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Here is the translation:
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, if it's not just a crack, or it pierces, and has an open wound, and feels pain, and that feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one puts back together what is broken at its joints, so that it is assembled as it should be; then put in the dressing, and I put a round stell, if you have mastery of it, and hold it steady as it should be, then re-establish all the arrangements that we have said about other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar things; put each accident back together what is fitting for it, so that it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is known that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "straight" and the other is called "oblique"; and it has an equal break as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and all the work is the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it feels great pain, and one sees it well; and it turns inward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then one must extend it, and set it straight, and place the splints equally; but however, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension may be minor and lighter; and adjust according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two flexible rods that enclose the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them in two layers of bandages above and below, and bind it firmly, so that the leg does not bend to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should touch the leg for a long time, for it is fragile, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly treat it in the fracture where there is pain; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if you heal until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and the toes bend, and it does not happen except in several dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot are broken, and you see them overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on the shin, where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small table with two flat planes, then hold it firmly to the foot, then wrap drapels around, and other things that you have as medicine.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when ten or twelve days will have passed, if you disentangle the thread, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot of the table that I have described, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are eleven or twelve, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a bandage of linen, and hold the foot of the table underneath; and let it be standing above the head of the table, so that it holds the belly of the foot well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken; and attend to each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the female nature is broken, if you make it sit enlarged, then incline it to the back part of the spine, and hold it from behind; then fill the belly with the natural cotton of the patient's cut, and insert a big stitch as I stand; then remove the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and return the bone with the stitch; and when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or so: it will restore the break, and if you see, take a bladder of birch, and tie a chain to the peritoneum, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow into the chain strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the break; then fill with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the thumb of the man is broken, or of the woman, if he resets it thus as we have said in the bone of the shin; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from one who applies his study and his use, and intent on my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies more disposals the right way of restoration: then give the gift.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	On the verge, when it is broken, take an eye of a goat and put it on the verge; then wrap drapels around, and let it be for two or three days, and it will be healthy soon.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is suitable for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healthy now, so that the healthiness that we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if you have a residue of vitriol, and you don't have anything else, then recommence to restore the breakage at the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, as long as the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident to happen.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered heart, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not suitable for putting in your hands, then reset with this instrument which is of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary to put it on the mirror that it holds 3 or 4, according to whether it is necessary in each treatment of breakage; and let it be round and a little thick, so it does not slip from the compression on the member at your work, and let it be steady beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because it requires that the curved head be placed on top of the apparent bone; and the joint is once bent, so they are reunited, and become equal one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it requires that you cut the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot set the bone, as we have said, then take hold of an instrument suitable for that, whether it is an incision or a saw, to your power; then remove what is remaining in the bone of roughness and small scraps.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is rearranged, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Here is the translation:
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that a worse accident may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, so it does not fit to put on splints; but envelop entirely, on the limb of the splints, wrap hard bandages, and bind.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see afterwards on the next day or second day that it is swelling at the wound, so remove what you had put on all around, and apply gentle healing remedies, as you would apply a tetrafarmacon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you anoint the limb three times a day, in the morning and evening, until it be sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be wrapped in such a way that the bandage does not bind too tightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but repeatedly breaks, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all those separated pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and opens into the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The bruises that come upon the wound
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the health of the breakage, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad thing to see the shape of the limb; and by chance it cannot do the natural works of the limbs.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed then when it is fresh: if you administer medicines stiptiques, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine stiptique or with abundant water or with oil; and put them on the wound in poultices, and hold it well, and do not dislodge it for many days; and then remove it, and restart another, until the swelling is gone; or you extract onto a piece of well-made plaster; for the property of the plaster is that it removes all the swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling is already converted into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, so scrape off the surface, and make the superfluous apparent; or take it away with some rasour, until it is gone, and the cure until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains afterwards with weak and subtle members, it happens for many causes: because one is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and could not bring nourishment to the member; or because of multitude of aromas; or because of too great movements, not at its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient slim, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the aromas often come from the warm water, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	because of a twisted member after the injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is exposed, and the shape of the member is ugly, it does not return to its natural function: so do not believe those fools who say that one must break the member anew, and many foolish surgeons have done this in our land; and these operations are blamed, and great evils come from them, and often death; however, if the nodes and torture are fresh, then you should raise them with warm water, or apply mollifying herbs, such as foilles of vismalve, and roots, and mellilote, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, as one does well, and take the musculature of vismalve, and mix it with fat of goose or oil of sesame, and apply it; or take greasy figs, and crush them with flour of colon, and similar medicines that alleviate the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And often the nodulation is removed by constantly and lengthily rubbing with a moist hand.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And so adjust the movement to each limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted tendons are inflamed and hardened, like stones, and need to be burned with iron, so it is necessary to cut just up to the bone, with subtle and light incision; and to put caution and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary now to bring back sense to the stretcher.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limbs swell, and by chance if one resets it to its place; because it is not good to move it at the hour when it is swollen: often it brings spasms and other pains; however, when this happens, make the patient healthier, then leave it, until the apostemes are calmed down; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and cure each limb as its cure will come into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head just up to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws are dislocated and awkward, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are somewhat loose from their place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its proper position more easily.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is entire and complete, it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not delay; and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his fingers as a pouch around one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be below, to hold equally; and instruct the patient that he relaxes his jaw, and moves them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers put them even, until they return to their place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is grievous, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are warmed with hot water and oil, so that the resets are lighter; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are restored evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming numb, if one places soft drapery on a pillow made of oil rosset and wax, then ties it lightly with many ligatures; and has the patient sleep on their back, and their head is supported between two cushions, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor exert themselves too much to chew, but takes light food, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed; and then one feeds them what they want lightly, and does not struggle to open their mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place at one time, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and strange habits come, and perhaps a solution of stomach, and perhaps a vomiting of pure colic.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a perilous condition; and many times he who has had it dies in eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge from the side it presses within the continuation of the limb and the foot, and is often dislocated at the defect, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and stretches out their arms; and then presses the area firmly with the palm of the hand, and it will return to its place; then places the poultice and bandage, and holds it in place; and the head which is turned towards the side cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates again, reset it to its place, as we have said; then places the poultice and bandage, and holds it in place, and instructs the patient to rest until they are healthy; and thus the head of the shoulder is restored, when it is out of its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Here is the translation:
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they have a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells up with a hot abscess, and one believes it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you examine them, as long as you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocations occur when it falls towards the shoulder blade, and makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a diversity of manifestations among them; and you will find a pit in the head of the shoulder, and below the shoulder blade, touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bulge; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their knee, nor move with any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it manifestly at the touch; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is recent, or if the patient is diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the hand of the patient upwards, then puts their fingers underneath the joint, and lifts the joint with force upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and stretches it upwards, then puts it in place; if it will be hastened.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the administrator should apply a mollifying and soothing treatment, such as a decoction of althea and fenugrec and mellilot in water, and let it be administered; then let the patient be placed on their back, and put under the shoulder blade a strip of linen cloth, not too soft nor too hard, then place their hand on the strip, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and draw the hand of the patient; and another administrator should hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder will now be restored, and if you see it reset according to this method: and it is that you make a splint which is larger than the patient; and let it be straight towards the side, and put the shoulder blade under the strip of the patient, and lift the strip upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another administrator should draw the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And adjust it in another way: and it is like fixing a long pole in the ground, so that the head should be as round as a pestle, not too big nor too small; then place it under the patient, but let it have soft drapings above, and the patient should be standing straight for a long distance; then extend his hand downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return through all these things that we have said, do this treatment: take a pole of three feet long and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded so that it can enter obliquely under the armpit, in this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place the head of the stick under the cushion, so that the cushion does not touch the patient, then put it under the seat of the patient; and extend your arm on the stick from top to bottom, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small chair or stool of one side, and extend the hands downward, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is thus, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary to place under the seat a layer of equal linen, then apply the plaster made with powdered mill dust, with incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the seat steadily, and turn the ligature around the plaster, and bind the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary to massage a little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more afterwards, 5 or 6 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has gotten in, or for another reason, then you must administer cauteries at three points, as it is shown before in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 8 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are injured or stretched out or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and later it moves slowly, if the patient is bathed many times, so that the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation where the joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is known that the joint where the joint is dislocated is alleviated at points, and at points it returns; and it is alleviated from all parts, and meanwhile before and behind, and the dislocation is not repeated, for one sees well and feels well; and it is alleviated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the injured limb with the healthy one, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset thus, lest abscesses form in the vein, for if abscesses form in the vein, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to your hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the count on the inside, above and below, and bend the joint to its fingers together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and strengthens from the root of the palm the count that is out of joint.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double long and wide bandage; and when the doctor has joined the joint to his hand, anoint with no oil to soften the joint, then put the joint in its proper form, until it returns; and when it is in place, set on a dry plaster with an egg white, and hold firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the injured person, and leave it for some days, then disjoin.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is fixed in its place, he disbands the bandage, and leaves it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, he recommences the plaster and the bandage, and leaves it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then he disbands it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels irritated after the joint is reset, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a thick fatty sheep's bladder, then leave it for a day and night, then remove it, and make him enter into a warm bath; and when he sweats, then rub the joint moderately, then put the bladder back on, and then enter into a warm bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see fit, then put on a moist warm wrapping with burre, and hold steady.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is light, more than the other joints However, it must be quickly returned to its place, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the reset is that you put the bad hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and the fingers are made even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it regains its natural shape, it is necessary that you examine if it is well in place; then put the bad hand with the back of his hand on a table at extension and reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the mirrors place their hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well; if not, then hold the emplaustres in place of abscesses, and let it thus rebegin.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, the joint remains twisted; and do not harm the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot hold anything at all: then know that the nerves are injured, or the arteries; if there is no other means to relieve it except by fire cautery in this case, and perhaps it will be of no use.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in its place, put the dressing on it as we have said, then hold it and let it be still for a while, then release it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, apply the warm water of a decoction, and rub it until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any part, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly; then the fingers are bent, and put the dislocation back into its pouches until it returns, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjoined; and leave it for two days, and then make it equal on that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and unbind it from day to day, and make it move, and relieve it; and do this often, until it is straight, and all thus do, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and all thus do, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	for the dislocation of the spine in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly take away the sense of judgment, cannot hold on to it, and many times some member becomes soft, either the two hips or the two arms or one; and many times the spine changes in four parts; that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you should recognize that gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no cure or sanitation of all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falls or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures speak of great profits with grand words, where it is not in all great profit; but I have abbreviated according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse manners.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositeit that comes to the worst part ahead, no one is healthy; and also that which comes directly to the two sides, and one cannot cure except that which properly comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in a level place, and have support beneath them, so they do not slip; then fix one stick at the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie one bandage beneath the sick person's hips, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the calves; and two ministers know how to bind the sticks, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two sticks; and be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the nurse puts their palms on the spine firmly, until they recover.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a tube of three long arms, and hollow out the affected area, and let the patient be in a straight position, and put the head of the tube on the affected area, then place the middle of the tube on the spine; and place the mirrors at their ends on the other head of the tube, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, make it firm at the turning point that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you fix two pins at the head of the patient's arm, and two others at their feet, and between each pin, above and below, a space of one palm's length; and have in each pin a perforation, where the turning point turns, and let the pins be firmly fixed to the ground, so they do not move; and between each pair of pins, have one turning pin, on which the turning point turns, and have two small pins of one palm's length, to turn the turning point; and then tie the bandage that is among the bones to the turning point towards the head, and the other bandage towards the feet at the other turning point, and each of the ministers turns their turning point with all the bandages, and the masters put the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, you put a decalcifying plaster with plenty of egg whites, and then the poultices, and then an ivory tablet of three long inches, which should cover the part of the spine and the healthy section, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient, until they are healthy; and if something happens at the end of health, you must administer soothing and softening medicines, with the tablet that we mentioned before; and never administer on a piece of lead, and never does the appearance come in the rear of the spine below the back, and believe that it is dislocations; and it's the bone that opens, because one should not have false hope: by chance death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the thigh
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come dislocated, not like the other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four parties: within and without, and in front and behind; and more within the hollows, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocations is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee at the fire; and it's the joints that are weakened by hot abscesses, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one to whom it comes to the fainting, if it is that this accident is contrary to these beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who faints beforehand, if it is that they stretch their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the knee joint without pain, and if you want to make them walk, if they cannot go forward, and retain their urine, and inflame the ankle, and when they walk, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who faints behind, if it is that they cannot stretch their knee, nor double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is dislocated beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this type of dislocation are that you should reset the dislocation, which is ancient, and it stays according to its disposition, if there is no cure; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the three manners of dislocation, if you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare the strong minister, and strongly grasp II by the hand, or at the knee where it is tied; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands under his haunches, then tightens with a soft cord around the thigh; and another pulls the top of the cord; and they stretch up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If it is not so, then you must put a cure in its likeness. When the dislocation is at the hip, then you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the cord around the root of the thigh, and the limb that is under the angle, then stretch the cord up towards the angle, and towards the strength; then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large limb of the thigh of the patient, and extend it in a straight form: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong and soft cord above the two ankles, and above the two knees; then let the injured leg be extended two fingers more than the other; then let it be suspended from the top of a beam, and let it be on the ground with the long arm; then instruct the minister to embrace the hip of the thigh, and let another minister suspend with the patient, who will strongly hold the thigh, because the joint returns now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is in the thigh, adjust the patient as we have said for one who has gilbositeit, and stretch the cord properly on the injured leg, and on the feet also; then apply two tongs, one at the top and another at the foot, then fix a tong between the thighs of the patient in the shape; and place moist cloths around it, so that it does not harm the patient, then each minister extends towards him, and the physician sets right the dislocation with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibbosity, and adjust the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the fingers of one hand on top of the affected joint, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards, nor lift them from the ground, but rather that they should be as if their hip was dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and be on their face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and must press on the jointure on the table; and it will be at a point when the patient stretches out their legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hip, and put the plaster, and hold with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then remove it, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are even, hold as before, and leave for three days; then remove it, and make them walk comfortably, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in three ways: namely, inward, forward, and backward; and not at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their knee to their thigh, and if they do not straighten up to their thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg as much as possible, and place your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet; then take their knee in your hands, and pull between your two, then bend the two sides of the knee to form a right angle; and another minister extends their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that they have straightened up their leg to their thigh easily; and put the plaster on, and adjust the leg to the thigh, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then release it; and do not bother the patient with going out, as long as the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in its place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it be healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes entirely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and stretch before to the part where it is dislocated: the reset is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and hold the ankle firmly by the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and set the foot well in its place; do this twice, as we have said, setting and pulling the foot; if it goes back into place, that's good; if not, start the treatment again, for it will go back into place; and if it cannot return to its place, make the patient sit on their back on the ground, and set the ankle firmly in the ground between their hips, and wrap the bandages around, so it does not dislocate the patient; then hold the ankle with one hand, and another hand extends the foot with their hands or with a strap, so it lies against the neck of the foot; then extend each hand equally, and the ankle is held firmly between the patient's hips to retain the ankle when stretching; then set the ankle in its place with your hands, and another hand holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at the point, set the plaster and stoppings above, and bind firmly, and place the foot on the knee, and wrap the nerves that are on the back of the leg, so the ligaments are not too stretched; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments become numb, hold fast; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and delay going to the patient for four days; and if it goes beyond this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses or wounds come, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended without strain, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any of the two toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press your foot firmly, until it returns to its place; and when it is even, and there is no gap, set under the sole of the foot a table at two inches, then bind firmly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	Here is the translation:
Amen	Where the fire cautery commands the patient
