O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fuels except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will vivify it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the remedies of cautery, and of other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine that is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and the issue from there.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the name is not much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware lest he fall into error and lest he harm men; thus I have wanted to warn many times those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and their experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Here is the translation:
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And he saw another wonder who treated a stone of a man's urine, and the stone was large; if he carried with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within 22 hours.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called by the surgeon, and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and if they had removed it well, he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another wonder who took in care a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the surgeon, plain of ignorance, held the break steady on the wound as it was strongly swollen, and did not leave the wound untouched, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that he should not dislocate it again; and remained thus until the leg became entirely inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was almost completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wound that burst into a swelling abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its sovereignty.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not matter if one touches it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, three-faced son, you are beset by the need to know that the work of hands is divided into four divisions: namely, to know, to avoid where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you take care of yourself, so that the foolish doctor cannot speak badly of you. Take your arms in consideration, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and abandon the grievous diseases of sorrowful sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien says in some of his warnings: "Do not take a bad illness in hand, lest you be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the ways of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and about the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and about the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember in our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and do no harm are the longest and most subtle science and secret responses; and from this the wisest speak the most, and agree to this; and I am not bothered by their words, for I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know that hot complexions lack matter, and dry complexions lack matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, they lack matter, some say that fire cautery is great aid; and others say the opposite: that fire cautery is not good for diseases that come from cold and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured by cold for a hot disease, nor by dryness; and he who says the opposite that fire cautery makes great aid to hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body chilled.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all the way, no one interferes with him who has experienced it, and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of the tense; we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors gathered and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and has greater goodness than medical burning remedies.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come except to the limb that is cooked, and does not harm another limb unless it is named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines pass from member to member in alleviating, and bring to the limb diseases of sorrowful healing; and by chance, the patient is not harmed by the fire due to its highness and the goodness of its substance, which does not do excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is established on the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I should reveal the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it debuts the diseases of bodies, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and they choose the opportune moments.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries are immediately cured by the aid of cauterization; and meanwhile the cauterizations are for necessary pains and urgent cases that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think anything, dear son, as fools often do; for the disease that is treated by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for the haste of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease returns at some time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and that pain does not return again; but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we have administered ways of cures in some disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of gold instrument are more effective than those of iron, and they didn't say this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the eyes of the cautery do not make putrefaction, but it is not true as I have experienced, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, just as they loud said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it has cooled down quickly; and if they heat it too much; then they make it at the fire; and thus there is enough of hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we do not use cauteries of iron that we have made appear in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have ordered this chapter of the loud chief just at the foot, because it is easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	For the fire olive oil treatment,
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cautery is suitable for moisture and coldness on the brain, and in it there are two things done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for multitude of sounds and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and also for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solutive modifying the head, 9 or 10 days, according to what the strength and age and the acclimation of the patient can suffer; and then make a retreat from the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the sign of ink on the location, and make a slight incision and stretching with your hand little by little while turning; then withdraw your hand slowly, and look at the location to see if you see the bone small; and if you do not see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk, and put in soft and moldy cotton inside, and place on the location, and let it be for three days; afterwards put on a warm compress; and leave on until the swelling subsides; afterwards cure the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And so said the old ones, that the more you delay opening the wound, the more it suppurates; and for this reason it hinders many.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of these said that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others said that one should leave the cautery so long on, and press so hard that one abates from the bone as large as the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux (pockets) because the humors issue forth; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and solder.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two types of cautery do not seem to me to be entirely good, except in certain homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other limbs; and it seems to me when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salvaging and mending for me, and that's why I usually work in assembling health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use yolks and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and of ointments; and if one does the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then afterwards cauterize beneath that cautery a little which we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After doing cautery on each corner of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and do .i. cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and it is .i. in this way that one puts ventouses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the corners are more subtle than those where one cauteries the moisture of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with Mondifian medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but none of these profit: then you should do cauteries according to .ij. methods, that is to know of medicine ague and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine ague are that you take a sweet almond, and remove the shell and recover .i. a little as .ij. heads, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can replace the sweet almond under the skin; and when it is replaced, bind it well and leave it thus .xij. hours; and then release it and treat it with the sweet almond, and leave the wound thus .ij. days or .iij.; then put a cotton plug in butter until it is poured into it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you see that this does some of the combined medicines that I have written or described in the treatise on combined medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery to the form that it is in.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a hook or it has little curvature, and it appears small; and put it on the painful place, and hold with your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that most of the space of the scar becomes clear; and lift your hand that the artery does not harden, which is deficient, and abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton in the vein of the seat, and put it on the painful place for three days; then I put moist cotton in a bundle, and then cure the place of ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure migration as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries before said about medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and sign also on the painful place a line of half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and hold so that you do not touch the artery and do not come near to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerves do not have regard for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is touched, or touching has great fear and shame for him who does not know himself, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the vein in the middle way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you on the place where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy in the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. handles; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has applied solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointoie all around the sick ear, or around the .ij. where the pain takes in both, and you detach a little from the root of the ear before you have signed the place of the injection; and it has .x. points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	from the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that should be cured by fire cautery is not fiercer than those that move with flow, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this kind of torture that moves with flow, of ydres and purgings of head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the .ij. lips; and put the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery exactly at the head of the ear just above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery until most of the blood is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the similarity of the cutting that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cutting instrument be a little larger; after curing the patient as I have said before, until they are healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then you make three cauteries: one on the three horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the vessel called "vasselz" as we have previously mentioned, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and so treat thus as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this malady it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clear the brain; afterwards, place on the head of the patient all the emplasters written or treated in the treatise on emplasters; and that is the manner of cautery: if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus, it is good; and if not, make three cauteries in the head descending just to the neck, and leave a space of two fingers between each cautery; and treat as the others, and if you see that they are suffocating, make one cautery in the middle; and if need be, another on the three horns, and treat until he is sane; and so it is the cautery called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of what we have said before; after warming the head of the patient, then do fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is fierce, do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the worst heat is gone, and lift your hand; after curing so that it may be healthy, and may the cautery which is called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first clean the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffers from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, make them gargle and chew softening the brain with good bones of meat; afterwards they raise their head in the middle, and make fire cautery according to what we have said before, and make fire cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo fire cautery as I have said to one who has paralyzed and mollified their body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive oil fire cautery be according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle fire cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is superfluities or corrupted and gross moisture, then cauterize with such fire cauteries as we have said to one who has paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is declining superfluities into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink which will purify their brain, according to what has been said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you want to cauterize, make points more often all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery softens the brain immediately; and then put on cotton soaked in butter and in fat of goose.
de l’awe des eulz	of the opening of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the opening of the eyes comes first through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing humidifying the head, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him to rear his head, and make him cauterize within the head, and make him .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descent of the opening of the eyes is in .ij. eyes together, or if the descent is in one; and cover all the cauteries all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the corruption of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop the flow of blood as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery, how you will anoint it; and no one does cautery or touches behind the eyes below.
dou cors des larmes	at the course of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear at the top of the forehead; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold humors, then I do the cautery as I said at the beginning of the work descending to the eyes: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the temples, and .ij. cauteries or touching behind the eyes; and if there is need for more, if you cautiously cauterize above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	at the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give a drink to the patient .iii. nine potions; afterwards take hold of the head, and make a fire cautery or a mild olive oil cautery; and make .iii. cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the .iii. sorcils, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not pierce.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And it is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the pupil of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	according to the form that it is in.
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that they make .iii. cauteries on the .iii. sorcils as long as the sorcils are; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into pains, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries in several ways: namely with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in good health; afterwards, sign on the parchment of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of a dead tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moistened cotton in the glare of an egg and musk perfume on the eye, then heat up the cautery to the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cautery on the figure that you have signified little by little many times, so that the heart be at rest in that place; and the signs of the health of the vein are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it thus for three days, then put wet cotton on a wound so that the scab is removed; after the treatment of the joint so that it be healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then recommence the cautery on the same place, just as you did previously; and if the hairs are defective, then cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterers of medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as large and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and living charcoal, one half ounce of each, and mix well together; and apply it quickly, so it does not cool down, then spread on the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, then one should operate on one, and if on both sides as well; and put under the eye a cotton pad soaked in water of lilies; and the head of the patient should be in your care and show your finger on the medicine, and press one pouce and loosen all the times that the patient feels discomfort from the medicine, for they feel discomfort just like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the mortification will have passed, lift the eyelid of water, and reward yourself if you see the pupil lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not, reset again the medicine on the spot where the medicine has not overflowed, so that your operations are even, and your eyes are at a point; then put cotton soaked in bitter water as the heart's fire is quenched, afterwards cure the spot of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, so that it may be healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you are more skilled than well guarding your operation with great care so that no drop of the medicine falls from your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, then recommence the medicine on the same spot which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; afterwards cure until it is healthy; and this is the form of the gentle death mirror:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constraints accordingly; and do not miss the right path for him who is the student of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not profit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Here is the translation:
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After the fistula is uncovered, and the putridity is drained, and the dryness; and if it is closed, so the work, and drain further the blow; after set fire to the hot cauterizing iron, and hold your hand on the cauterizing iron at the part of the nail next to the eye, so your hands do not make a fool; and set the cauterizing iron in the fat of the eye, and corrupts.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this does not work, restart the fire cautery again once more, and another time you have mastery over it, and let it be for three days; afterwards put a cotton cloth in a warm poultice, and treat the grafted skin until it is healthy, and if forty days pass without it being healthy, then apply medicine with corrosive properties so that the bone may be uncovered; and arrange according to what comes into its proper place.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Make an incision in the fistula, and make the cut straight; afterwards put in the incision a subtle camomile of what is its form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the quantity of a .З. of poultice; and hold your hand or camomile firmly, and do not move the patient at all points, so that the poultice does not fall from its place; and it is suitable to put on the eye a cotton wad in a stream of water or in awe: the poultice thus artfully covers the place of the fistula, and keeps healthy through marvelous sanitation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer pungent applications to the nose, and to bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is its own proper flow.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks with what we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then burn it with a small cautery iron according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply heat quickly to those hollows as long as it comes just to the fontanelle; afterwards cure the sore spot thoroughly so it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes putridity and rot and becomes festering; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all: then it is necessary that you have fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards apply a poultice or plaster on the fistula, and hold your hand so long as the iron rod comes to the fontanelle, and remove the rear of the limb; and do thus one time or two, afterwards curing what we have said in cures, so it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the limb and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then place the head of the patient in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery to the point where it comes thus in such manner that you apply a cane over the tooth; and insert the hot cautery hastily, and hold it as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and recommence the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and firmly fixed.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such manner the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and the treatments with medicines are not effective, then it is necessary to use cautery according to their manner: and cautery of blistering and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Here is the translation:
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Here is the translation:
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good burgundy wine in the impression of this cautery, and then they will be refreshed; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do fire cautery on the part of the body that you want, and according to what you are able to do; and this is the form of the burn.
des scrophules	of the scalp ulcers
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrophules are of a flowing and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery to remove what comes after, and make two openings for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or where it is necessary, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on a soft cotton moistened with burgundy wine so that the discharge may be drained; after curing the limbs of ointments and tents until they are healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the chain:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures come onto the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be emptied first by medicines that dissolve; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come near the throat, and do not harden the heart but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let it be the cautery that is called "clavile" because we have the shape before us; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the thumb
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the arm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or shivering, and it is an old disease, then make two cauterizations on the forearm in their veins; and another cautery between the muscles; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned beforehand.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cautery by pricking at all the cauteries that are called "points" because their shape is thus before us in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or even more inside.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing the wound according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three places according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are the lighter cauterizations, because you make them in three places at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient is aware of his back and side; after he raises the heart which is within the swollen area as close to the tip of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves that are numb because it is in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart as much as it penetrates just to the side, and the figure of the cautery would be assembled with three cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, for the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tendon and that is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And often it is adjusted on this nerve because it has seven cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting the fire cautery on the painful spots with oil; then make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is restored, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healthy.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach there come coldness and much moisture until it draws to its complexion, and multiple catharsis are accustomed to him, and in such manners of accustomed cures he does not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and stretches out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this on, make three cauteries below the cuillier of the pis according to the quantity of a finger, at each cautery claw, and two cauteries above the two sides so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and let there be some space between one and another so they are not joined together when they will putrefy; and let the cauteries be so deep that they pierce the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at that point according to the quantity that you want to inject; then cauterize all the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we had before, until it be sound.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver brings pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, until it is far from its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated for what we have said in divisions, but it does not profit him, so it is necessary that the patient be supported on his bed; and mark three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondries, there where the sides of the man come; and let there be a space between each cautery the width of a finger; and let the cautery be two fingers long in the course, and do not press too much with your hand on all the cautery; and let it be raised slightly above the middle of the heart, and let the patient be straight on his feet; and if he cannot, so let him be leaning, and stretch out his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you want to, if you cauterize these cauterized wounds of the cutellaire, be subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the heart, for you would make the entire body sick; and it must not reach the bouillon, for the heart is very subtle there, and the saiches examine to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, they feel a faint pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment reaches the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be warned about their head; and then sign where the liver or abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to the reason, from which it is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cauterize as much as the heart is burned, and come just to the spleen, as much as the pores are entirely cleansed; after the cure, according to the cure of the veins as much as it is healthy; and it does not suit that from this cautery use any cleansed pores except those who have long studied in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these maladies have often been corrected.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then it can hardly work, and always it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	Here is the translation:
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancients said that no man should use fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, as much as it reaches the abscess; and then the pain flees, just as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the wound
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the wound of the mouse of what we have said as divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they add three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Here is the translation:
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you burn the two inflamed nerves so that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then draw fire from the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, if you cauterize the entire cautery to four nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gained strength through long tension, and this is more than the other cures mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Fire cautery is not suitable for hydropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the piss; and let the cauteries be well close to the width of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, let the cautery open by girth for a long time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient's illness after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the four intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the clavele that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been put here beforehand.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of watery discharge, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the little finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not insert it too deeply, lest the watery discharge would flow out, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, do the same on both legs, making two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterizations be done from top to bottom, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations uncovered for a long time without moving, so that the fluid can issue forth; afterwards, cure with the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the belly pain comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, if you do. Make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or cautery of the stomach, at the circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel in every place, a subtle clave cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each of those places, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupt humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit if you do cauteries: III on the spine of the back, which is all divided below in a triangular manner, and I cautery below the navel II fingers; and if you think that the stomach is refrigerated, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face inflate, then make a large cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the clave cauteries; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing, let the limb be sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the fleshiness which is named "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems to be rough, and then apply it all inflamed on that cut fleshiness; and let it stay there until your hand feels the cauteries coming to the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows out; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul", then cauterize each one as we have said; after curing the painful limbs profitably so that they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the Achilles' tendon, it will be of greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer touching or pressure, which we will recount in its place, if it comes to such a disease that cannot be healed unless by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes, and it is wrapped and casts putrid and corrupt moisture, if you want to prove all of a subtle tent, and beware that you know the entire tent as much as it has of depth.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that seems to be a rasp, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and repeat the cautery as long as those corrupted and rotten places are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of their need; and beware of burning the nerves that are near, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, beware of these places, and do not make those fiery burns except in the charnelled limb, and think that it is not completely purified; after healing the limb as much as it is sound, and if the limbs are healthy, and the matters are removed long hence, then know that the limb is entirely sound; and if the matters are not removed, know that the limb is troubled, and the rotten bone at the font; and thus one of those things that we will direct in his limb.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of the loins comes from cold and great windiness, and does not take such a woman's talent, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the loins on one side and the other side with the clavile cautery that we have mentioned before; and if our cautery zones are in a good place, they will have three cauteries in a line, and they will do more great aid.
de la vessie	of the vessel
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the vessel is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you make a cautery on the affected part above the vessel, where the hairs of the finger begin, and on the right and on the left, and let each cautery be as long as our thumb; and you make a cautery above the back, or if you need to; and let the cauteries be arranged according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations delayed; and when they come, so great pain is felt: then you must make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said or a cautery of the vessel, and two cauteries above the back; and let the cauteries be arranged according to what we have said.
de la hainche	of the handle
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the handle of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measuring them together; and it is found that the joints of the department are twisted, so you must cauterize the patient on the handle of the hip with a cautery similar to a circle, and mark before the joint around the handle as it turns, so that the handle is within the circle; and if the cauteries are such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of large olive-trees, and let the cauteries be as profound as all the veins; and heal until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the box of the hip, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment is not working, and the illness is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of doing cautery is according to two methods: it is to know ensemble medicines burning, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the surface of the thigh three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good profundity and great, and have between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and so the cauteries are olive-shaped; no time is cautery made in the middle on top of the thigh, because there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, that you cauterize at the cautery of the circle which we have previously said in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the spaces of the circle are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And it is the manner in which one does for sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it reaches to the knee and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers, a little on the left side; and so the cauteries are cutellaire, and so is the thickness of the curvature of the heel; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or nearly to the edge, cauterize there where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the masters are, they do more; and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, they make a cautery at the cutaneous or circular cautery, and you must carefully guard in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have undergone cautery on the tender skin of the foot, and they let it be until the leg was completely swollen, and the feet also, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a burst of belly where he got death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on one and on the other, in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said concerning the cautery of the thigh, that it is in this manner, make it such a thick iron as a small nail of a date tree, or a little less, and let it be between the skin and the flesh, and let the skin be pierced from one side to the other, the width of a thumb; and let the piercings be on both sides, and let them also be like nails, and let the hand have well-made iron; and this is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is entirely red and gives off a sweet smell, and then place it on the affected thigh, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with three cauteries in a row and leave them for three days; and then apply a plaster of borax, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of his glance, and we see few who use it; and however this is one of the good cauteries, which can suffer him, and there where he gets accustomed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine is such that you make the instrument sharp between the fingers in a circle, and be it iron or copper with a long handle, and at its height we have two, and each has the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and be overt below and above, and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing on the box of the hip to the patient lying on their healthy side, and then put your hand much on the box of the hip; after that, insert between the two circles of the warm water which is heated by fire in a small pouch, and let it be for an hour or ten hours, and the patient suffers from heat and dryness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds mortification as if by fire; and when the mortifications have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip of warm water, and let it be for three days, and put on a poultice so that what is black from the scorching is removed; and leave it three days that the purging is in a straight line; and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds so that it may be healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that draws according to what you have done in the hip joint; and this is the manner of the warm wave, and I have written about the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of live ashes and hot cinders, as much of one as of the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small hole to filter so that the point of a razor can enter; and place on top of that pot another well-plugged pot, and put above the ashes and cinders and sweet dew above, until you have two fingers' worth of powders which you will have well prepared in your hand; and leave it thus until it distills sweet water and drips into the plugged pot, then take all this water, and throw it on the cinders and on the ashes as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very painful and is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauteries of other members because it makes other works like fires, and if there are other medicines where one cauterizes well the hainche thus as thesis and honey and anacardi and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us about a cure where one man was cured of the pain of the hainche and sciatic vein, and it worked very well, and he said that there is no other cure, and that he was healthy at once when this cure was done, and he was bathed as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner that you take fresh and dry litargire, and crush it well with a little fat, and put it on the hainche and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain holds, and bind it; and let it be for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the bitterness.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter a bath so that his body is slightly warmed up, and have him enter bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And beware that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fiery goat's hair, it helps much; and it should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and the fat of old oil, and apply it to the hollow which is between the thumb of the foot and the other called fossicle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take dry goat's hair, and burn it in fire until it is charcoal, and apply it to the linen, and leave it on until it is stained; and do it again thus, and cease not from doing thus until you think by sense that it reaches the hip, and that the pain is ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat's hair".
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of two teeth
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar things of cold matter spread out, none of these similarities is worth cauteries, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient is void of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines signed in an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauteries according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let it be made with the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries at the cautious clave moiens according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Here is the translation:
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the cautery of that one according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	When the fire cautery burns any part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that the fire cautery is burning around the spine to the poignant lines two or three, and the points are close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the limb so that it is sound according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in a curved area which is in a spasm of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the physician calls "podagra" properly, and when it is from cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-like according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, make the cautery at the whole cautery that one calls "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, make the cautery on each knee three or four times on each part, with all the olive cautery; and if you have mastery of more, do more, but do not hold your hand firmly unless the space of the heart is ready.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, then one administers the cautery that we mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the fingers on two lines; and if there remains a point of pain in both, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the wrists or just to the elbows, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good government for him and you purge bad blood, then he will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of the face
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anguish, and the veins descend to the hips and it is new, then you should know that when you want to cure it, do not neglect that day; and use things that loosen the belly, so that the farts come out of their belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the vein is repaired, and remake with both fingers, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that should be similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the form of:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until he is pale and he feels sensations.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the veins to their place; and you hold his hand so that they do not return back; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion under him and a strap on the thighs, and another on the foot which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign across the whole hand, and the right thumb and the left thumb as far as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommence again until you reach the bone; and be subtly careful that the vein does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not approach the bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their bones, and for large people also large according to their measure; after three days cure the bone with a hot cautery so that the numbness is dispelled; after curing other wounds so that they are healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that their nourishments be relaxed for a long time, so that the boil does not burst when they get up to go to their chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when they want to get up, a well-made litter is prepared for them, and they carry it for another 40 days; and let them have good rest, so that they work little and beware of too great repletion from drinking and eating, and from too high exertion; and when they follow this instruction, they are entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell you about the treatment of bloodletting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the treatment of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come to other regions and are connected, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make I the fire cautery of the same quantity, and let it be according to the third degree of heat; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery with three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the level of the inch and make a line according to the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized areas.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more moderate.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to a member, whether from a fall or a blow, and that pain holds for a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twisting and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is well anointed with the first cautery, that's good; if not, restart another cautery on top of it, because such is the custom that it must be moved to the member that is next to it, so it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the patient is well.
de meselerie	of the disease
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The messes are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see that the cautery is applied when the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend or remain, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the entire disease, then make V cauteries on the head: I on the crown of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and II on the II horns, and I behind on the temple; and leave so much space with your hand that the cautery reaches just to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth; and apply the cautery on the mouse according to what is before it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is scattered throughout; and it perturbs manifestly, then you must cautelize with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in some of the nostrils, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. great on the crown and .i. another on the loins, and .ij. on the shoulders; and .ij. on the hips, and .ij. on the tendons of the foot, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, lest you burn them; and often make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and .i. another on the bone of the stomach, and .i. another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that when you do more cauterization, you do more harm, and it does not benefit; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cauterization if they are healthy, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the masters.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After healing, treat the wound with flour paste mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation occurs in a member and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and it is not healthy, then you make cauterizations on the member according to its size and the smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little within the thickness of the skin; then treat with ointments until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And many times one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the inflammation is eliminated; and never gets in the way unless it is known about the limbs and outlets of moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of abscesses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "abscesses" is enveloped, and the engine of medicine does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour of veal and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almonds, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind with a dressing, and apply to the limb until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer comes at the beginning, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that seems like a circle, entirely around the tumor.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And wise men say that one should perform cautery also at the middle of the tumor; and it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to avoid it many times; and a more rightful thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot be reduced
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some have an illness called "adubelati", and it tarries from moving or through the superfluousness that it makes or through the ease of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or because of his tension; and you see hasten to move: then cauterize extensively with many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards let them be so.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it hastens to move.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you perceive to pierce through all the fire cautery, heat up the fire cautery according to its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" so that the cauteries have pierced the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the putridity is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment so that it may be perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a withering of a member, for it eats away the members just as the fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer from cautery together with fire, then heat up the cauteries little and great, according to what is necessary for the patient or where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts so that you extract all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted may be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized places a soft poultice with oil as long as the burning heat of fire is removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of swollen eyes producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mengeson has often been cured by medicine in place of fire cautery; but however fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of the medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that our feet are affected by a disease which is called "closer" according to our intention, and it is a big faulty thing that swells the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations of this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is that you heat the iron to the measure that it can penetrate the nail of all parts, and that it has subtle margins; after, put it totally hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the font of the nail; and leave it thus three days until it begins to rot and become putrid; then make a plaster of bitter savages herbs with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the limb of the joint by anointing it so much that it becomes healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by evil humors in the body, and often occur in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply warm water cautery; and it is in this manner: take a small cane of iron or a pen of violet, and place it on the nail and the joint, which is for rooting out warts; and place the cane so that it touches all around, then put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches to the root of the nail, and then find the warm water penetrating deeply to the root; and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, as you straighten those who are in the body, then heal the wounds that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do them three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cautery between each spine; and one fire cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive-tree cautery; if you leave the shivering, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never appear by default on the body ulcers, or pus-filled pimples, which come from gross corrupted materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	it is necessary first when they appear that one does cauterization on each head of the pimple: a subtle cauterization of iron of myrtle, from which the point is taken in fire, or of the root of aristologe long, or of the lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow from the roots beforehand, but are dislodged the superfluous things that come from them, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there occur great deteriorations of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the outer layers, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And always when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and hold very tight so that the blood is appeased under your finger, and no more issue comes out; then apply the olive oil cautery, more or less small and large as it becomes all red; then take .i., or great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and apply the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery so long as the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stanched unless it is through one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines applied which have power to staunch blood; and thus it will be bound and held in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who administers the treatment of tight bandages or of putting hot things on, or similar things, does not profit if not done carefully.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, one should put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well so that it is restrained above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but the mole of the cold water which is very cold so that the blood is congealed and thickened and restrained; and make inquiries beforehand about those who need cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter all about the diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or hot medicines, and the instruments and causes and the tools and forms of cauteries; and I put that chapter among the chief justifications, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because it is easier to find what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you do not undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who worsen their illness so that they die more easily through the foolishness that they find in their disease, and because of the greatness of their evil; and one should have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there is one who gives you his sense, and says: "wait, I am healed"; and the disease is despised.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not suitable that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of that about which you are certain, and from which you can take and lose; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before or the chapter of cauterizations, that I have devised from head to feet, because you will find it easier to learn what you will need to master.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes very often to children in infancy, and when the vein holds the child's head too tightly; and it never comes from a known cause that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen, they hastened to death; and therefore it seems to me that it is worth leaving off the work in certain treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not support its own weight; and the moisture was so great that it was mortal, and this moisture was gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as we need, until the moisture flows; and see there the form of the spatula.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture increases, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head affected by each part, and the water flows forth when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after cutting open, remove all the moisture thoroughly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After straining the folds of drapels and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave it like that until the fifth day; then dislodge it, and treat the wound with tents and with ointments, and leave the head to straighten out freely, and give food to the patient dry meat without much moisture so long as the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and assemble the water; for it is never before; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and let it flow according to what you can do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and avoid flowing blood, so that the patient does not die from the corruption of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of humor
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the foot, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with fire, which one coppes with the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary then, when you see the wounds close, that the patient makes his head rear; after he rubs the area of a rough drapel so much that the arteries appear, then dislodge the patient's neck to the entire drapel; then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and are a little bent back; then sign the veins in the flesh, then cover one and the other with a sharp spatumile of two parts, so much that the vein vein reaches just to the bone, and it is done through the large hole of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as much as two fingers at the traverse.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the width of three fingers, then sign from the notch and make just up to the bone; and it is necessary to put six cups of blood, or by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the siphac, if you think that apostemes are about to come, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migration comes, and catarrh agitates, because of the moisture of the tears and the colds in the temples and the old forsakenness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of cures of medicine and all this does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauteries, as we have related.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is little restored unless in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then extract the neck of the patient from some drapels, then rub the skin with some rough cloth, and raise the skin with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up with pincers, and separate well the tissues that are beneath each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the uncinate, then take care of that part according to the quantity of two inches.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For she is not bandaged, if she does not know the sensation of the wound everywhere.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Here is the translation:
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Because fire cautery is helpful for ending moisture: therefore it is of great help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, one fills the hole with much cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when they are removed, be cured by dry medicines that make flesh grow, and by tents, until it is healthy; and if you do not have a remedy for the artery as I will show you, if you hasten to cauterize, either use vitriol and hold it in your hand so the wound does not get infected; and if you don't have that present, put your finger on the hole until the wound is congealed, and raise the cold water until the wound ceases, and hold steady as it is necessary; and what is more gentle and easier in extracting the artery is to cauterize the vein of this trenchant cautery .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid further inflammation.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less their warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you should have between the .ij. knives .i. a space of a thumb, and then when you have signed in the .ij. joints, and you put the hot iron on them until it reaches just to the bone, and cauterize the vein in .ij. parts; and they should be separated between the .ij. fingers because it is not suitable for this cautery to be done all at once; and that is the form of cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not benefit from a medical cure that one makes, and you see the face of the patient become inflamed, and feel at the front as if walking on fiery coals; and thus they are tender and moist so that the hairs of the papers are fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the ardor of the tears, so it is necessary to use this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it an "injured cure", and it is that you make three cuts on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, so that he has hairs in front, then make three equal incisions according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as if two fingers are entirely on the forehead going downwards to the nose, and the others are as if two ribs are above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are above the papers; and remove your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound have the quantity of three fingers at the joint; and apply a piece of sponge and much drapery to suck out the blood, then put the spatula, expert on both sides of where it is the form.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Here is the translation:
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting tool towards the air in the heart, and the smooth edge towards the bone, and the end as far as it reaches to the middle notch.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision continues up to what opens in the heart, and then further make an incision in the middle notch up to the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and press the flesh for the taken blood; then put in each notch a tent of old cotton, and put on drapery moillied with wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that abscesses do not grow; and on the third day, loosen the lien, and I will show you great plantation of aqua tedea, then the treatment of ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments which cure wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	you remove the eyelids
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no vein is accustomed to the flow of catarrh, and you see the eyelids swollen and small, and the vision is obscured, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in the front it has a painful ache, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and this catharr come from many veins, and the treatment is more difficult than it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a great cut in the forehead, and another as wide as the thumb.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the cut of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be just up to the bone; and hold your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the two lips of the cut and put in a lot of cotton, and apply a dressing of clean linen; then lay on top a warm drapery soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is osteized, it is necessary that you rub the bone so that the flesh begins to grow, then cure with exciting things that cause the flesh to grow.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take three parts of flour of wheat, and three parts of colocynth, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Here is the translation:
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls in the pierced ear or another manner of thing that does not adjust to the ear, nor grows into the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	Here is the translation:
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often it happens through this treatment; and if it does not happen, the patient needs subtle extraction with precise pinches, because that is its form.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, that is good; if not, one facilitates extraction with the subtle onion-shaped double hook; and if it does not come out by this, one makes a cane of iron and puts the head of the cane or perforation into the ear strongly, and stops up what is around the cane of wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then one draws it out in the proper form, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, one takes glue from taking the wings, and puts some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and puts a bit of cotton around; then presses the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and draws it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then you hasten to open the ear thus that an abscess chalzes in the vein, and spasms; and the manner of the opening is that you first make a healthy wound on the cephalic part, and extract blood according to its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear above, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends; and let the incision be thus like a moon, until you reach the stone, then draw it out according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and cure it until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a spatula with subtle touches according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and a precise incision of that vein.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the vein is moist due to the moisture of the ear, so that you have made many pieces; then extract with precise pinches and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case where it falls in the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses the support of conditi first, and fills the ear with much cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them rest on that same ear where the ache is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it happens through this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it doesn't happen, take many small pieces according to the length of your thumb and fingers, and heat them slightly over the fire; and put the patient one or two punctures of their ear, and sew on the other side of their feet, and make a piercing of another vein on the vein that is in the ear; and do not stop making this from vein to vein until the ache has gone entirely away, and thus it goes entirely away; and if you see, take the joint, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head takes fire so that the most sensitive joint may be cauterized; then redo another part of the joints until the ache is gone entirely, as we have said in the vein.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small in body, like a puncture and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large in body so that one can feel it, then administer an extraction with pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if no worms appear, if they are treated with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the vein of what is its form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and broad above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck forcefully through the cane; do this often until all the veins are clear.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to exit, stop up the cane with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not spring forth as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat them with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, it is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be of silver or copper narrow below at a small hole, and above overturned to distill; and to press within the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper for this, and if you see take the scum and wrap it around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the vein, and the vein is in the ear; then put within the scum all the cotton, and press your hand temporarily until the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels it within, and be the distillations not too heated by fire lest they are not well distilled in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with holes in their ears; and the same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a flesh born inside the ear, and this swelling comes sometimes from deep within the ear, if one cannot see it well; and sometimes it happens that the hole becomes small, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from deep within, if one cannot see it well, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this one sees that you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opacity, then it works with all this spatula-like instrument, according to its form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be careful and gentle in front and behind the entire plain, so that it does not block the ear; if the opacity is from flesh born or growth of the ear, then take it as subtle pincers, and hold it lightly, until this flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operations are deep in the ear, take a subtle, light razor and heat it slightly over fire, then place it in the course of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the oppression that the patient feels in their ear, perceive it lightly, and beware not to touch the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the perforation, and the mucus in Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the flow of blood comes, then plunge an esponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are treating the distillations.
de la char des papieres	from the ulcers of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	It is the ulcer that comes from papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and cut with a spatula of its roots; then put on the clear glassy surface.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not torn out, then the cautery of the subtle lenticular fire is applied, and the cauteryizer afterwards incises and makes wounds; and many times they repair, for nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the scab
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times things appear in papers of the eyes that seem thick in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of great moisture above and below; the treatment is such: take warning if the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make the donation of the large, then scrape off each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing a little the paper, do not hurt the patient; and if the crack is large, assemble it with a bandage, and treat until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not use force, for the ointments restore it quickly and ease the pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine descends from the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by incision, it does not harm; and when the grandine is covered, leave the salty water of the oil, and cure the place of that which enchants, as long as the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fatness of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Here is the translation:
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your arm with your fingers and feel the pulse between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient places his head in a healthy position; and then takes a strip of linen, and arranges it in a circle according to the quantity that contains the extremity of each part, then puts it on him; and presses with both hands from one side and the other, so that the extremity is assembled within the circle; then makes a moderate incision at the spatula-like trenchant, making a cut no larger than the wound made in a vein opening; and makes the skin deep enough to reach the extremity; and in many dispositions the extremity comes out of the incision, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract then a whole piece of charpit cloth between your two fingers at the defuer, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread out; and be careful not to touch the incision, that you do not reach the entire spatula-like trenchant up to the eye, lest you bruise it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extremity does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then slightly enlarge the incision so that it appears; then extract as we have said, then wrap in cloths and in water, and put on the limb, and bandage with binders.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break their own arm and put it back to correct that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to the arm, then the treatment of poultices soothing until he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs joined to another than the natural ones, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so that it is cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in .iii. ways: either by fire cautery, or by medicine according to what it is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done or by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then you pierce with a needle at all .i. threads above; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow beneath these hairs, and draw .i. thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make on the part beneath the paper, beneath the joined hairs, all the spatula coping, from the great tearer just up to the small one; then extract .i. thread, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and of drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, as the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into two.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is one who has mastery of coping with a great quantity of paper according to how much the paper is moistened; then make a spatula on the two lines that you have signed, and start from the large larder up to a small amount; and let it be one of the fissures near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the wound, then scrape everything; then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle and all the subtle thread of wool, and suck out the blood, and make a dressing on the two eyebrows to hold everything in place, if you want to do this; and if not, if there is no cure, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitching things that are dry and constricting, because the paper relives suddenly at the assembly of the wound and its gathering, but the stitches are mortal (as the ancients said), and it's a work without fear; and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, three ounces of powdered form according to the shape that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take what surpasses the small equal forces according to the form that is here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread beneath the large artery, and the second thread beneath the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your two hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with cerote and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the papyrus are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture on one side and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the papyrus and make it thin according to what I have said, and then make .ij. stitches by art, and .ij. subtle threads as long as the papyrus and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the papyrus of the eye, and hold the .ij. stitches of the .ij. parties firmly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which was stretched will die and become black, and will fall off, until it heals by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the scalp is treated with forces, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound has been sewn, and if the papyrus has been lifted, and the hairs will no longer sprout; and this is the shape of the two canals that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread .i. fine silk thread subtly; then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order another subtle silk thread briefly in the hunt, and tie the two ends of the thread; then put the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it be exposed to the sun so that the operations are clear, for this is a subtle and minor operation, then insert the needle at the root of the hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put in the hunt that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then extract your hand as much as the hairs come forth throughout the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hunt to the bottom of all the thread that you had ordered, so that the hunt comes forth through the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it stay closed .ij. hours or .iij., until the hair is rooted in its place and grows out of the flesh; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair from the natural locks, and elevate it with that which you left, so that it is elongated and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the porridge comes into the eye, there are two ways of it: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from cauterization, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you should close that wound, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tender threads of linen, and bind it so that it be healthy; and it is not suitable that you use in its cure things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the disease returns worse than the first; but it works with things that soften, like fenugreic; and the rose water or alta and linseed oil are cooked, and ointments of galenon fondue in one of the eyes, and it envelops a tent, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of this treatment is that you take heed so it does not become worse according to the form it was before; and these workings that we have said are only remedies for this disease, so it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is beneath, truly named "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and sew the flesh, and make pierce through the left arm vein as far as the right, so that the thread goes into the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with a large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is convenient, it's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the papyrus, and make two fissures or sew within the papyrus; and be the heads of the two fissures at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has no "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then reattach the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then use the cure of what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from wound or fracture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain cut beneath the hairs of the parchments, and according to what is written before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they need from work and from instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	because of the swelling of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling occurs in many ways that the paper above is swollen with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, until you collect what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the spatula being too sharp or bleeding the oil; and make your incision, where you carefully remove the assembled thing, lightly, so that the paper regains its natural form; and it is all healthy, and never again becomes salty in the bitter oil, and raises with gentle warmth, and of collared things; then put between the paper and the oil a linen thread, and put on the oil a moistened cloth in abundance of egg white; and after three days use gentle collared things and similar soothing things until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the corner is according to two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard, rough surface, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to a whitish, congealed moisture, that when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be; and one and the other appearance encounters towards the great artery, and gradually increases until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware that the spatula does not touch the tender skin and break it, and that the pruning is not perceived; and after the incision, pour a little oil into the eye, and make a poultice of litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so that it may be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the nails cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured by medicines; and grows as I have related in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly a little agitated according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail subtly, and if you see that it is diminishing point by point and the reason appears, then distill from your mouth into the eye a poultice made of litargyrum and red clay and oil, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method of opening, so that it may be entirely restored.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, then as an abscess bursts, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the work as before, so that it may be healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the skin is hurt by the armorer's night in the eye through great annoyance, if it suspends from the onion, and cuts into a part but not entirely, that course of tears does not come; then distills in the eye a red collar made from litargy.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the nail
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Here is the translation:
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But always it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil fragile by nature's way; and by accident, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	There are veins that are red and covered on the eye, and they take away its function and weaken the eye throughout the days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, therefore, at first to examine the eye, in which the vein is, whether it is strong or not, and there is no other illness besides the vein; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around according to its wisdom, and let the veins be subtly double according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let the onion be divided by degrees in the course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then when you collect the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and extract the blood at a good hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and beware that you do not block the eye with the points of the scalpel, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not take more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is dormant beneath the eyelid.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of it at that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave some days until the pain is alleviated and assured of hot abscess, then restart according to this method which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and by burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if it is engendered in the eye that you make an incision on the abscess, there where it must be drained, and remove all the moisture that is there, so that the bone may be uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the decay and blackness, if it reaches all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "asperate head", and it was made from iron indeed a chief counter, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the bone of the corrupted place, then turn it between your two, and press your hand a little so that you feel that this corruption is reached; and do this several times, then restore the bone with medicines excitative.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the eyes are swooning, and there is no growth, and the body of the bow is swooning, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not improve and is not abscessed, and bad accidents do not occur, it seems that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the pierced nostril according to this form: and it is that you discover from the bone a second time by iron, and by medicines aqueous, and when they are discovered thus take the forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be attenuated up to the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the patient's arm where the pulse is, and withdraw your hand from the eye I prick, then turn to the entire forearm until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it through what the veins are in that position if they hold their hand near their nose; and then restore the arm with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh is born and endures the limbs, so goes the material to the nose; so it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the nose, nor diminishment, it means that you should bind the patient; then put a poultice, then apply cupping glasses or heated irons to suck out, then place on the eye .i. make a paste of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and wrap with bandages and drapery; and the way of draping is that you take drapes quite soft, and double each one in .iiij., and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need most; then hold it steady with a firm bandage above, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck out without piercing; then remove the cupping glasses and let the eye stay steady day and night, and if they become weak, it means you should strain them more; then remove the binding after day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, that is good; if not, then reapply the poultice and drapery and the binding and cupping glasses until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	because of the tearing of the veiled membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come to the veiled membrane, then open, and come forth with papers as if .i. grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then if you have seen the veil covered, the operations are such that you put a needle in the root of the part beneath, just below the pupil; then put another needle where there is .i. double thread of the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cover the eye with double thread and tie one part of the veil around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye a clean moist cloth in abundance of egg whites; and let it be until the threads stick with the veil, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healthy; and never restrain the wound by the veil any part of a circle of drapery, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they pierce through the subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albumentous and descends to the eyes, and goes in between at once; then it is extracted until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the cavity of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not but a bubble that forms in the eye, appearing as a water descending, and it's not really a water; and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands from both parts, and move it until you see the bubble coming up to your eyes; then be fixed, and do not descend or disassemble the light, and see the patient's things as they alone can; and if it does not descend below, know that it's a water, and if the descents of the bubble are not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des aigues de l’oil	of the humors of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the similarities of the wounds in the division, and that which is necessary to perceive; if one operates according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye firmly and strongly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or in your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then put the point of the instrument on the crown by the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye at the minor corner, then apply the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand until it penetrates into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the depth of the measure of the spaces which are from the prunele to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you will see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the curved fabric, and then put the instrument next to where the wound is, then press down one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation:
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest, the patient rises by the second route, puts fire with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not ascend, then extracts the almond-shaped tumor lightly in turning the hand little by little; and then puts back into the aigue a little of the gemstone, and leaves from that the eye within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then puts by default the eyes besmeared or anointed with rose oil and in abundance of egg white, and binds with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our kind, put on a common poultice with an abundance of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond oil cannot enter the eye because of its thickness, for there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose form is this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce then the conjunctive sorely, and do not move too much in the background, but make the subtle eye, then extract the almond-shaped tumor, as we have said; and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient who is asleep, in which he sleeps on his back in the darkened room; and be deprived of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in that same darkened house, and test his sight, and make him see certain things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not suitable that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is suitable that you delay this, because the aigue ascends hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Here is the translation:
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then it happens little by little in his case; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Here is the translation:
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of algmada, because those who do not know them go astray; and thus they are properly aligned:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And thus the head of the bone is in this subtle complexity, and the last one at four angles aqueous.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nails
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No times do birthmarks or moles appear in various ways, because there are some that resemble scorptions with many feet; and if there is such a one where the flesh has changed to a flux color, and if it has soft flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these moles which are soft and not changed, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and cast the onion at those moles, and remove their roots; for you can then sustain with a subtle spatula on one side, until you know that the mole is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be coped with, if you open everything .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without surgical intervention, or an abscess bursts, if you sew it up as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, if you hurry and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the wounds are closed, then pour in water or vinegar and sharp wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the mole does not open and moisture comes up to the palace, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is a new mole above, which does not come from cutting: then you must thread the linen on a small needle, and be careful with our hands, and have at least an inch of space between each hand; and place the patient's head in the filth of their nose, and draw out the odor as it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many times children do this as a game, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold one end that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other while being careful as we are with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do as much as you know that the ninth has corrupted this flesh, then draw out the thread, suck out the blood, and anoint the thread with Egyptian unguent, and put it back in its place just like before; do this three days or more, until the unguents corrode all that remains of the flesh; and then put on a poultice of plantain for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, from which they distill oils and medicines.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp cover, like a tube, and the conduits are thus; and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats up the oil or some liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nails
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease occurs on the nails of the hand called "telul", and grows and becomes large, so it is visible to behold; and for this reason you must take care at the beginning, and remove all further, then put on it the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay taking care until it becomes large, if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when you take care many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that you can remove all, if you cure the patient and take away their fear, and heal the dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nails are cut and burned
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes into one of these cartilaginous joints, it profits little, because in some homes.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary then to cancel what has happened to none, if you see that the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two lips of a gash, and treat until it is healthy; and if the lips are already separated from one part and another, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of their skin until they heal, then assemble the two lips together, and hold them in place, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and incense bruised; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other suitable plaster, and let it stick by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the suturing is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have dens abscesses on their lips, hard, like grains of wheat, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each nut, and take them as pincers, and cover in each part; then apply the lard after the incision of vitriol bruise, so that the blood may be staunched; and then leave it to heal, and cure the lip of dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the gums are bruised by a blow, which the old men call "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold them in place with bandages, and apply a dressing to their root, and let the blood or wound flow; then put on top a vitriol broth or other powders that constrict and dry; and if that wound returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you cover it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatments to heal wounds.
des sordens	of abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs which are black and bitter; and sometimes the teeth turn black and yellow and green, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary that you examine the patient between your hands, and their jaws are in your saint, and take out the teeth or scabs appearing, until nothing remains; and thus make an end to the blackness and the verdor, and the jaundice and other taints, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then recommence to re-treat on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth have need of various forms of treatments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots which are removed from the teeth have other forms than those which are between the teeth; and these forms and others should be well-equipped with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay to treat as long as you can, because it should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to then so one has no excuse to rush.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained by two tractions, it is necessary that you are certain of the teeth of the oil.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the patient feels the pain, and believes it is in the sainted tooth, and makes traction on the good tooth; and however does not depart from the pain for that, as long as the bad one is extracted, for we have already wanted to do it for these healthy ones; and when you are well certain of the teeth of the oil, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with a spatula strongly to ward off the gum on all sides; then move your fingers or subtle tenaculums at first gently and gently, so they are well relaxed, then fix them well; and let the head of the patient be in your sainted position between your knees, and hold it well so it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part lightly, and remove it in the same way you did at first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are perceived and gnashed, it is necessary that you fill them with drapels, where the perforations are; and if you hold subtly as in tongs, so they do not break while holding; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you do well to be careful not to break it, and leave a part remaining, and return to the patient through the badness of the root, which causes greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you beware that you do not act thus as the ignorant healers, who through their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have recounted; but they come to be afflicted with this great illness due to the roots which remain, or because of the cartilage which they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is decayed, you wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood comes out, which often happens, you apply the vitriol ointment; and if that does not work, you cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, which one must adapt to the teeth first, should be long and pointed and have large handles, so they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be thick limbs so they do not bend during treatment, and let them be well-made of iron, and let them be held in place by steady muscles.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the wound, it is necessary that you apply a cotton cloth soaked in warm water on the spot for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wounds are softened, then apply the tongs called "algefri", which seem to be a beak of a bird; and they should be made thus like a file, and that is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to issue into all these tenacillas, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and you put the instrument called "althali", that is to say scalpel, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and large so that it does not break easily, and if the root jumps through that, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has twelve rungs, from which it is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are in front of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which it is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, because there are certain diseases where the ancient ones did not teach at all about the instrument for the diversity of wounds; and it does not break in the cartilage or other bones, or it decays, if one searches for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and helps with the gestures, from which it is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let it be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but it can hold and remove; and then restore the limb with convenient medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take out all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and its shape is ugly, especially in small women, if it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot smooth or file: then take the radius; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and let it be of iron sharpened to a point.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the small skull and small hands hold it firmly for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a part of the file as it is in shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and file the small tooth firmly but gently with small hands, so that it does not move until it is steady; then smooth it out at the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, then file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when they prick
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front tooth is dislodged, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that they do not bite, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but it does not work; if you need to restrain it with a golden thread, because the silver thread turns green and rotten, but gold does not move at all; and let the medium-sized thread be neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to adjust the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the teeth among the bad ones, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then recommence the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so that it does not move at all; and let your treatment be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the heads of the thread to a tourniquet, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth, and adjust it so it does not hurt the tongue; and then leave it thus tightened as much as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the threads break, hold with another thread; if it stays and serves thus all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the two healthy teeth, and of the two muscles, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not meddle with it who is not skilled and suffers, and never make the shape of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it thus as we have said, and it will stay and serve thus long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	from the copper of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	It never happens that these threads come from under the tongue or nature, which you do not know thus; or by accident of a wounded abscess; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue; then take the nervous thread of the large size, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if it has hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you find the uncinate and take the large ligament; and beware that the fissure is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift the lever of warm rose water and of cold, then put under the tongue a linen compress; and anoint the patient every night, so that their jaws cannot close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the flow of blood comes, then apply the glass vessel bruised; and if it does not stop, then cauterize with a slow fire, which is good for this; then treat with another treatment until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see the color of the fuse is black or dark, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it declines to a blister, and there is moisture, if you pour in an ointment, and you make a subtle spatula, and you deliver from one part and another; and if the blood does not come to your work, if you put on a vitriol broiet as long as it is stained, then return to your work as much as you treat everything fully; then lift up the limb of the axis and of the seat, and cure other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there come abscesses in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called II amandres; when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, beware: if it is a hard aposteme with little sense and a dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of the flow of blood; but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will cut it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cover, but first make sure the aposteme has cooled down and is quiet.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be in good health, and he should open his mouth and hold the sergeants between his hands, and press the tongue underneath to all the instruments, because this is the method; and it should be of silver or subtle iron, as if a small knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Here is the translation:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then take a candle, because it is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting from one part, and naming from the other part; and when you have cut into one of the veins, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot and cold water, and if there is a flow of blood, then gargle the patient with hot water, or scorching pommes grenades that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stained; then cure it until it is healthy; and no other time do abscesses grow in the throat besides these two veins, if you cut them thus as the two veins agree.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was growing inside her throat, it's known as a small abscess; and it had almost closed off the entire throat, so the woman could not breathe through the passage that was obstructed, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like that for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that it had nearly put out two veins through the two nostrils of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then, and inserted a lancet in one nostril, then the flow of blood was abundant; then I made another incision in the other nostril, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I inserted the lancet into the abscess, and removed a part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease from cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred again, and refilled the void I had made, so much that it became very large; then I ignited it and cauterized it deep in the throat: thus it did not grow again; and I parted from those regions, and knew only God could do something about it after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the vein descends to the skin, and it is swollen and long, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is rather thick and round, then it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the inflamed abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it must be coped; and the one that is round and assembled and not long; and it is sanguine or of dark color or black, then it must be eschewed from incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before; then prick the vein with a needle, and draw from below, and cope with one of the two instruments that I have said for incising the two veins.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the surplus which is beyond the natural terminus; for if you cut further, it grieves the voice and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two manders, and cure until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear about cutting, then it is necessary that you use gentleness in the cauterization of the sensitive areas with fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cautery is to be sharply pointed.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in your healthy hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument which we have said or chapter of cautery, and confirms with a sharp living flame, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in employing the management of this instrument, from which it is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, not like cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put them to boil, and make the pot well glued with strong earth, and let it have an instrument that cuts according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether of silver or of iron, and whether one of the heads is thrust into the patient's mouth as far as the vapor rises to the eye through the vein, so that the eye is mortified; after often recommencing, so that the eye becomes dry, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of the hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do it unless at the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a small hook of egg whites in the chief, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the hook of egg whites does not let the vapor grievously harm the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or some other thing; so therefore you should try what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and what does not appear and is rejected in the throat, therefore you should make the patient vomit thus that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be cleared by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie it to the sponge thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will be rejected, and then you will extract it again; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take this instrument of a plectron in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high elevated; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all does not go well, nor does it bulge inward; and it is of great value that the patient holds the instrument, because it is held or the thing is at ease; if it holds below, where it draws everything equally throughout the entire instrument, so it is drawn.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the sensibility of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No medicine is suitable for the blood, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not benefit at all, then look into the patient's throat in the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, so treat it thoroughly with small incisions, or subtle tenure that are worth it.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a heated iron, and insert it into the patient's throat, then apply the heating of the iron to the spot, and make it sweat.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And tease the patient with water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full view of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in so that it swallows, and move it with its own hand often; and if soon as the wound feels the water, it scabs.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not scab as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with assaftide, with the instrument that I said in the fumigation of the urine; do this many times, for it will heal without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and in this pierced lid is the head of the instrument; then you throw in the fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches just to the sanies; and the sanies will now descend, and if they do not fall, then recommence the fumigation many times; and the patient suffers thirst, and eats salty and bitter things, and drinks no water; and then it is necessary that it be driven out by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved tongs entering into the throat; and it has a resemblance to a beak of a sign, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the cauterizing irons for abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many abscesses are similar, according to what the remembrance brings hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it is in two manners, one of which is in its own resemblance, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the bowels are ripe according to their accomplishment; and if there are those that require piercing when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are near the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near the joints, and one leaves them until they are ripe inside, perhaps if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, one should pierce it in such a way that it is ripe; and it is not suitable to pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for the one that is near the foundation, so that it does not putrefy inside, and becomes fistulous, and cannot be healed within a long period.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it's when the pain is alleviated, and the departure from fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the debating and settling of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation sit or more depending on the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be from the length of the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equalities where there is no polypus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases where they swell, by stretching according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is better that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce before that, the body would be filled with much filth from him, and it is full of much foulness; and by chance they harden the lips and the depths of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs have need of.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you make small incisions for small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many fissures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the skin, and cover; when it has become thus as I dress, and is amortized, it is necessary to do thus as one does for blisters: and if there are those that are cut into three angles, and if there are those that one covers like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the loins; and if there are those where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head of a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it plainly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected great matter, and you pierce it, so do not remove all the matter at once, but take part of it; then stop the abscess until another day, then take out nothing more; do this many times, a little at a time, until the matter is all gone; similarly if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the surgeon often kills the patient with the issue of the matter, which happens by misadventure, and you do not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Abandon then this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, heal the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, apply a tent of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it is necessary that you put a tent in each one so they do not touch each other; and if you have caught in the abscess a piece of skin, and you have sewn it around, it is necessary that you fill it with much cotton or dressing of flax thread without moisture, and leave it until the third day; then remove it, and cure with ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if you remove blood that comes from your work, if you handle it with cold and ease, and soften the dressing, and put it on the limb that is being treated many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you remove blood that persists, you handle it with governance and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in my book, and if it's during winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then you must put on warm and moist dressings with wine and hot oil; and if it's in summer, and the limbs are cold, then you must put on warm and moist dressings with water and hot oil, or with cold wine and oil, just until the third day, as we have said; and then separate the abscess and the fluid and the cure, as it is necessary, until they are healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of ulcers
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the crust of a new abscess forms, and there are mannerisms that are in tiles, just as the joiner of a vein, and much is similar.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There is fat and such things where there is moisture, just as in pores; and if there are such things that are hard and rocky to the cutter, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the cut are so that you experience all the instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes hereafter, whatever thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then they make it by drying above a length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, then they scrape without leaving anything behind the skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing; then inserts cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and in vinegar, and applies to the wound, and leaves it until the next day; and this corrects what has been delayed from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then recauterize the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain at all in pain; then heal the wound of pricking with a suitable remedy, so that it becomes healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscesses hold in a fat nut, so cut according to this form, from afar; and you remove the skin, and scrape off all around, and put all your treatment to draw forth the pus that is there; and if the artery makes you do the opposite, so do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And thus do with the abscess if it is piercing, and how to cut and how to cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut into the piercing abscess and the moist one, it is lighter, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and among these I treated an old woman's head; and found the abscess just like a dry, rough, and bluish stone, which could not be broken; and even if one had made any effort, it would have been just as well to make a wound like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming onto the head, just like those that come onto the heads of children and the roots of the ears, one should open them up carefully every day, depending on how much they need to be drained; and one should treat them as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of the scalp ulcers
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and beneath the shoulders, and in the groin area, and sometimes they come from another part or limb, and are numerous, and are intertwined with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each abscess is properly located within its side, just like the tumor and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these abscesses are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that case where you see a good disposition in the touching, and it is similar to the color of the body, and it moves from each part and is not airy as near the neck or at the artery, and is not very deep; so it is necessary that you cut above, and scrape off each part, and stretch out the two lips of the heart as oncines, if you are a master, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and treat little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not let it be too shallow, so you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut into the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to stop, then put vitriol broiet in the wound, or some powders that staunch bleeding, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is softened, and the wound becomes mollified, and begins to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding is stanched, return to your work, until you complete it; then inquire with your finger whether small scrophulae remain, if you cut and mend them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrophula, it does not seem that you should cut that scrophula at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself without harm; then fill the wound with a great deal of cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire tumor, it is necessary that you reassemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no excess flesh remaining from the greatness of the tumor.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of it, and to draw out strongly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those tumors that have excess flesh, pierce where it appears to be dying; and pierce thus as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then amend it with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then the treatment with ointment will bring forth a scar, until it is healthy.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the scripture of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the cutting of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and one should not help by that, because all the veins and the pormon of the patient are at risk of having an abscess burst in the mouth, or in the throat or in .ij. mandrels.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the arm, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it beneath three circles or four with a small cut across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cut across the siphac, not in the cartilage; and if it is convenient at the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough to be cleared.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the masters are fearful, then it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire neck, then open the chest as far as it reaches the canal; and clear the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cover the syphac, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the flow of the canal which bursts forth through the broken place, and through the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed during which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew entirely without sense of cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	It is necessary to do this just as much as the throat is entirely stuffed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and the defect lacks the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and they inhale through the wound, and thus are saved from death; and for this reason the old man orders to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then he orders to bind the wound and cure, until it is cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young woman received the cautery, and it was placed in her throat, and part of the sinew from the arm; and I was called upon to cure her, and I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that she had not been treated properly, nor had a vein been conducted further than the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened to her, and kissed the wound, and cured her until she was healthy; and the young woman did not have further trouble, for her voice returned, and she recovered her disposition; because I saw that in the tailoring of the epiglottis there was no more fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women; and it is classified into two manners: natural, and accidental; or natural has no point of injury.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is classified into two manners, one of which resembles a fatty tumor, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not require making false fires except in those who are small, and it proves and searches for all the internal passages: if you find it thus as I do not have a fat tumor, and it does not penetrate into any vein, then you cover it, just like one covers the tumors, and you extract it from its entire cofin, if there is no point; and search thoroughly, and cure it as it requires, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of our own, which I will describe all the similarities; and now it is necessary that I differentiate everything that is between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the fever and heat are maintained, as long as the inflammation has passed, and the putrefaction is accomplished; then replace the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the patient who has no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the vital spirit, which is their own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a jaundice, and becomes thick; and are according to two similarities, either gray, or moist, and many colors are so as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of inquiring about the abscesses of our own is that you take or make the area more moist than you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so much that you know that the instruments have perceived the heart, then it is according to the greatness of the abscess; then extract the incision, and take care in what you will do.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	Here is the translation:
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it stays nothing, it returns to us many times; and if it stays a little, and the wound does not grieve, then fill the wound with corrosive powders of some sort, and hold the wound steady, and apply soothing remedies to calm the hot abscess, and treat other wounds until they are healthy; and if it is great, then cut open the II lips of the wound, and treat what injures there.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the veins are swollen, it is contrary or otherwise, if you hasten and apply the liquid of vitriol broken, and let the lips be still for two or three days, until the wound putrefies, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that which was delayed from the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of inserted instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula; and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the sorcels, and they are of citrus iron, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more experienced in piercing black pores to encircle the curves of fistula; and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the pertuses.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the onions are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are onions with two curves in three ways also; and if there are onions with three curves, and they are also of three kinds; and if there are onions with two curves, and onions with a single curve only, and they are of three kinds; and all this is necessary in their treatment.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these instruments are sharp, and of those there are some that do not cut except in one part, where the nails are scraped, because one does not touch the vein or nerve; and of these intermeddling things are the small knives placed in handles, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and we do not use them except in the treatment of wounds, such as legs, arms, and limbs, and similar things; and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling scrapers of fistsices, according to this form, where blood is staunched.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it in a place that heals with the conjunction of veins, and arteries, and put it back together according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Here is the translation:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Here is the translation:
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the seats
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the seats are a type of hard scrofulas where there are ribs, and it is only moisture that they contain.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who hold moisture must be treated according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment coming to that extent so it becomes healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrophulas, then they do as we have said in making incisions for scrophulas, and if the wound is gaping, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is damaged, and the skin is swollen above it, then abscesses often occur, and also it happens at the inflamed vein with an abscess; and if you examine it closely because it's due to the artery, then the abscesses are long in depth; and when you touch it with your fingers, you feel the constriction; and when it's due to the vein, then there is a delay in appearing; and it's foolish to try to treat this abscess, and especially when it's beneath the bones and in the angles and in the collar bone and many other places, and it's very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then one must avoid the treatment with iron, and the one who is at the head must avoid it also, and in the one who has an inflamed artery, make a incision above the skin of the affected area; then open the incision as much as the arteries, until it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath, and make it pierce up to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then sew up the area between the two threads of an interstice, so that the blood flows out, which is in the abscess; then apply the treatment that induces suppuration, until the thread becomes detached; then treat the wound with ointment, until it heals; and if the abscess is due to the vein, then you must hold it with your hand, taking care not to touch the abscess with your whole skin, then insert the needle underneath the area you are holding, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, so that you draw it out from the other side; then sew up the abscess as I have told you, or the thread of one of the two parts of the artery; and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then insert another needle into all the threads underneath the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and constrict the threads in three places; then cover the abscess until it suppurates, then cover the suppuration with a bandage and let what is tied up be; then put on a dressing soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of poultices and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Thus, abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are irritated, or from too great labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	Here is the translation:
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscesses are small, then hold them with a tourniquet, and cut at their root; and if they are large, then suspend them from the groin, and scarify, then remove the bone and assemble the wound to the ribcage, and cure until they are healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	the large hanging lumps
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	It sometimes happens in the belly and not another part of the body, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large heads; and there are small and very large ones; and I saw a man who had II or VIII in his belly that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had few roots, and were already split, and immediately corroded with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found one weighing XVIII ounces, and the other VI З., and the work in the incision is such that you see if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the artery is whitish and moist with subtle roots; if you cut with a large spatula, and have fire cautery present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Because the surgeon often encounters great flows of blood, and if he does not stop them, then hasten to cautery; and if you see the patient frightened and pale from the incision of the iron, take the well-made thread of flax, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain it, and do not cease tightening the thread of flax until it holds the artery, and so it does not require labor; and if the roots are large, fear not to cover the middle of the belly, but you can well cover most of it, then cautery so it does not return; then cure the wound, and beware that you do not cover the unhealthy tissue which is of bad color and of poor sensation and of weak regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted abscesses afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is hot
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the abscess comes from cautery of wounds or fractures of the syphac, and it is on the belly and in some of the intestines, as if it had happened in other routes, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness; and if it is through the fracture of the syphac and by the issue of the bowel, it is like the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and is a light thing without pain, and open to diverse issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press on it with your fingers if it resonates, and then returns, and by chance if it is serrated, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to moisture, it's a light thing, and it appears well when you press it with your hand, it doesn't constrain at all; and if it's due to blood, it appears by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it's due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the works are that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and concerning the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his arm straight, and be entirely stretched out; then mark a circle around the affected area; then instruct him to sit between your hands, then go around to the place where you have marked the entire spatium; then tie it with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the thread absorb the pus; then uncover half of the abscess stretched out on the thread, and insert your index finger, and examine the intestine; if you find it taken by the thread, then loosen it, and insert the intestine back into its place in the belly; and if you find the bowel, then take hold of the navel, and cover the superfluity; and if the artery or vein is causing opposition, then go gently around, then return to your work and take three needles, and insert two threads, and insert the three needles into what you have made in a cross that you may make it pierce; then extract the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the place heal as long as it can, and expel the dead flesh by itself; or cover it when it is subtle and porous, then cure what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of what is necessary, and sew the place.
dou chancre	Do you mean "Where cautery"?
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the appearances of ulcer, and how one must work with medicines, and how one must remove the treatment with iron; and we say that ulcer is generated in the marrow, and great caution is necessary in its treatment, and the ancients say that when ulcers are on the skin or where one can reach them if they are like ulcers which are in the limbs, and in similar places, and it must be completely removed when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I know no way to heal it; nor have I ever healed any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is on the skin or where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make him healthier if he has shown signs of repletion, then perform the operation .i. cut into the limb to do the operation; then pour out all your incisions or ulcers, and shave all parts, and scrape all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and hold the skin well with your hand or with something, and if the remnants of blood make you hesitate about the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize so that the blood is stanched; then treat with another treatment until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is clarified only; and one should not touch iron for these two similarities: that is to know, tympanites and yposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of hydropsy called "clarified" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if you see the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides hydropsy, such as thirst and solution of stomach and similar things; if you do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient has strong virtue, and they have no other illness except hydropsy only, and it is not too young nor too old, then you must operate: lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the stomach at the lowest part of the pis, then take the spinal instrument in this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And a point, and let it not be so internal that it cannot reach the intestine when one pushes it in, and it cannot become blocked; then see if the dropsy is turning towards the intestines: if it needs to be opened from the belly on the right side of the third rib; and if it is for liver disease, let the opening be on the left side of the third rib; and if it is for the spleen, let it be on the right, and it does not need that the patient's gaze falls on the opening so the superfluous fluids do not run to the weak spot; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the belly, and lift your hand to the entire space between the skin and the membrane as in scraping a quantity of an ounce or finger; then pierce the membrane until the space comes into view, and it is the place of the water, then draw it forth, and I put away this instrument from what form it is.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a subtle silver cane, and it is made of iron or steel, lighter in one part below the small perforations; and where it is touched on one side, three perforations; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a pen, and this is the form of the incision that the writers shape the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top is the scalpel, so that when the instruments come to the water, they now rest on the instrument; empty it then, removing half or a third part, because if you empty more than it needs at that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he falls into a swoon, or approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then touch the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held back by the cord that obstructs the perforations which are on the syringe, as I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then return the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take from the water a small quantity; do this every day, and guard against foolishness until it no longer remains but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much of water, if the treatment of the tomb or grave is hot, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and you paint with wine; and the treatment of desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never is a child born who does not have holes in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If you want to pierce it, then it does not appear at all, the very subtle spatium mole according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put or make a subtle hole in the plank, and bind it and hold it thus for three or four days, and when it wants to urinate, if it is open, let it urinate, and then replace it; and by chance you will not cover it, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The area where the perforation is small, if it is medicated with a thick cloth of cotton, as we have said, it will enlarge itself.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the perforation in their body are afflicted, because none are born with a perforation at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they lift their penis high; and they cannot be cured because the material cannot reach the marrow, and it's a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the rod and the handle are like the width of a pen, so the pierced area is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of the flow of blood which often comes, and if it happens, then stop the bleeding with what stops bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the blisters on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often times cysts come on the rod, and it is a sign of bad flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a very subtle onion, and cut and clean all, then put on a soft cotton in an Egyptian ointment; then heal the ointment diafinicon until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have seized it, and the ulcer is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is softened, then cure the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, if the head of the rod is not assured that it is not perceived, and blackness and corruption come in its rod and at the conjunction; so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply the plaster made of honey and flour, which is made from the scrapings of green pomace and veins, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a flow of blood comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries thus aid in two dispositions together: it is to know, for the flow of blood and against corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary that you apply or conduct from the rod a pipe of lead, and inject the patient within; and when the skin is rough at the head of the rod which has not been circumcised, either from a wound or an abscess, it is necessary then to scrape with a suitable instrument, so that the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the rod is freed from all parts; and if it is a difficult thing to devise this, it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula around the head of the rod and the skin; then divide gently between the two, and apply a subtle dressing of linen moistened with cold water, so that it does not roughen again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greater part of my masters and wise men who performed circumcision in this way, and with great force, and all in a new manner; if the courses were changed because there are two modes, and by chance one copes on that which is above and delays that which is below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is two fingers from the member it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrodes the vein, and many times thus they have no need of mending and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mending which is done with great force, I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces in the mundification is this: the two heads should be turned and should be cutting, and should be the heads as large as the evenly cut mains.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mundification is when the dense heart goes to incision; then it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the abscess forms equally, and you hold it in place, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then you tie it up.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, let it be until the aposteme wounds are appeased, and scrape the crust lightly; if you cover it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then the wound of sudden powder, which we have said or treatise of powders, and if you cover beyond measure, it will go to the surface, it will not harm at all; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	because of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of the lancet or scalpel, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and remove the superfluity of the lancet and tie it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or wax and almond meal, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod of moist olive oil and water; then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod above towards the bulb; then insert the syringe before just reaching the bladder, and feel the patient come to the voided thing, and this is not done according to this order unless the conduit is twisted or it goes awry; then pull the thread all along the lancet little by little, and the urine follows the lancet, then it is freed, and make the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorched or blood comes into the bladder, or when putrefaction is assembled, and you have seen distillations of waters and medicines, if you do all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if there are three perforations: two of one part, and one of another, as you see; and the veins collapse because the medicine is applied so that it stops the flow sensibly without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture, and push when mastery is; and when you see your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the cauterizer in the moisture, and pull on the drawing which is inside; if you pull out the moisture to the cauterizer, and then strongly redraw it inside; if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the subtle form of the cluster which one uses to clusterize the bladder: this is it.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below this is a sinew or ligament; then take a bladder of sheep and put the moisture that you want to clusterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts in the form of a double-twisted thread, and heat that moisture over the fire; then put the head of the clusterizer in the vein, then hold your hand on the bladder until all the moisture comes out, so that the patient feels that this moisture has arrived at the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread in these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dial, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtle clarity; and it openly hurts, and greatly troubles the penis, and they often fall ill, and then become swollen; and many of these symptoms are foundational; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very grievous in old people, and it's as if midway, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by cleansing, in order to expel all the bad humors that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders the healing of the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and make them bend and move to the bottom, so that the wound descends to the front of the bladder, and often falls from the high place; then have them sit between your hands prepared, and their hands are below their thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declined downwards; then examine and touch inside; if you feel the wound in the space, hasten now to cut into the wound.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not reach the touching of everything, if you anoint your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and apply it to its foundation, and examine the wound, and when you feel it with your finger, if you massage at the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and apply it to the depth where you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand touch the skin that is beneath the loins in the area where one makes the incision; then he should apply the spatula-like instrument, because this is its form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between what is between the hip and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh; and let it be straight on the stone, and the two should be together or fundament, and let the waist be so traversed that it is wide by default, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the press if the two which are in the fundament, that it feels no painful labor; and know that there is a part of the stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is difficult to extract; and if a part which is underneath, similar to a pebble, and round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there is a part where it has angles and margins, make the waist larger; and if it does not feel, it is necessary that you extract at the handles which are like a lime at the head, to extract the stone so it does not break; or you put beneath the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer thus, if you enlarge the little hole, and if the blood does not flow, if you extract with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, if you first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull strongly, and the small ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must cauterize it, and make a bigger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Because these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out through his bed because the wounds cannot heal; but you must exert yourself to treat it, or to dissect the tendons, as much as you can treat it by pieces; and when you have completed your work, if you fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it steady, and put on a dressing of soft cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resolve the patient back onto his bed, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, rub in very well the oil and water, then apply the ointment of Dyafinicon and Basilicon ointment, until he is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses come into the wound and ulcers, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that without a flow with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy; then lift the wound with water and salt and silk, and aid him in all ways that you can, as long as he is healthy; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you cure, that you bind the two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the kidney is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot flow out; so the treatment of what I say thus, that you should cut frequently, is to excuse the cutting because of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a forest of iron in this form and let it be at two angled points fixed in the thigh:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	then take the thread and tie it around the rod beneath the kidney, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod gently into the rod, until it reaches the kidney; and turn the rod in your hand in the kidney little by little, until you can feel the other side of the kidney; if the urine comes then, press your hand on what remains of the kidney that is inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is thus broken, and bursts out with the urine, and cures the patient; and if you cannot do this because of any thing that deflects it, then tie the thread beneath the kidney and another above, then make the rod straight at the spot where the kidney is between the two ligaments, then extract it forcibly, and loosen the ligament, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure until it be sound.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone in women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes it happens that the stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens often, then the treatment is difficult, and is prevented by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more profound than the stone of the man, because it makes a deeper cut, and great fear there is. And if need be sent to that, then it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and prick the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask I cast subtle gaze; and present a wise woman in the life of women, where a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she does what you command from the inquiry of the stone; and see very well if the woman is virgin: then it is necessary to bore into her finger or foundation and inquire about the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain beneath her finger, and recommend that she bores into her finger or with the disease, and asks and presses her left hand on the bladder strongly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary that she moves the skin from the entrance of the bladder up to the root of the thigh, so that it comes to the root of the hip; then feel around the stone in the root of the hip against the middle of the concha, where it appears most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or below, and be the first to cut small; then put the razor in the incision, if you feel the stone if it increases the wound so much that the stone may come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities in order to know the exit.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood does not come out, put the vitriol ointment on the place, and hold it for an hour until the blood is stained; then return to your work, so that the stone may be removed, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as aids to help you in your operation; and if the blood does not come out, and it is from the artery that is cut, put the powder on the place and hold tight with tents and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not touch it anymore, lest by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the flow of blood is calmed, and the veins are purified, then return to your work, so that the stone may be broken.
de hernie carnouse	from a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Here is the translation:
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this arm is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it is spread throughout that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And often if it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it's a declining color to yellow, or without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more; and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white or jaundiced as we have said, then the apostemes are ripe, I do not think like the figure of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the apostemes are ripe with a part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white jaundice, then it feels very well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you probe into all the intramuscular quarter, from which the form is thus presented.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the interior quarters, judge of that which is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be sound in body and replenished in his flesh; then place him on his back, on something slightly elevated, and put many drapes underneath; then sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart; then take the scalpel, and cut into the skin of the ribs within the length just up to the nail, and make a straight incision in dividing the skin of the ribs up to the white spot, and carefully remove the thin layer according to what you can do; then pierce the white spot with a flow of water at a large opening, and extract all the water, and then put on ointments, and apply the white spot above; and do not touch the heart of the ribs, but let the white spot only be treated; cut everything or in pieces carefully the side of it subtly, so that if you do not treat it wisely, the water will return; and if the vein is full of blood, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white spot; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the ribs into a bundle, then treat as for other wounds, until he is sound.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the corrupted vein of another disease, it is necessary that you lift the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then touch the joint to all the suspended, and extract the vein, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equalization, then suck out the blood, and put on the clean wound a soothing ointment of rose oil; and put on another clean wound a soothing ointment of wine and oil, and put on the two bandages, and put double layer drapery, and bind it all together with the string that follows this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two bandages, and apply them with a clean dressing according to this resemblance, and assemble them by sewing on the girdle of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just up to the back, and another at the part of the handle; and another head takes hold on the two angles, and so is assembled the whole restraint in the loop of the arm; and no medicine is made with this cautery iron in the size of an iron bar, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the bandages, and be careful as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains the wound is discovered; if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac as oncines, and scrape it with this subtle cautery hot:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And examine in all ways that you can, as long as you stretch everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the skin; and know that this work is more salvaging; and beware of the deterioration of blood, and remember that the operations of cutting are; and if nothing does contrary to you, or an abscess bursts or deteriorates blood or something else, if cure what does contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, if you make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the watery liquid is there, if you seat the patient on a high chair; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the entire spatula, and put the perforation from a long cord; and make the opening wide, so that all the water flows out; then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and let the remaining water flow out, then cure until the wound is healthy; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to issue from the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you use a pen or instrument with which one extracts the watery liquid of hydropics, whose form is thus before; and enlarge the wound, and know that the watery liquid returns, and is gathered together after six months or within a year, and when it is gathered together as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Be aware that in this chapter there is more fear in many dispositions, because it seems to me that it is of no value unless one lets it be; and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to a head, and likewise as wounds; and it is in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know by the excessive and bitter humor, which is spread through the veins, or by percussion; and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no true pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and sometimes it happens that an abscess is greenish and pungent, and of a dark color, and never comes from a narrowing of the artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is by narrowing of the artery, it is known by the warm disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not necessary that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Here is the translation:
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the vein is suddenly swollen with these new flesh, then it is necessary that you treat the vein, and the cup; and if it is attached to the syphac, or in those which are within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension, and the cup returns.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is where the back skin is, it is necessary that you cut all of it, and withdraw the vein, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are completed, apply the plaster of moist linen oil and rose water, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	These are enclosed abscesses resembling a boil, with the softening of the surrounding tissue, and the patient suffers greatly when it bursts; and the treatment of this disease is very near to being fearful as this one before, and always we will describe the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high stool, then bind him with suspensory bands below his thighs, to all the vessels that are near the verge, and tie them firmly, and stretch them out forcibly; then cut away with a spatula trenchant widely to uncover the vessels, until they are discovered, and then strip away from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then fix a double thread or needle, and bind it at the first joint where the veins come together, and bind it again at the other head; then cut away in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moistures; then treat the wound as others do, so that no vessel is injured that nourishes one of the surrounding tissue; for by this means there comes no harm, and if all the vessels are visible, it is necessary to treat them at all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of the face
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Here is the translation:
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the section that makes sudden painful beginnings come, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's failure due to the swelling.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, because it is necessary to beware of its effects.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is it cauterized, the white thus that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of deterioration of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Here is the translation:
de hernie carnouse	from a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this wound I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done thus, like the scorpion which assembles at the sight, in such a manner that you lift the veins, after adjusting lightly on the joint below; then cut in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who open, until the veins heal; and the cure is as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never at any time does a rupture occur in the entrails, as we have said, and opens the loins; and none of the intestines are cut, and if they are cut, it is little, and repair all hours; and however long it remains in this point, it believes the wound or syphac, until the intestines open; and this happens through the extension of the syphac which is in the entrails, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflamed the loins and opened; and the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and never is a cure made with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient places his back between your hands, then cut the loin of the rupture inflated according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the syphac which is beneath the skin that has swelled, then take the reasoning and place it on the loin appearing from the syphac; and press at the bottom of the belly, then cut the two loins appearing from the syphac on the head of the reasoning, and cut one and the other; then extract the head of the reasoning, and do not touch any point of the syphac that does not extend to another thing, as I have made you know in the cure of the rupture of the intestines; then the cure through the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the veins, if you make a wound and treat the wound, so that it may be healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The veins are constricted, and have no appearance in the wound, and the cauterers are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the joints is softened in some homes, because the flesh that is within is softened, and it is pleasant to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on their back, and cover the softened skin with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips to a suture, and if you see, first remove the excess of the softened skin from .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy, and feels the thread.
dou chastrement	with strengthening
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	I know that cauteries are commended in our law, and for this reason it pleases me not to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to make a fuss about it except in two ways: one, where the masters respond when asked about treatment; and the other, because we often have need of chastisement from some beasts to aid us, such as goats and sheep and chatts and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that cauteries are made in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we make by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water, so that its skin becomes softened and pendulous; then take them in your hand, until they are relaxed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des hermofrodites	of the hemorrhoids
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Here is the translation:
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way is with women, and it is on the little finger as a rod and they grasp it.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is that you cut the adjacent flesh all, and treat it as other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine passes through the skin of the thighs, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tenderness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A pustule is an adjacent flesh on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you remove the superfluous flesh of the pustule with your hand or with onguents, and cut lightly; and do not go too deep in fear that blood vessels may be injured, then the treatment of another wound until it is healthy; and to another sore that grows at the mouth of the thigh, and the graft, and by chance it bursts forth, and resembles a cowe, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you take it, as we have said for the tenderness, and the treatment until it is healthy.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the pertus is small; and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has come; or it is by chance adjusted, or subtle dou syfac, and it is made deep in the marrows, or in the sides, or below, or whatever; and it affects conception, and childbearing, and by chance the flowers have; and the knowledge of this is through the gaze of the baile.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stoppings are nearly apparent, then you should apply to your fingers or to the vein.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is subtle dou syfac, and it is nearly at the liver, then hurry, and turn thus: put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then turn the two livers forcefully, so that the subtle dou syfac is round, and is above the stoppings; then take a thread, and roll it in oil, and put it on the place, and guide the woman to hold each joint each day, so that she cannot dislocate.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the skin is hard and thick, it is necessary to apply cups to the affected area resembling a mistletoe leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is of a flesh wound, then they suspend the onion and the cup; and if the medicines are staining blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and assemble abundant dew; then apply a large poultice of plantain, so that the wound cannot suppurate; and thus it will be lengthy, and apply a tent of dry linen; then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh wounds occur, it is necessary to apply cups according to this method, if there are no abscesses that become inflamed.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that becomes inflamed in the flesh, one should not touch it with iron.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhages are wounds of veins that occur without external injury, and when hemorrhages are old they become habitual; and we have already said in the division the similarities of these, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive cures.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the thigh, when they are deeply rooted in the marrow, and they do not appear to sensation, if it is not a cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then apply the poultice as a bandage, and cover it with its roots, then sprinkle on medicines that restrain blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet in a cold bath for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if the blood flows out, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gale, and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he stumbles, it’s good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If this does not work, make him take warm baths on his back and massage the affected limbs gently; then take a cloth, and apply a compress of plantain juice or ague tree juice with old wine, and make him take it lying down.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess breaks, treat the wounded area with ointment until it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough, dry scab, so you should cover it as I have said before; and then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come to the marrow, such as cancer and piercing abscesses and herpes and estoimenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary then that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that burst outward; and if you want to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscesses are agitated at the beginning of their coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make meurer until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a chair, and have him lean against his back and assemble his feet as parts of the leg; and let his thighs be spread out, and put his arms beneath his knees, and bind them well with a linen bandage; then suck up the fluid from the right side, and I will show you the instrument by which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you have managed this instrument, that you fix the rule first to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not come more deeply than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapels, so that the instruments do not grieve; and it is necessary that he puts the cornet of the instrument above, and holds the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when abscesses open, and one feels a soft spot in the hand, then it is necessary to cover the head with a spatula; and when the tumor is empty, then it is necessary to put tent moles on the wound with rose oil or green oil; and put the tent under the marrow and above the marrow and above the clean nettle on the water or bad veins are so cured; then heal afterwards for 2 days of ointment, until they are healthy; and never lift the marrow and wound by clusters of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and long aristology are so cured; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is set in the marrow, then it is necessary that you beware of iron cauterization, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Here is the translation:
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Here is the translation:
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes out naturally upon its chief, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of it are weak, then make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and arise from the nature of oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then place the expert between her two small spatulas, which is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and bind the second one, and cut to his finger as much as the moisture that is in the corpse was; and take hold of the belly of the woman as much as the children descend, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to administer a cluster to the woman of muscillaige of fenugrec with oil of sisament; then make her press and estrue with condition, and hold her mouth and nose an hour: if now the children.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hands are stuck, it is necessary that you reset them lightly bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet high; then remove the chair from the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall; and if the hands cannot enter, and the children die, then cut the hands at the cutting-off place which is set before, and extract the child, and reset equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the infant comes upon its feet, it must be lifted up high; and then turn it little by little, until it is even; then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Let it jump just as the hips, if you command to grasp, and make them extend with effort; if it jumps far, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump fiercely as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, take a poultice of high grade, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in the mortar; and put it on the nature of the woman within and drive out this ointment, then make her sit in warm water up to the ribs; and when she is moistened below, make her wear a belt of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her stretch and hold her mouth and nose, and take her belly lightly, for the infant will now jump forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the escape of the child upon his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the infant comes in this form, if you put the basin under its hands little by little; then let it be supported on its neck, and let the feet hang down, and let it recline on the bed; and bend its hands little by little, and then take its hands under the belly, and remove the pillows from underneath, until it is arranged below; and if the infant does not sit up, if you take its feet and shape them forth, then shape the belly upwards, then put your hands there; and rock the infant little by little; and instruct the woman to hold it in place until the infant sits.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the issue of the child who comes with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must instruct to bring back the hand: if you cannot bring it back, if you make the woman get up, and walk; if she cannot walk, if you make her sit on the bed, and shape the legs forth; then massage the muscles that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, if you make her sit on the chair, then study how to bring back the hand; and rock the infant according to its natural position, and make it straighten up, and instruct the woman to hold it in place until the infant sits.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on its neck, and has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I think the patient should hold their arm, then turn it slowly and gently, and lift it lightly; and when it is even, place the natural muscle tone of the upper arm and oil, as we have said, then instruct them to move slowly and gently; and when you have done this, make them sit on a chair, and instruct them to take hold; and make them steady.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for the entire second one
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this method for the entire second one, then cut the second one at your finger, as much as the moisture is evacuated; and if the infant's foot rests on its face and neck, then cut from the womb, so that it is not retained, and kill the infant; then put the child inside, as you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to take hold at no time: then it will be easier.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the dislocation of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes not at all; it is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	They are strange things, and do not live well, if they receive little name; I know that, which must be multiplied, and are deprived by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the belly; and sometimes they issue naturally like all those underneath, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue grievously, thus the cure as we have said, and let the subtle bath be, and do it gently and lightly as it does; and do it so that it may bring salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed into the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the bath knows all this, because by chance similar things have happened; so do according to what is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	Here is the translation:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then place the file against another onion, where the third is in your hand, so that the extractions are even; and then they will be evenly set in motion from one part to another, to remove what is putrid, and hold the onions firmly, as it is the form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some of it remains, oil one of his fingers with the oil of the two, and put them in that part, and treat the other part; and if there remains none, place this onion or higher on the limb, and do this until all foulness is gone.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to stiffness, then you must wrap around the drapil, until it is all whole; then put a bandage on the joint of the foot or at the ankle, and thus you must do with the other hand, and so for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted in the issue, or it has an aching assembled chief, then you must put the spinal instrument between your two, and make the chief and extract the ache; or you will render it to the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one; and thus you do the same for the children with a natural large head; and then treat them for the bones as tenons, and if the head falls and it holds onto the forceps, so be careful not to break it, lest the moisture issues forth; and if it cannot issue, then cut into pieces in the muscle where you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce as far as the moisture corrodes.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he stands on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the administration at the mouth of the marrow is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is twisted in the belly or in the chest, then you must extract it with the drapery enveloped on the hand; and make the belly or chest, so that the moisture issues forth; and if the other limbs are ossified, and the head remains, then put the balm on your hand deep into the marrow, and treat just to the mouth of the marrow; then you put the ninth or tenth, and treat further; and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by a hot abscess that has come, then you must not work too hard, but rather administer moist and greasy things; and the administrator places plasters, and so on in a soft mollifying and anointing.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it upright, so amenistrize what we have said in the living infant; and if one cannot hold it, so take it by parts, and leave nothing of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, so amenistrize what we have said in the abscesses that come to the marrow; and if the flow of blood comes, so put it in a tight restraining bandage, and amenistrize other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had swallowed an infant that had been dead, then she conceived another on top of it, and the other was dead too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, he came to have abscesses in his belly, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to greatly suppurate.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong poultice, and there came out a bone, and after some days others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel greatly, because for this reason the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I touched the wound, and I put my hand on it, until the woman was in a better state; and I examined the woman's long tense muscles thus, and I pressed slightly with my fingers on the bone; and I did not recall this chapter further than that, because when the masters find an extraordinary thing, they know how to give aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the hip back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the presser, where one examines the books; and at .ij. turnings as .ij. heads of the .ij. ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle in their restriction, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the tube should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be one palm and a half long; and within these two ligatures of this same tube, which are fastened at one end and the other, half a palm or a little more in length; and these two ligatures are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, made in the likeness of a subtle and light tool, should be fashioned from ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tenaculum; and it has two heads, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide; and when you want to open the marrow entirely with the instrument, have the woman sit on the bed, feet pendant and legs covered, then put the two heads together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then operate your hand throughout the instrument, as you have done for the tenaculum equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the marrow, until the patient does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	Here is the translation:
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained in the infant's birth, you must command the patient to hold their arm, and then make them stretch out comfortably, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose; and if they sigh through this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Here is the translation:
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary inflammation happens quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not entirely feverish, then instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or musk in the manner of a massage, and then put it in the natural state, and seek the second; and when they have found it, take hold of it little by little and straighten it gently, so that the marrow does not slip out during extraction; but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then treated; if it comes and dislocates.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the marrow is already constricted, we have mentioned the treatment of sternuating, and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not respond to all that we have said, beware that you do not fail in treating; but it must be that which is at the mouth of the marrow, that you apply it to the womb of the woman, then cleanse it with a four-part ointment; if she will conceive and give birth, and will come into fever; but meanwhile, when she conceives thus, a bad odor comes from the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Here is the translation:
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to make a similarity to a dog, and place the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads on the fire; and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tar until it is exhausted, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have a perceived foundation, thus it is stopped up subtly: if then it is necessary to apply the poultice so that it perceives the subtle one with its finger, and does not touch it with a spatula, and clears the discharge so it doesn't touch it; then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of unction until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not reset, then put or insert a cane of lead, and leave it there for a long time, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess comes; it is necessary to cover that sudden thing: if it is treated, if we have spoken about the treatment of a pointed cane.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the bottom foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodation, and those that come from beneath the foundation are called defuer, or in the space of two parties, if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodation is old, it works, and increases moisture with a white or subtle swelling, and these fistulas are never perspiring; and they are known by the fact that the patient makes evacuation, or has ventosity, or flatulence, when the patient makes evacuation, and sometimes by chance jumps towards something.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula in its foundation, and does not miss it: and it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twisting, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or horsehair, until you feel the probe or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from pertussis or windiness or vermin, as we have said: be aware that it does not pierce anywhere; so hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the urinary tract, if it suppresses the urine, and cannot be helped by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just to the joint of the thigh, then the probe comes just to the place; if there is no twisting and the origin of the pain within, then it is that it must be bowed, and no medicine or sudden movement by ointment; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through labor, and the vain efforts of foolish doctors who get involved.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In this which is not fully grown and is not ancient, there is hope of health through fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient places himself in your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his thighs, and bend his thighs towards his stomach; then apply a tent of iron, or of lead if there is twistedness, until you know where the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it deep in his fundament, then it is necessary that you apply your index finger, and feel then that the tent has penetrated; and be discovered where you feel between your finger the sphincter or flesh, then know that it is fully grown; if you do not work there, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can heal some wounds entirely, but this happens rarely; and the aid that one makes, if it is scorching the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before; and apply it very hot into the fistula, until it reaches deep inside; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred parts are burnt, which resemble a bird's feather; and then treat with moist tents in mud, until those charred parts are loosened, then treat with ointment, soothing and calming.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is thus, it cannot be healthy; and if you pull between, and do not perceive just up to the finger that is at the bottom, and between your finger and the pull a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering of the finger is taught; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and put before the pull, and then apply the cautery, until it reaches the top of the pull; and the pull will be delivered, and fall out; then I will show you those faulty skin layers that resemble a bird's feather, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood does not come to you, and it is short between you and the vein, then cauterize with fire or medicine water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery assembles two things: it is to know, the burning of those joined skin layers, and the stopping of blood flow and the drying out of moisture; then the treatment of wet pulls in mud or in broken earth, until the joints gush forth, and the burnt skin layers are in the hollow; then treat the wound of the suddenly swollen fingers, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near the fontanelle at the bottom of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then cut off your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes they are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where the foundation of the skin is torn above the leather-like skin, if you take a perforated tent at the head in this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And thrust the thread into the fistula, setting it to the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that perforation, so that you push your finger or foundation; and draw the head out of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for a day or two; and restrain it sometimes, until the threads cope with the flesh that are between two, and heal; then cure the wound until it is soldered and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, make it penetrate in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the dressing if it is deep inside, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spiny spatula that one makes for the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side not, because one must not cope with what one should not touch, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of the hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Here is the translation:
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	you should cleanse the wounds or basis
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is cleansing of wounds in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no value.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
dou fremit	because of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Here is the translation:
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a thread from a bird's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and place this thread on the fracture, so that the circles encircle the fracture entirely; then turn your hand all around the thread so that you grasp everything around the fracture, and put it in place, and extract the fracture from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a cane of iron or copper in this form, and be subtle underneath and straight above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, for you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the fremited place, as it is before or in front of the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of molten iron or steel; and never make these small and large instruments, according to the ones that are prepared for them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Here is the translation:
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large cluster is above width, where the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and it has a separation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is perceived within; and have one of the sides II pierced, and in the other I; and let the belly be where medicines are placed from a beast's bladder or parchment, and let it be entirely surrounded by small piercings, and have between each piercing I thread of space, then put into these piercings I strong twisted thread curled in X or within, and assemble the belly as if it were a sheath; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then clisterize; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or album of egg, or similar thing, then sprinkle it lightly; then grasp the minister's hands together, so that they are all seen, then extract the clistere, and lift the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to exit, let it flow as much as it can; and if he sleeps one night thoroughly, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat him for a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to issue, then recommend it as long as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the humors are in excess or foundation, or abscess, so let the clistere be as subtle as for a child; and it is the form of the subtle clistere on whom the skin is restrained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments by hand and by medicine, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they were made, and according to the locations or where the wounds were made, and of what they were made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by piercing of stone, and thrust of sword and of knife, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or similar things; or that are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it's not a matter of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely broken and the wound is large, and you doubt strongly about an abscess forming: if you make it immediately healthier from the cephalic treatment, as little blood comes out of the wound, and may the healing be opposite to the injured part; and avoid the patient's repletion with wine and coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not want to heal, if the patient's food is diminished, and they do not drink wine, nor eat flesh; and put on the wound, if abscesses form when it comes, a cotton cloth soaked in rose oil or stippled with wine; and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, so it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will discuss a little later; and if the patient's artery has been moved, put on some ointments, until they are healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tugging, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is discovered on the bone, and it is hollow, and only holds to a little, if it collapses; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in the place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large pieces of meat, if they are well-cooked and roasted, just as for poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find decayed skin, and it does not adhere to the bone, then collapse the entire decay, and throw it out, then heal; and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without delay, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, seek to remove it, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if that does not profit, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes thus that the wound has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is this: take one part incense; dragon's blood two parts; living talc three parts, and powder subtly, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap; and then bind it well, and leave it without loosening, so it does not inflame; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never does one make a poultice of hot chalk alone, when one has not heated the blood of dragon, but rather that the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arsenic has moved to the wound, meanwhile in this state, if you do not put on this powder; but put on some digesting ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, so that it throws off pus; then heal with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then I will instruct you on subtle pinches; and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes to the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, then there is no other engine than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not put on the wound anything cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but be the soothing medicine, such as warm water poured in gentle water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooled in gentle water, and other mines according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, if you pierce or cut below the skin; and if the artery is cut, and blood comes out, if you clean it, and bind it, and cauterize where necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the veins, and the conduits are guarded, so that the flesh goes, if you cut the vein on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it still for a while, and leave it alone for some days, then cure the wounds with ointments often until it is healthy; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, if you seek; and if there are pieces of bone, if you remove them thoroughly so you can, and those that you cannot have, if you leave until the wound heals, and be careful and alleviate the issue; and if the wound is fresh, if you sprinkle with powder as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of lance or of knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	Here is the translation:
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Here is the translation:
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, whether on the front or back, if the treatment of what is in front; if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, if it heals the wound, and the tissues are restored if they are disconnected; and if they are not disconnected, if let the wound putrefy, if it eases the extractions; and for other wounds as other members are judged as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	for the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the belly are large and medium and small; from a large wound sometimes the intestine is injured, or the nerves of the intestines, because of the introversion of aus; and the stitching is more painful, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one, because they put the intestines back in place more often, if they do not put them back in place immediately; because the intestine swells as soon as it feels the cold, if it goes back into place more often, and therefore it is better to have a moderate wound, because they reset the intestine to its place like other II And know that the ruptures of the belly are according to four manners: the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds of the body and two other proper stitches are common as other wounds; and anyway they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will tell one by one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines is outside, and it is difficult to put back, it is by one of two methods: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is frozen, warm it in such a way: soften an esponge or a mol of drapery in hot water suddenly, or you cook in hot squinant and cypress and spiken, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed; and never make this wine restraining, and it is deadlier than usual for thawing.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestine with hot water or lukewarm and evil things are cooked, because by this the entry is eased a little; and if it cannot enter, if you make a small opening in the wound with an instrument to remove the morbidities; and the first treatment is deadlier than the surgery, which we must not perform without great necessity; and these are the instruments for cutting: if you cut within the curve and do not perforate, and see here the shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts out, if you put it back in its natural shape in its proper place, you can then have power over it, for that is worth more.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, you should make the patient sit on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, you should raise the head and chest higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, you should adjust so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus you must manage what I say about large and moderate wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, take what is prepared for you, then place it between your hands and minister pitifully, taking care to stitch the entire rupture with one hand, and assemble the lips; and this is the common method of suturing, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave space on both sides of the wound, and fix a needle or thread strongly; and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the siphac, which is beneath the skin within, as much as you make it pierce from that part, and assemble the two heads of the siphac together; then strain with a double thread around the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound immediately, and then leave space on both sides, and fix another needle; then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not cease from doing so according to what you have mastered of needles, until the entire wound is restrained; and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse, for subtle needles take in all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well: therefore they must be moderate; and do not push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they do not take hold and open up the wound before the suturing; and then tie the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and place tents or drapery on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is soured; and this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it suffices to take one or two second stitches, and it is that you assemble the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the siphac together at a moderate strong thread; and when you have pierced these heads all together, then rethread the needle at the part where you began, in the manner of sewing clothes; and leave space between each stitch the width of a small finger; this suturing serves the man, and I sewed a wound that a certain man had on his belly, which was injured by a cut, and it was more than a palm wide, and it was two palms deep into the intestines, and it was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine then when it had been out for 23 hours, and the wound was sewn up to 15 days, and I healed it, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctor had given up that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not care about ointments, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicines; and I put cotton on the wound many times a day, and washed with honey water until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing: take the needle, and pass it through the damaged part up to the inner layer; when it has penetrated the right layer in a straight line, then push the head of the siphac or the thread you have inserted with the needle, and make it penetrate another part of the inner layer up to the damaged part; and the intention of this suturing is that you sew just like the pelterer sews the skins, and that you leave one time the thread of one part, and take it back from another, until the suturing is entirely complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of suturing, which Galen describes properly, is like no font, which assembles the two parts naturally, and applies one head of the suture to the other head, in such a way: take a needle or head of the mirror-like proximity, and make it pierce that part of the suture, and let the two heads of the suture; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the defective part just up to there inside, as the two heads of the suture; then make it pierce one and the other from the defective part just up to there inside, in the other heads of the mirror-like proximity that are on the other side; and this is the most common manner of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this speech, and no one bears witness, that one must sew the belly with two needles, or it has a thread in each; and one must push one needle from one part, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew curtains; and know that when the rupture is within the belly, it is the most grievous suture than others of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, just as if the artery has been moved, so reset the intestine and the gut; then put on powder making a charm, and if the artery has been moved, so put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the filaments, and sew up the suture, and the membrane; then cure the wound as with others, until it is healthy; and if you have no medicines, so put on, as soon as it begins to heal well, cotton much, and remove it twice a day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no better medicine in many dispositions than for simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound does not make a common community with the principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light ointment of tempered heat, or rose oil, and put it among the angles, and beneath the straps; and if there is pain or putridity in the belly, and many times happens, so cleanse with black wine clisters, and meanwhile see that when the putridity reaches the intestine; and pierce deeply, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it's because of the delicacy of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the closeness of its nature to the kidneys.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the intestine jumps out of the wound, put it back in just like the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned towards yellow or black, then you must lay the leu that is black, which removes blood that does not come from veins, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligament, and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound until the extraction of the intestine is complete, and the wound is cured.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, then one can restore it in some homes, because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and obstructed digestion and ventilation; I applied treatment according to what I could do, and did not cease to subtly treat until it was healthy, and the veins were sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sweating, I doubted that the patient would not be ill in his abdomen; and there was no harm, but he remained in better dispositions, eating and drinking; and some experimentors said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in such a manner: take threads at great tensions, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has covered the mouth, if you put it on both lips, so it holds its mouth closed; and then they cut the head, and this is held so that it does not come loose, then put another thread afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the head becomes entangled in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner: take the head of this intestinal thread which is very delicate, and then tie it to the head of this subtle twisted thread, then put the thread on the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reunite it in its natural route; and this way of sewing with threads is not futile according to the method of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal tubes, so there is no need for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Here is the translation:
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	Here is the translation:
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by hand operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Here is the translation:
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	Here is the translation:
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve is not troubling you in the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, then remove it until all decay is gone, then heal things little by little so that it becomes healthy; and if it does not become healthy, and returns to its former state, be aware that you are not altogether idle just now: if you uncover and seek as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all decay, then restore the place; and if it is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this does not work, be aware that the decay is too deep, and you cannot get to it; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature; and if there is a small rotten bone, and you can remove it with tongs, then extract it with an instrument suitable for that, and if there are many bones, then remove them all, do not leave a single one; and if the moisture makes you oppose, and there is no error or fear, then cut and break and separate, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them for an hour, then put a poultice on the wound that promotes suppuration, and let it be until the pus is formed around the bone, and then they will have less difficulty with the bones; and if it's a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, remove the corruption as much as possible until the blackness is completely gone, then restore the wound; and if there is a great deal of corrupted tissue, and it comes close to the marrow of the bone; you must dig out and scrape away all the way to the corruption, and then cure it so that it is fully healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in my own leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	It was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so that the materials went to his leg and became infected with a large abscess, and there was no way to open it; but the doctor, through foolish work, operated so much on it that the abscess opened, and corroded many materials, and became a fistula, and there were many openings that completely emptied the moisture from the body; and for many years I treated him, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands, so that I was called foolish, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was cured, and what corroded through the openings in his great body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I thrust a tent into one of these perforations, and then I sought out all the perforations, and found that some were coming against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption was reaching to the bone within; I knew what appeared to me as corrupted bone, and thought there would be no other corruption except that which I had seen; and I began to restore the wound with medicines applied over a long time, but could not succeed; and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone just as before, and found the continued corruption in the bone, and knew it, and then removed it, and thought to succeed in setting the limb; but I couldn't do more than cutting into the palm of the bone, and I extracted all its marrow, then restored it with medicines; and it was quickly healed and set, and there was no need to recommence the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because the blood evacuation often fails, but it was completely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no hindrance or contrariness in every way, neither to the wing nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this way: take a strip, and fasten it at the top of the bone that is open, and order that it be stretched upwards; and put another strip of linen, larger than the first strip, on the crust that is above the bone, and hold the top steady, so that you can remove the rotten flesh below, and uncover the flesh on the bone where you want to treat, so that the treatment does not touch the rotten flesh; and put a hot iron or a cup under the bone to draw out the rotten flesh; and continue treating until one can see and feel the corruption, and treat again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not appear, and the corruption is in a thousand places or in one part, then it discovers the entire flesh; then apply fire underneath, and then cauterize from one part to another the corruption, and be careful with the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut into the corrupted joint, and cauterize the bone or where it contains the other part; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cauterize; and if the corruption is on the hand or foot, it is very difficult, but nevertheless it is necessary that you inquire into this corrosion, how it appears; and examine it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not do harm; and know that the incision and cauterization are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to appear with each similar work instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of illnesses; thus prepare the instrument you will need according to what it requires.
dou feu	for fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head perishes either due to internal causes or external blows; and when you have medicated that corrosion through the treatment of medicines, and it does not benefit, then it is necessary to amputate that member up to where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes death, either by the decay of the limb, which is greater, or due to malice; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards turn dark, since the corrosion spreads from limb to limb, and takes over the whole body; if you hasten to amputate, and it is through the percussion of certain venomous beasts, like scorpion stings and similar things, then the corrosion is at the chief of the finger, cut it off, and do not give it space to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, cut off at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the arm; and if it reaches the arm, cut off at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no other remedy than to remove the affected limb; and thus you do when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes in the first joint, cut off after the next joint; and if it comes in the foot, cut off the entire foot; and if it rises in the leg, cut off at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die; and the way to amputate or dissect the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one of your assistants down below, and another assistant up above, and you sever the flesh that is between the two ligatures at a span of a large spatula, so that the bone is exposed; then cut off or dissect, and apply a dressing to each part, so that the dressing does not touch the healthy skin, and reaches the patient with another lesion and abscess wound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Here is the translation:
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Here is the translation:
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Here is the translation:
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the senses throw away indigestible matter after many days, know that the senses are not hurt.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if you come subtle cort after a long tension, do not despair of health, for healthy approach.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who take medicine slowly in their wounds, and of those who do the opposite; and if you have indigestion or discomfort after many days, know that the breasts do not become accustomed to it; and if the breasts take time to absorb, and it is delayed, then apply moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue, as we have often said, for there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine; take a daub of diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and mix wine equally in substance; then confit and use; and this same thing makes honey cooked and gross, when daubing diafinit is not present, or you take myrrh and aloen and incense, and grind, and powder on the honey when it is over the fire; and then glue the drapel, and apply it to the breast, and no one administers on a long aristologe, and celestial roots, which is like fine flour and centesimal; and in use of simples or composites: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey as I have said, and in use; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep-rooted, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the limbs; if you treat a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Here is the translation:
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, it is necessary that you remove all the excess flesh which remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauteries are great help if the bone is healthy, and the finger is healthy; and if the finger presses on the flesh inside, and begins to point, and becomes whitish, it is necessary that you put the right under the finger so it doesn't press on the flesh, and bend it upwards, and remove the subtle and light flesh carefully, and apply remedies burning and corrosive to expel everything; then treat with ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, remove it, and extract thoroughly, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed; and if you see the decay corrupting, remove it from our means as it was said before, then treat until it is healthy; and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and it feels great pain, it is necessary that you heal it first; then remove the finger with a spatula-like instrument in cutting across above, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh which is under the finger, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, put something on top to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that swoops down from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that grow in the hands of certain men by chance are all flesh, and by chance they have a piece or they have bones, and never an ulcer, and none of them grow at the root of the joint, where growth is in certain of our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those that grow in a certain knot of the toe do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the toe, by chance move; the size of the one that is fleshy is light, in such manner: it cuts at its root with a large spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold it too tightly, you cooperate.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those that grow on the back of the toe, it is necessary that you cut around the flesh to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for that, then cure until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden pains that come together come from birth, or from sudden injury, or from fire burn, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut the sinew, so that the toe returns to its natural form; then put between two tender or soaked drapes in rose oil, so it does not stick together; or you put between two pieces of subtle plaster, until the toe is stuck, as it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Here is the translation:
des vils	of the hairs
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	They are gross veins full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come into many members of the body; and more occur in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you apply no further purging of the colon, and then the healthy regime of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is that they cut, and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you raise the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is in this manner: raise the first leg of hot water very strongly, so that the gross blood is subtitled, then stretch the leg of the patient from above the thigh to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a large incision, then release and draw out the black blood at your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood as the virtue of the patient can suffer; and then let it go, and instruct him that he should abstain from eating black-colored food; and recommence the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must bend it straight, but do not cut it; and pull it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron tool with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut, so it doesn't cut the vein; and it's a large curvature, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is the shape.
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is generated in legs, in warm parts where no herbs nor trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from under the skin, as it grows within the body of serpents and worms, generating between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are if a very great inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the veins, and begins to issue forth like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of splint, one and a half inches long, up to two inches, and the knot, and leave the splint on the leg, and every time it does not fall off, if you envelop it with the splint, and the knot; and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is all issued; for if you cut it, it goes back into the flesh, and causes an abscess or putridity on the limb, and bad disease; because one must treat it little by little up to the head, and leave nothing behind; and there are often times when this vein is treated with five inches of length, or ten, and some men come to me who had it issuing from ten inches of length, and when you cut it, you put I rais or pertus, and pierce up to the bottom, so that everything issues; and let the matter which is inside be voided, and administer medicines inhibiting putridity any day, then the cure will be like the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And often at this vein many times it does not rain, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot is, and much of the fluid comes out, and there is much loss; heal the wound thus as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often takes oxen, and is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, ascending and descending, and one feels it well by the movement from limb to limb, until it breaks the skin or falls out; and it is caused by putridity of certain humors, as come worms and serpents and lice and ascarides in the belly; and there is doubt about its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it mounts to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance returning, and destroys the eye; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the patient and treat them, if they cannot be cured by any means, then it is necessary to place the limb above and below with a strong bandage tightly, then cut into the flesh and make an incision, and if the veins are swollen in the skin, and you do not find them, if you cauterize with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm they do, it is that they corrupt the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly, then cut into the flesh, and make an incision; and it is necessary to use the patient's moderation of bodily medications for the evil humors, and beware of consuming spoiled food in excess.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw it rise up like a vein at the shoulder, more quickly than anything, like living silver when it flows from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and fixed in the shoulder, and then soon after spread throughout the entire body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it would return again into her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very amazed at how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had wanted to know well how the pain would move from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and because of this apparent constraint; and it does not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and responsive veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said, if the vein above and below hastens, and then gathers above so that this windiness constrains the place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure what drives out the windiness, like fetid pills, and serpent's pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they settle.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are those with large points, and small, and curved, and straight; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one that falls in any member falls according to several manners: either in principal member it curves, like head, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the limb falls into no place of its members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, appears: if it is necessary that you extract this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrowhead is in it and pierces the bone, and the syrup flows forth which is on the brain, is when there is concussion and swelling and turning to redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and perturbation of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without force from the nostrils, or from the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and there is a whitish blister-like wound, and it also bursts forth like charcoal; and if this sign appears, then hold off on the cure, and pull out the arrowhead if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Here is the translation:
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow wound that does not swell the forearm is that without excessive swelling from the wound, and the throat becomes inflamed, and the patient's complexion changes, and breathes deeply and quiets the cold arthritis.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow head remains in the covering of the thigh, it is beneath the small ribs; and it causes great anguish and great pain and breathing; and moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow head remains in the stomach, perhaps it jumps from the wound some undigested food matter.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow head remains in the belly, and it does not pass a point of feces through the intestine, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps up and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as the arm and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, I will tell you what happened to me, because that is why you do something similar.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to the man that an arrow shot into the root of his nose: I held it, and drew it out from beneath the fat of the ear, and he was healthy without any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And drew out an arrow that shot into the fat of his eye beneath the skin, and the arrow was stuck, and could not be touched except for the point towards the hollow of the tree, and it was a large Turkish bow arrow, with all its iron lightly touching the ear; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow in the ear: I softened the barbs, and subtly manipulated it until I drew it out, and the Christian was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And drew out an arrow from the man, which was stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die; and then after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his disposition; I cut around the arrow, and freed it, and drew it out forcefully, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man whose arrow fell or was shot, and the wound was sewn up above; and the arrow remained within him, and did not change its natural disposition, nor was any harm found in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And you see another man, who had an arrow fall into his face, and the wound was sewn up; and it remained thus without suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And there fell an arrow to the man of the king's princes, which was stuck in his nose, and it was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely lodged I was called to the cure after it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything; and he felt a piercing pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was a point of the arrow I placed on the skin a plaster digestive and attractive, because the skin did not inflame; and it seemed to me that the skin of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on for many days, and healed the wound again, and the patient remained thus for a long time, until he felt the arrow in his nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put a corrosive medicine on the wound for many days, until it was opened, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which was stuck to the skin; then I added to the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly; and it went well beyond the terms for three months, and then I relaxed if the wound that I had put in the tongs, and the muscles on one side and the other, and could not issue; then I did not cease to subtly refine and engineer devices, until I took it out with well-made tongs, according to what its shape would be at the end of this chapter, so that I extracted it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restore it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, for the books cannot grasp everything; but wise masters compare well very few great things, and on what is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed except in two manners: either by the empty space where they enter, or by another part; and the one that jumps forth where it enters, it is an arrow entering into the flesh, and it does not come out anymore now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not heal now, let it be until the flesh is purified around, and the issue is alleviated; and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot come out, let it be thus for some days, and each day it will soften; and then it will heal, and if it does not heal, let it penetrate deeply into the whole forest subtly, until the flesh around is enlarged, and then it will drain.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: do not touch it, but let it be until it is even after some days, for if the arrow comes just to the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed deeply in the bone, and does not come to the surface, and the patient remains for some days without bad accident, then proceed with the treatment.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very fixed in this way and cannot issue forth, then administer tareres around, as I have told you; then cure the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is repositioned in its place within the body so that it cannot be seen, if it seeks to extract it entirely; and if you feel it, if you draw it out with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or vein, if you make an incision as large as the wound; and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it holds, if you cut away the flesh that is attached to the two parts where you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so you can extract it; and carefully ensure that you do not break the arrow, but rather extract it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, let it remain until the swelling has subsided, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood counteracts you, if you contradict what we have said about the cure in its chapter; and beware of the incision into the nerve and vein, and engineer it so that you can extract the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow fell, for it is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, then put him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens into something of it, or the skin is swollen at the spot if one looks or feels around: cut thereupon, so much that the tongs can grasp, and then extract it: if it comes out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it alone and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if the wood of the arrow is there, cut around the entire wood; and if the wood is cut, and you see to administer cutting, if you administer the instrument that cuts, so that the point of the arrow enters into the notch of the instrument; and then cut out, and if the arrow is notched, cut the instrument to enter the point, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut around the entire flesh where the veins are, so you can, then cure the wound as it is needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrowhead is in the foot or abdomen or bladder or ribcage, and it is close by, and you can operate on it, then operate; and beware of operating on the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, as that is the task; and treat until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the swelling resembles that of a bird's beak, to push at the point of the arrowhead, just as it is its shape.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for applying heat and for extracting if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one bleeds, of which XVI are main ones, that is to say: II veins that are behind the ears, called "herbech"; and II arteries that appear in II temples; and II veins that are in II eyelids of the eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the II gullet veins that are in the neck; and the II veins that are above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and II veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	Here is the translation:
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the savior is the vein that is between the auricular and anular, and if there are two veins; and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the curve of the left shin, and the second saphein which is at the ankle of the right shin; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient cataracts and migraine; and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with one eye, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in their dependent places: take care to give it to your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch; then take the lancet, and insert it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand over all the vein above, and cut and the skin and the vein very well, so that the blood flows out as much as you see; then hold and bind, until it is healthy; and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The health of the forehead vein is worth as much as the health of the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face, and in migraines, and in redness; and the quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein so it is healthy and never bursts from a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with eyes, and with the tendon, and with redness, and with the orbit in the eye, and with diseases of the face; and the quality of their health is that the patient strains their neck by twisting without any cord, as before; then it heals, and so the health of the traverse, a little above the long flame a little large, for there is no point of burning.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the veins are subtle, perhaps they break; then make correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery over it, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood of the vein, which is not worth an egg, and suffers from being forcibly pulled, and from facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old; and the quality of the blood is that the patient tightens his neck, then tightens his nose with his left hand, and takes a subtle flame long, and places it in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will now begin to flow; and do not go too far forward, and make the blood flow according to need, then leave it for a night, because it is almost completely restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the two veins helps with the narrowing of the artery, and at the beginning of messelerie, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and similar things; and the quality of the blood is that the patient tightens his neck below one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat, then opens the vein of the arm somewhat widely, then draws out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then do another part in the other vein, and releases the ligature, and holds back the veins softly, so the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so the wound may be healthy.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The wisdom of the veins above the lips is recognized by a hole in the mouth, and by decay of the gums, and cracks of the lips, and painful nose and interior.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the liver, and look at the two veins, one on the right liver and the other on the left, and they are recognized by being black, and because there are small black veins around them: thus take one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, take the largest of each part, and make the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it is about the constriction of the throat, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth; and the quality of this health is that the patient places himself between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein: thus take one and the other, and do not insert too far, for underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the cut that one commonly bleeds are healthy in two manners: either by pricking with a flame mirror, or subtly olivary like a cutting trenchant, and is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the largeness and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the "flaime" widely known, is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the obvious veins full of thick blood appearing, and that contain thick blood and turmoil; and this is the form of the flame olivary.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for cleansing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids the illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the foot, and in the belly; and it is necessary for the bleeder to bleed strongly, and to beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and a lot of blood comes out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one should not prick with the flame, but rather cut skillfully like anesil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change another; or you want any vein of it, or you bleed in its place in the arm: it opens clearly; and the cope with the flame anesthetized, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the place of the wound, it is necessary also that you extract the arm, so that you touch the place as much as you know the pulse; then feel the place of the skin, and then the arm, and cope with the vein of the flame anesthetized; and beware that you do not strike in the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it spill out high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery: hasten then, and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops; tie up the arm, and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be without fear, and do not move until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not stanched, and it vanishes, and the medicines are not present, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins; and stanch the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a dressing of fistula, and make it, and take one of the moieties and place it next to the other just so; if the wound is stanched, that's good; if not, apply the treatment, as we have said, with powders that stanch blood; and the stanching is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possibility of a lien on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The health of the vein is in the middle if it helps to draw blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and it behooves the healer to be wary of the nerve that is below, and if he presses too hard, and he strikes the nerve, and he swells and the health is grievous, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any homes due to its subtlety, then it behooves you to sound the instrument anesil; and seek out the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the fingers, thus they make it two inches long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	Here is the translation:
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Here is the translation:
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is not limited to just maintaining health and preventing future illnesses; and it should be done in one of the three veins that are on the arm: namely, cephalic, fastidious, and basilic; and one should bloodlet at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of repletion appear; and one should bloodlet on the first or third day, two or three hours after eating.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bloodletting that is administered for illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but rather it is done when the need arises, at any time of day or night; and one must not bloodlet children until 13 years old, nor a woman who is pregnant beyond the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to bloodlet, in whatever manner it may be, one must first clear the intestines with a gentle laxative, if they retain much flatulence, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the principal members; nor should one bloodlet those who are too full of food, or drunk, as long as it is possible, nor those who are dropsical; and one should beware of bloodletting after a passion of the colon, and vomiting, and decay of the stomach, and multiple conceptions in a woman, and labor, and watching, and fasting, and such like things; then subtle the humors, if the blood is gross, by food and drink and medicine, so that you have little power; then enter into a bath, so that nothing may hinder, to subtly clear the blood, and bloodlet from the vein on the third day, as we have said; and guard against that day of labor, and of puncture, and of luxury, and similar things; and be joyful and happy, and let the bloodletter be more skilled than the one who is being bloodletted, and massage the arm twice or three times, then extract the blood moderately, because when it is too constricted or loose, it cannot flow freely; then massage the hand so that the veins swell, and feel them; then moisten the bloodletter with a little oil of violet, then put his left hand on the vein beneath the hand, where he wants to bloodlet, so that the vein does not fail or falter at the touch.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flee as if they were cords to the healthy person, and if there are those that are full of windiness, so when one puts on the flame, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these; and if one opens the vein, it is because the wound is too narrow, for which reason it is necessary that the surgeons be advised about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the side, if the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are swollen, and the patient is in a swoon, let him lie for a day or two, and do not bind his arm: lest by chance abscesses may form; do not enter or bathe, then recommence the treatment as it pleases him; and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that there is not so much blood as you saw, then insert the entire flame directly into that perforation; and make a slight incision hastily, so that the veins are swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	Here is the translation:
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which often occurs, especially when it is not healthy enough to be opened at that time or the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and put on the limb a wet sponge in water and a little warm, and hold it for an hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it remains on the limb after several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm; and if you see, put on something of aloes or myrrh ointment in juice of calament, masterwork, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it may happen in court without an artery; but the physician makes a plaster to harden the spot, then cures with another cure, until it be healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw each one's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because the patient's blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be large; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed less often and more slowly, and you must bleed in a slanting cut, not in a piercing way; and this method of bleeding is free from disorder of blood and from copiousness of nerve, and is better than the bleeding of the loins or of the large veins.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose body is worn out at the health resort, it is necessary to give a warm poultice made from juice of green pomegranates; if they are overheated, then draw three or four times the blood III times or IIII. And if they are of cold complexion, then apply before the health resort a warm poultice made with syrup of musk, or with aromatic honey syrup containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and galanga, and well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if they faint at the health resort, after the evacuation of much blood, it is necessary that they have a broth of beef, and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to anoint his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is weakened by great wound, that he anoints little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to anoint his arm after the first healing, and it has a strong course, if he anoints seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to heal from another part, if he should anoint on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body which is already overheated, and it causes fever; if you need to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening so that it spurts into a basin; then you must observe all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse when it beats, so that death does not occur in the patient's body, and this happens often, when the healers are negligent; and do not press forcefully upon it when you see the arm relax, and cause blood to issue a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly upon it; nor if it is bent, should it be extended hastily, for that would be bad; but let it beat as long as it bleeds a second time; or you have reached the point of the flame, so that the blood which is congealed at the vein's opening flows forth, and place it in a warm bath, and press upon it gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed the blood a second time, let it be in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bloodletting is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the vein becomes red; then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then prick now through the middle, not too large nor too long; and let the punctures be wide, and let it be well near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot get it out, then put the hand in warm water again, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough; and if it is in winter, do not reuse the hand in warm water, for they put it more in spring than in winter; and the bloodletting of this vein is safer than all other veins, since there is no artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bloodletting of the salvatory vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method: hold the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein becomes swollen, so that you can see it; and if you prick now through the middle, and if you cut around entirely, do not grieve anything; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are very close to the flesh, and then put the hand in warm water again, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot get out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out as much blood as is necessary for the task, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and thus do for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the hand on the left side is good for the disease of the thigh, and do everything just as I have told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The wisdom of the sophene is worth everything for all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its wisdom is that the patient feels as if their foot is in hot water, and it pricks at the vein so much that it hurts; and it puts above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins; thus sometimes a large vein, or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you strain above the foot, so beware of the nerves that are underneath, and the vein of traversing as in a coping; and let the flames be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the saneness cannot issue from it, then reset the foot in the water, and let the vein be well purged.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the wisdom fails the first time, it recommences the second above a little, because the joints are salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the wisdom of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The joints of the sciatic vein are at the gathering of strength, and its sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it is because of hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of his sanity is such that the patient goes between the bath, and stretches above the crutch IIII fingers in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then the vein flows in all ways that you can, and across; and it is worth more that you take care of it, for the blood is sound, and it is much restored to many homes.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then the vein of those that open or give two fingers below, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves; and make a correction of the blood as you see, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and constrain; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	of the veins of the cupping glasses
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping is made of horns, or of brass, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is without piercing is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire; and the cupping that is done by piercing and extraction of blood is done on XIII places of the body, where one is at the top of the head; and another in the neck; and two others in the sides of the neck; and the cupping under the chin; and the cupping of the shoulders; and the cupping on the hips; and the cuppings on the arms; and the cuppings on the legs; and the cuppings on the ankles; and the cupping does not draw blood, except from small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it is not feared, just as one does with vein blood, and it is not necessary that it be administered, neither with full fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, as long as the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of sickness it is necessary to bleed, either by habit or custom, if we delay each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at every time; for there are those who, when they have mastery over bleeding, have a heavy head; and there are those who experience repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes; and there are those who spew a mouthful of blood, and have a swollen tongue, and spit out blood; and if there are those who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to apply a poultice after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The blood of the nose helps with the grief of the head … which comes to their eyes, and it is not fitting that this be after the evacuation of all the body; and this bleeding is in place of the blood of the cephalic, and it is not fitting that one who is of a cold complexion uses it, or has catarrh, for this causes them great harm; and therefore it is not fitting that the veiled ones use it, nor those who have colds or frosts.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are often wounded, if they become obtuse, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of obtuseness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is in the place of the healthy head and the basilica, and for this reason it has esteem for the straightness of the spine, and for the fracture of the channel of the arm, and for the coughing, and for the replenishment; and it is necessary to avoid breaking, because if it holds too firmly, it injures the obliance or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilations as the ribs of the neck have esteem for the pains of the head, and obtalmia and emigration, and for the strangulation, and for the pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the healthiness of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healthy one to press his hand to put, so he does not touch the artery, and does not show signs of bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds below the chin affect the mouth disease, and corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the vein of the .ij. lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilations of the back are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilations of the joints have esteem as much as the three veins of the arm, because it attracts blood from these large veins; and instruct the healthy one to not make too many deep wounds, because the limbs are nourished by flesh, and know about the underlying nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping that is on the back is like emerods of deep foundation, and like diseases below, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of iron, so it has mastery to treat well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cuppings of the legs feel openly, because they attract blood from all over the body, and are worth as ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and recall the flowers; and are in the place of .ij. soporifics, and of .ij. chevilles, and altogether they enfeeble the body after long use, and bring about palsy in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the cupping is that you put it on first empty, and suck at once, and put it on hastily, and move evenly, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the place red and swollen, and feel the flow of blood; then firm, and reapply the cuppings, and take heed in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have tender flesh, and clear pores: if it is necessary to pierce once softly, and make large wounds, and a little deeply; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is abundant, it is necessary to pierce .ij. times: the first time to subtly open the way for the abundant blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it must be cauterized a third time; and when we want to draw out a little blood by little, it suffices to hold it back only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to remove much blood, we recommend often; and if the blood is thick, we make a strong fontanel, and the ends are such that the coursing should be perceived suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have obstructed pores, that you apply the leeches of oil apertif and dissolutif: if it is in summer, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, of cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superficies are large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if there are those who have tender skin and large pores, it is not necessary to put on oil, but it is necessary to wash after the ventosation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ajueil, or from the water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have swollen superfluities rise from wine, or from water of rue, or from a decoction of anet or chamomile, or from similar things; and it is not suitable to apply a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one must not sleep after the cupping, and it is necessary that they warn themselves when they should be cupped and when they are cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware of those who are healthy but choleric, and their blood is too agitated and inflamed; if it is necessary that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuce in the shade, and similar things; and they should eat little pucins, and flesh of young roosters, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat little pucins and small birds and pigeons; and on the day they are cupped, they should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give to some men three or four muscatels before cupping, or after, to comfort the principal members; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not suitable that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Here is the translation:
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered by fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And have two large and a half palm in front, and have the costal bone touched near the small perforation, like one would pierce with a needle, and be of iron or steel, to put a bandage in place, and have in the middle a transverse rod of iron or steel, to apply a compress, and they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them; for the blisters of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin than the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must then place this bandage on the limb: take the compress of wax or linen, and put it in the bandage across the rod that is in the bandage, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the bandage so it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and these two are on the perforation as we have said, so that when one wants, if the vapor goes away, and one removes the bandage; and take the linen again as before, and reapply it often, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping that is administered in disease of the lungs, to all aching, it has no strength nor pertussis, and is not administered unless when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only slightly; and this is its form.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping is not administered unless on members where one cannot place cups due to their smallness, such as eyelids and cheeks, and similar places; and in denuded skin of flesh, such as fingers or toes, and similar things; and the quality of the usage is that when you find cuppings that are in sweet gentle waters without purification, if they take them; and put a nut in sweet water, so they become familiar, and have nothing in their belly; and then be healthy from vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and place on the cuppings; and when they will be full, and will cling, this is where one can place a cup, if one puts it, for it is worth much afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	Here is the translation:
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not take, then rub the wound with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle so that the wound is opened, and then put them back, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere; and when you see that they are closing, sprinkle a little powder of alum, sage, or cinder, which will make them heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here is the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish wise men stray from this chapter, for they never read any of the ancient books, nor did they learn a single letter; and for this reason is the science strange in our land, for I never found any good in it; and I know nothing, except through the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the experience of my life; and I have described to you here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in those two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary therefore that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where wisdom places its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising occurs to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to heal the patient from one part and another, so that nothing prevents them entirely, as weakness of the body, or infancy, or old age; or if the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and avoid cold joints, this means to know cold joints, and the flesh of birds and goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat coarse rough meat, and do not overfill with foods that fill the veins with blood, so you have no doubt about abscess heating up, nor spreading of matter in the limb; if you regain the patient according to their primary government which they used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or if they have viscosity, as if they were fed on thick soup, and rice, and bread, and pieces of meat, and bacon, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a good nourishment represents marrow and more quickly heals the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well rejoined or reunited according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but there is no cure, reset the broken bone with a large splint which separates and joins the limb together, so it enforces as it was before; and do not overwork them at all, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish them with coarse foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Here is the translation:
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks at all a small notch.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each manner he has his engine, and his proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings back to its place; and it is known that the breakage of the bone occurs because the bones are twisted, and appears well by palpation, and sounds at the pressing of the hand; and when there is no tortuosity in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no point of breakage; but he can have tortuosity, or crack, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It does not matter if you move the hand, but apply medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold it steady now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the breakage that goes into a cavity, and are the two disjointed parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that the abscesses will not grow; and if the abscesses grow, let it alone for a while, until the abscesses are appeased; then set them in place so you can gently and wisely touch, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restorations of those where there are pieces; then hold steady, as it is necessary after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it is the second part, whether it is hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand; and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are disjoined, you reset them by all means in their proper places as you can, and take care through your work not to come to the patient with injury or pain; and adjust well the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in his hand if it seems to him that it is not well: if it is straightened nicely, and not strained too much, nor pressed as those who come with their work of abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in a point, chastise well the patient so they do not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so stabilized that they feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when they feel no pain, it is not in a point, and you must put it in such disposition that they feel no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Here is the translation:
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is inflammation or abscess, put an aposteme-chasing ointment on it, which draws out the inflammation, and leaves it thus for a few days; then hold your fingers steady, and be in the middle of a large cane reeds gathering, or of wood where they make the clevis, or of palm reeds, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the instrument which one puts on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others; and be as long as it is necessary for the member of smallness or greatness; then hold your fingers steady, just as you did at first, then tie above with a thread, just as in the first instance on the fracture; the tighter it is, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of flaxen cord; for if the threads are large, like I have seen of the foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted cords, it is a great error, because the ligature cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and does not allow that there be less than two fingers' breadth between each instrument.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patients are injured by the staples after the constriction in their healthy areas, then put under them swabs of linen or a layer of paper, so that they do not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment following this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not suit to stretch out the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to restore the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take abrasives and ladanium and enula and asa fetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; and make a powder, and mix with egg white; if the patient's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and helps many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plastering that is good for torsion: take mugwort and vismalve, in the shape of an X; mix and blend, in the shape of VIII; add acaice VI; boil Armenian bole X, and crush well, and concoct with water or abundant egg whites, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way of plastering for joints and dislocated bones, and to calm the sudden pain, and to reduce the swelling of the bone, and the fracture: take new flax, and grind it into a poultice in warm water and oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore at all, but they are good for calming hot abscesses, and properly reducing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to apply plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earth-based peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way of plastering for the restoration of bone fractures and to diminish the remainder of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of applying it more forcibly than the first, when a stubborn abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of lin, balauste, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and camomille, all in one part; and crush, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Here is the translation:
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply to the broken member, to restore it, things dried and a little warm, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to apply is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and decapitate the heads of men, or feathers of a bird, and visnaga, and adjust similarly, and crush, and make an application on the affected member.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then undo it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you undo it too soon and pain comes to the limb, or inflammation, without rest or swelling, hasten it, and undo it, and remove the application now; and take a lighter dressing, and sponge with seawater, and dip in water, and lift up the limb, until the inflammation ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry or oiled cloth, and bind it with a nut, until you are certain of a hot abscess; and remove the inflammation of the limb, and be rid of the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little application, and do not strain it too much as before; and continue subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have need of emplastering and bandaging, then resume it, as you did initially for the first treatment.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb of what we have said, do not dislodge further until after three days or four or five or seven; and no time leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the bruise appears, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh underneath; then restrain more than before, and it thickens its meat, as I have said before; and if you see the limb drying out more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come; arose from the warm water treatment, all the times you dislodge it, and this is each tier day, and ease a little the ligature; by this work then corrects the nourishment to the limb, and immediately amends what the foolish mirror shows, which restores the limb crookedly: it is bad, and if it is perverse works, I do not see another thing but to leave it and open it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are destined; for there are fractures that are made by percussion of a spear, and the neck bone breaks all the bone just up to the socket which is beneath the bone, as if it were shattered or crushed; and because of this, this kind of fracture is called "shattering".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the spear cuts through the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or fissure, or break in the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if he has a persistent bruise that approaches just below the skin which is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and it is this wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound that is placed in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the crack is small, and because of this it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound that is made or by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes the piece of the bone go down, and the bones are joined together like the cauldron when they are melted over the cauldrons; thus between the stones within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens more to those who have moist bones, like the bone of a child; and there are all these kinds of fracture where small pieces are disjoined as if they were shattered; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaks by the traction on them, and the inquiry with tension, and by the corrupt flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the hairline is known by this, that when one discovers the bone, and one rubs on it, then the black break appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of breaks, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and fever and ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in worse dispositions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a sudden accident, and you expect healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the naval disease comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the break of the bone reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, so it is necessary that you split the affected part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the wounded head, and uncover on the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more subtle than you can, and if a flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess falls, so it is necessary that you aid with what you need, and it is that you fill the hole with medicated ointments; and make the wound rest until the abscess is appeased, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to osteotomize around the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut straight beforehand, and it is the form.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I make another cut, larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse cuts, some straight and others wide, and are pointed, and are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around, thus you will administer gentle touches with tapers, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone, and must have a margin or circle above, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, if each one returns to its place according to the width of the bone, if you have tapers for every test; and it is the form of the three manners of tapers.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you put a taper on the bone, and turn your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the taper in another place a little later, and do it all around, then cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with one of the instruments you have, such as pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spleen.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone, and extracted, it is necessary that you reuse the instrument which is remaining from the bone to all other similar instruments, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and more subtle than the other incising tools; and if there remains nothing of small bones, no scales, so lift them lightly with one of the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another manner of surgery is that which Galien says, which is more wise; and he praises it highly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, then put below the head of this incisional instrument, whose form is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and the affected area is on the II rib, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then make a small incision above, so that you can easily cut around the entire bone, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath; if it is attached to the bone, cut easily around it, for one cuts well without hurting, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate up to the membrane, and the bone is so badly broken above, and there are small pieces, thus it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to extract the scales at the subtle raspings you must have diverse quantities, to arrange in each place the most convenient, according to the work and figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you rasp beforehand with large raspings, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing that until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you arrange the cause according to its direction; and this is a thing that is not readily apparent to one who has not put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the swelling is uncovered, it is necessary that you apply a linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another doubled cloth in II or III, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to irritate the swelling, then apply above another layer, and do not constrict it more than necessary so that it touches the wound solely; and leave it thus for a day or II, until the abscesses are appeased, then remove them, and administer medicines such as roots of plants, and flour of vegetables, and powdered incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place on the wound, and administer medicines without causing numbness; and be careful that the wound is properly clean, so you do not leave any suppurating matter, nor assemble a poultice, for when a poultice assembles on the membrane of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great harm to the patient; for when you apply something caustic to the swelling, it increases by adding above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Here is the translation:
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness does not come forth by means of the medicine that one has applied, it is necessary that you take a part of honey and three parts of oil of rose and glue in the drapal; then apply the cure in many ways as it is fitting, until it be healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that often the two parts of the nail are broken above, or one part by the joint, for they are two bones; and the one beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you bind your small finger or toes with thread, and put the same breakage therein according to your natural finger index, and in the pouch by deficiency, until the nail regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot come to the joint, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a slightly large vein.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the breakage is of two parts, do another similarly, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the aposteme's heat is appeased, then bind at the tip of the nail with threads of linen, if the breakage is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you touch another part, the break is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that one must soak the tents in a mixture, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be soaked in a concoction of egg white and powdered millet; then leave the tents alone until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes touch where the wing of an eagle is in place of tents, and if there is a soft drapery inside, and it holds the break, and soothes the patient within; or do what you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you operate, if you meet cerate or cotton softened in rose oil, or in a little pouch of dragon's blood.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if apostemes (abscesses) come, apply a plaster made from flour of sisament and powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then place light poultices, and do not bind the knee; and if the break in the knee is small, and it is broken into little pieces, extract them as comfortable stromens to that, then cut the fissure, and treat the things causing anguish there, and soon, as one applies comfortable plasters and ointments to that; and if there are no inner wounds on the knee, apply treatment to the tents, and place canes of lead, until it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated downwards, and there is no point of injury beforehand, and the break is dislocated so slightly, and it does not break into two, unless the cartilage within is crushed, if one recognizes it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently put the break into place, and hold it with the other hand from behind, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is dislocated inwards, it is necessary that you administer extension from inwards, as much as it becomes even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth occur, or fracture, if you restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double wrapping; and put on the wrapping a large and well-made staple, or a piece of even leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and bind it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see the figure changing, dislocate it on the third day, and then reset to the point where it changed; and apply a poultice made with powder from the mill with abundant water or flour of six-month-old wheat, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are effective, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it heals in twenty-two days.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses occur, treat them according to what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken bone in its place; if you subtly remove the extraneous bits that are not necessary to the bone.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is constricted, expand it with flame according to the necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have gathered all these pieces, and there is no delay, then cauterize the wound, if it is large, and apply suitable poultices to that, in order to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de la forcele	of the stronghold
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The stronghold breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the stronghold broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then sets the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have to treat more extensively, then place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or leather, and let it be thick according to your need; and steady and lift the forceps, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot manage the head of the forceps at the forefront, because it comes in the opposite direction, then it is necessary that the patient leans back on their hinder part, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the forceps is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel roughness, it is necessary that you bend over; and draw out the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any prominence, take one of the incisors you have; but place under the forceps this instrument, to ward off the swelling.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it seems a spoon, and is not a measuring device, and be as large as the hollow of the bone and the power of the veins; and have two heads, if you see, and one is large, and the other is narrow, like the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the routing is small, or you doubt hot abscess, fill the wound with drapnels and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the hot abscess comes, apply a dressing with oil of roses and in vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The strapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and without damage, is that you put on the bone the plaster made from powdered millstone and egg whites, and lightly apply it, and place a splint underneath, so you have mastery over it; then take a very large bandage a palm's length wide, then apply double layer of gauze over the strapping; then take a subtle steel instrument three finger-widths long and narrow, and wrap it around that bandage, so the head of the bandage hangs down; and place the instrument on the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy skin, and underneath the diseased skin; and adjust each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the break firmly, and you clearly see that the instrument does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligatures relax, then restrain it; and make the patient lie on their back, and put a small pillow underneath, to raise the shoulder high; if you lighten the fracture of the arm by lightening the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and no bad accident happens, until twenty days; then restart the strapping, if you see that it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it thus, until it is restored; and it will be restored in twenty-eight days at most, and for some people in less time.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Here is the translation:
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone protrudes forward, and not below the heart, if it is above, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the forced abscess to appease.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it breaks often at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken within, it declines to the lowest part, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and everything, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and the wound seems well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the sides with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on plasters and bandages of subtle salt water, or other lighter dressing, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward every hour the treatment, and if it is restored, then restrain it; and if it is loosened, due to corrosion or pus that comes from the wound, or pain or abscess, hasten, and loosen, and remove the plaster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the plaster, and hold it firm until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the breaking of the ribs only occurs because they are large behind the back, and at the inner head, and do not bend except when they are slippery; and one feels it well during the inquiry in both.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restorers are that you make equal the fracture, as it is fitting.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and hold it in place with a bandage, so that you have mastery over it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain, and numbness, just as with pleurisy, because the bone touches the membrane; and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits greatly, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflame the stomach, in order to relieve the breathlessness at the time of the fever.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, because hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then bleed it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that one should not place ventouses on the skin, to suck out the bad humor, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the ventouse attracts the excess humors from the skin due to its weak disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they instruct to cover the limb of a bruised ankle in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to set the ligature evenly, then it is cured by the treatment of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone that touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is fitting to cut above the broken rib, and it is fitting to put an instrument underneath to ward off the blood; and then one must incise the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with plasters, until they are healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come, put warm millet porridge on it with rose oil, and apply it to the affected area; and treat while the area is being prepared for the abscess, and be careful not to touch the surrounding skin where it should be, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	of the breakage of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a breakage comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it happens that it breaks; and also it has a curvature of the spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortally wounded in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when they are held firmly and steadily, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so one can put them to treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if the feet are softened, and if the accident is in their hands, and on their back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated it from their belly, then there is involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is swooning on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: do not labor in vain during his care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, it is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of rose or oil of rue, as much as it is alleviated; then apply one of the comforting and drying emplasters, and bind with a lien, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel the pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone becomes dislocated, it is necessary to cover over the heart; and take out the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, in a stitch, then the treatment with ointment, healing the flesh as much as possible; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the hip", you put your pouched hand on the left, and place it evenly on the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and the staple above, so that you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make it thus, and take out, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Because the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it is, then there will not be a small amount of diminishment at the head; and make a long bandage, and decline to the partitions, and comes to the patient's pain in the leg, and swelling, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as much as you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and the shape of it are; and if the fracture is at the head only, then put evenly on that fracture, so that it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is too long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on his stomach, so that the restoration of this break may be apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, put on the plaster, then put on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move; and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the ligature is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes, do not touch it, until the abscess is appeased, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joints are those that are between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, one must restore it according to one of the following methods: one of which is that you take a full moleskin plaster, according to this form.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And lay the joints in a high place, and sit the patient on a chair; then you put a broken arm on a wooden splint, until it reaches the armpit, and has a curve of wood, then place on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors to adjust the fracture equally with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you support the patient on his shoulder, and tie the hand to his neck, then command the ministers that one holds what is on the fracture with his hands, and the others hold underneath all the joints, and extend each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forced, hold the bone below the fracture, and on the fracture, and extend each of the ministrations to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put the bone mean below the socket, and the other towards the joint, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the joint, it is necessary to put the bone lightly, without labor, until the fracture is even on its place, and on the joint; then set the fracture right, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that apostemes do not come there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, do not hold steady for seven days, and put on a soft, moist cloth in oil and rose water, until the abscesses are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding is that you place the dressing on the breakage, then assemble the arm on the joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and place the bandage, and hold steady on the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a state of rest, so that nothing disturbs it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place on the breakage a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the breakage two fingers from each part; then hold steady with the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, more strongly and less in opposition.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the alignment of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, while you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it stay until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each of them for three days to see that no swelling comes to the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you hasten, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, do not undo the dressing until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder a plain cushion of equal thickness, and look every hour of the day or night, that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the bonds are not loosened; hasten it by the power of medicine, and give him the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be abundant.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be restored to health within 40 days of treatment; and then one must dislodge and administer baths and medications for the joints to realign.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is lazy and swollen, it takes 10 days or 2 months to dislodge.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of 18 bones, which are called the "foscile", of which one is small, and it is the one that joins the pouchet; and the other is large, and it is the one that is underneath, towards the little finger; by chance breaking the large foscile solely, or the small one, and by chance they both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fractures are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and worse than when they are broken and united together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's a small fracture that's only slightly broken, then one must extend it lightly, and set it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's a large fracture, then one must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and tie the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministrations like an arm to the part below his hand, or at the lien, and another ministration above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then fix it thus and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking of a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; if you take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses and wounds occur, if you apply a plaster made of oil rose and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and you apply the plaster subtly, until the abscesses and wounds are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the wax, and apply a plaster made of powdered millet with abundant egg whites, then put in the staves, and let the stave for the fracture be stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have six staves or arms in more dispositions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and hold more steady on the fracture than other parts, and less often in alignment, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, which it is strained from linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rewind the limb and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident happens to the limb, as if a bruise comes to the limb, it is necessary that you apply warm water to the limb, until the bruises are soothed; and let the limb not be tightly restrained, but rather rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the strapping, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones are disjointed, and similar things, so adjust it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that the numbness does not come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and let it be for some days, until the numbness is corrected, and then it will be restrained.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not undo the dressing until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	where he turns inward, then places his hands on his neck, and makes his neck even, and guards against movement and degeneration, and sleeps on his back; and knows that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and as we have few fractures, and it does not come but rather frequent sprains.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the finger of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient sits crossed, and sits directly in front of him evenly; then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministres the broken bones, and set them even with the mirrors, so they are well joined; and apply the plaster and bandages, if abscesses come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the swelling; and be enveloped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the base of the thumb near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken thumb; and then bind with a long bandage, and let it be the splint of soft leather as big as the thumb of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and tighten the ligature between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture occurs in one of the fingers, it is the pouch that makes it equal, as it is necessary; and bind it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the index or one of the others, make it equal, and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after; or you bind them all together, that makes them steady, or you put a splint on top, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and heal what has come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is clearly seen when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is done by binding the ligature above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient puts it on his face, then each minister extends his bandage to its equal part; and it's when the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then let one of the ligaments be towards the finger, and the other ligaments below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, and then let the ligaments be towards the knee, and the extension below; then put the mirrors to make the bone equal with his two hands, so that it is according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if abscesses come from there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and your treatment; the lieure is done in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you envelop the fracture with a doubled bandage in two or three layers, and remove the superfluous parts, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and make the head of the thread above; then turn the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then put these straps on the fracture, and put a strap on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft drapery to equalize the constriction, then start to bind firmly three or four times around the fracture; and when you go further up from the fracture, there is less constriction; then take as two heads of the thread that you put between the leg and the thigh, and in three straps that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, so that you come out at the foot; and hold it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that there comes no abscess or swelling or other similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, if it dislocates, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it must be extracted, whoever can; and if they cannot, then it must be broken, and forced out; and the treatment is as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the joint broken thus that one puts them back, as in the joint and in the arm; nevertheless, in the restoration made thus it does not shut out the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the joint is restored to its place, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee joint there is little bruising, but it often collapses.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's not just a crack, or an opening, and it has a complete wound, and feels a wound, and this feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one puts back in place what is crooked in its two joints, so that it is assembled as one can; then put on the plaster, and one puts a round stave, if you are skilled in this, and hold steady as it suits, then rewind all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, as for hot abscesses and similar things; if one puts back in place what suits each accident, so that it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "mustelz" by right, and the other is called "foscile"; and it has all the same breaks as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm equally, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg becomes twisted in every part.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, they turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it feels great pain, and one sees it well; and it twists then.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then one should apply extension, and make it even, and lay the splints evenly; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension may be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that surround the leg on one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the foot; then wrap them in two layers of bandages above and below, and bind them in the middle, so that the leg cannot decline either to the right or to the left, and thus it is good; and no one should remove the wooden splints for the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done it heals the broken bone where there is a wound; and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breakage of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there comes no break, but sometimes two bones come to a break and sometimes two poxes, and it does not happen except in more dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there are two bones broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on the shin, where the bones are raised; then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and stoups above, and put under the belly of the foot a small table at .ij. plain joints, then hold the foot firmly in place, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when 3 or 4 days will have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether broken, whether dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are some of the two broken bones, reset them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that table that I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are 3 or 4, or more, broken bones, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the table under the foot; and let it be fixed above the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have said; and search for each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone at the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the female nature is broken, if you make it sit enlarged, then incline it to the back part of the spine, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with the cotton of the patient's groin, and put a large amount in it as I stood; then remove the woman, and lift the back a little at a time, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the standing; and when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or more: if the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of birch, and tie a chain to the belt, and put the entire bladder in the nature; then blow into the chain forcefully, until the bladder is inflated within: the nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the thumb of the man is broken, or of the woman, if you restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use, and intends my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies in many dispositions the direct way of restoration: so understand the gift.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	On the wound, when it is broken, take a mouthful of oil and anoint the wound; then wrap drapels around it, and let it be for several days or weeks, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaking with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who breaks with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healthy now, so that the healthiness that we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, with a mixture of vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the breakage at that same hour, or on that day, lest abscesses and ulcers appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses appear, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, as long as the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you will cause a bad accident to come.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears uncovered on the heart of the discovery, then it is necessary that you put it in a lighter position with your hands, in small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not appeared to put equal with your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to take 3 or 4, according to whether there is need in each cure of fracture; and let it be rounded and a little thick, so that it does not slip into compression on the limb in your work, and let it be smooth beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because it requires that the curved head be placed on top of the apparent bone; and the joint is once again, so they counterbalance each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, it requires that you grasp the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, take the handle of a suitable instrument, whether it be an incisor or a saw, to your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone with rough touches and minor scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Here is the translation:
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will not come, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, so it does not need to put on these; but enveloped entirely, on the limb of these, thick drapings, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see afterwards, one or two days, to clean the wound, if you have put on all wine, and you apply soothing ointments, as you would apply tetriformation and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and evening, so that it may be loose and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bowels are emptied lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it happens many times, and it cannot be reunited but rather breaks again, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all those dislodged pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he says in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and opens into the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it suppurates; perhaps it will fall apart by itself after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come onto the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Here is the translation:
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many causes: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, and could not bring nourishment to the member; or due to multiple manipulations; or due to too great movements, not in their time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient's body lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood may be multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give joy and happiness; then put poultices on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the manipulation often brings water, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the member which is twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And often the node is removed by continuously and lengthily rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be gentle movement to each limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortured area is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, if it is necessary to cut just up to the bone, with subtle and light incision; and put caution and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary now to reassemble without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limbs become swollen, and by chance, if one resets them to their place; because it is not good to move them at the hour when they are swollen: often it brings spasms and other pains; however, when this happens, make the patient healthier, then let him be, until the abscesses in that place are appeased; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each limb as the cure comes into its own place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes it happens that the jaws are dislocated and numb, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are somewhat out of their place, and slightly numbed; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through several more precise positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is entire and complete, it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not delay; and in such a way that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and put their fingers as a poach on one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two fingers should be placed opposite, to set it straight; and instruct the patient that they should relax their jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let him put it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is grievous, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are warmed with hot water and oil, until they are lightly loosened; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are readjusted evenly, and the patient's mouth is well closed without numbing, so place a soft cloth made of rose oil and wax on it; then lightly bind it with many ligatures; and let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or left, nor exert themselves too much to chew, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are numb; and then eat what they want lightly, and do not strain themselves too much to open their mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well numbed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper place within an hour, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and habitual discomforts come, and by chance, a solution of stomach troubles, and by chance, a vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of danger; and many times he who has had it dies, within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge from the thickness of the bone and from the flesh, and is dislocated many times at the defect, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies comfortably on their back, and stretches out their arms; then press the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the poultice and bandage, and hold it in place; the shoulder which is against the side cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the poultice and bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy; and thus the shoulder is readjusted, when it is out of its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Here is the translation:
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder is inflamed with a hot abscess, and he believes it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you examine him, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known the dislocations when it falls towards the axle, and puts difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them manifest diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axle at the touch of the head of the shoulder, as if it were an ulcer; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their knee, nor move with any movements; and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not forced to be brought back, when it is new, or if the infant is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient above, then place their fingers beneath the axle, and lift the joint with force above to the level; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it above, then place it beneath; if it will be hastened.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the administrator arises gently mollifying and soothing, like a decoction of alder and fenugrec and mellilot in water, and let it be administered; then let the patient be placed on their back, and put under the axle a strap of linen equal in width, not too soft nor too hard, then place the doctor's hand on the strap, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and guide the hand of the patient; and another administrator holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns now, and if you see that it is reset according to this method: and it is necessary that you make someone present at home who is larger than the patient; and let them be straight towards the side, and put the shoulder under the axle of the patient, and lift the axle upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another administrator guides the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And reset it in another way: and it is as if you fix a long stick in the ground, so that the head is also straight like the piston, and not too big nor too slender; then place it under the patient, but let there be soft drapings above, and the patient should be standing upright for a long time; then extend their hand below in the same way, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return through all these things that we have said, do this treatment: take a stick of great length and four fingers wide, which has the head bent so as to enter obliquely under the seat, according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place it on the head of the stick with soft drapery, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it beneath the seat of the patient; and extend your arm on the stick for a long time, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a support of a chair of suitable height, and extend the hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return to its place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you put under the shoulder a layer of equal wool, then apply the plaster made from powder of soft mill, with incense and burnt hoof, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the shoulder strongly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you feed him little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for he will heal faster; and then feed more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cauteries at three points, as it is described before in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is damaged or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs at the foot, and in the hands, or behind, is caused by impulse, and stretching of hands, and administering another treatment; and heal until it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, numbness comes to the limb, and later on it is slow in movement, if the patient has bathed many times, so that this numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation where it hurts
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint where it hurts is alleviated at points, and at points it returns; and it is alleviated from all parts, and meanwhile before and behind, and the dislocation is not fully restored, for one sees well and feels well; and alleviated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the wounded limb with the healthy one, then you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is injured and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset thus, that abscesses heal quickly, for if the abscesses heal quickly, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance they cannot be reset completely, especially when it is in the rear; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to their two hands; and their arms be expanded, and the hands of the mirror according to the count of the interior, above and below, and put the jointure at their fingers assembled, or at the root of their palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and presses from the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold the arm with two ministers, so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide; and when the mirror has joined the joint to its hand, then anoint with no oil to soften the joint, then put the joint in its former shape, until it regains its strength; and when it is in its place, then put on a dry plaster with some egg white, and hold firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the wounded person, and leave it for several days, then disjoin.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is closed in its place, then disjoin the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not close well, then restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then disjoin it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels grievous after the relocation of the joint, and it moves, so bathe and rub well, and press until it is comforted; or you put on the joint a fatty sheep's bladder, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into a bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the bladder back on, and then enter into a bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see, so put on a warm moist compress with butter, and hold steady.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints Anyway, it is necessary to reset it quickly, at the same time that it dislocates, so that the limb is not swollen, or that an abscess does not form there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the relocations are such that you put the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers, and the doctor puts them even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it returns to its place; it is necessary that you examine if it is well in place; then put the patient's palm with the back of their hand on a table at extension and relocation.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the physician places their hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well; if not, then restrain the swelling of abscesses with poultices, and let it thus begin to recede.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains; and do not harm the patient further unless the hand is limbered, and nothing can be restrained: then know that the nerves are wounded, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy except to restrain by cautery in this case, and perhaps there is no other solution.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in its place, set it on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it steady and let it be; then disengage it and let it be thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no stiffness, apply warm water compresses, and rub until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in each part, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the belly; then the fingers are stretched out, and push the dislocation into its pouches until it returns, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for two days, and then make it equal on that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and release it during the day, and make it move, and rebind it at night; and do this frequently, until it is straight, and do everything thus, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do everything thus, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	for the dislocation of the spine in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur with great violence, cannot be held back, and many times some member is softened, either two hips or one arm or one; and many times the spine moves to four parts; the one that moves at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you treat it as gilbositez comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures were spoken with grand words, where there was no great profit in all; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and formed remedies in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositeit that comes to the front of the thigh, no one is healed; and also that which comes directly to the two sides, and one cannot cure unless it is properly treated, as I say; and it is that the patient should be extended on his face on an equal level, and has support from beneath him, so he does not collapse; then fix a stick at the top in the ground firmly, and another at the foot, and tie a bandage beneath the sick man's haunches, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers know how to bind the ties, one at the top and the others at the foot, among the two sticks; and be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the master puts his hands on the spine firmly, until he revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a three-foot-long tube and place it beneath the patient, and the patient should be on their side, and insert the head of the tube beneath the patient, then put the middle of the tube on the spine; and put the mirrors at the other end of the tube, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, make a turnet that turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you fix two wooden pieces at the head of the patient's arm, and towards their feet two others, and between each piece a long space; and in each piece a perforation, where the turnet turns, and the pieces are firmly on the ground, so they do not move; and between the two pieces there is one turning piece, which makes the turnet turn, and there are two small wooden pieces of a long space to turn the turnet; and then tie the cord that is among the axles to the turnet towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet at the other turnet, and each of the ministers turns their turnet with all the cord, and the masters put the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, set upon the affected area a plaster made with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then a tablet of three long inches, which grips the limb from the giddy globosity and the sound part of the spine, then bind with a bandage, as we have said, and use subtle nourishing remedies so that it be healthy; and if anything comes in the end of health, one must administer mollifying and soothing medicines, with the tablet as we mentioned before; and never administer on a piece of lead, and never appears in the rear spine of the back, and think that it is dislocations; and it is the bone that opens, for which one should not have presumption: perhaps death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the thigh
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come dislocated, not as with other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways: inward and outward, forward and backward; and more inward than outward, and a little dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when one joins the ailing leg with the sound one, it is longer, and opens more the ailing knee than the sound one, and cannot bend the ailing knee towards the fire; and it is the joints that are weakened by inflammatory swelling, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one for whom it comes to the fainting, are that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who faints beforehand, are that they stand well on their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double-cross the knee without pain, and if you want to make it better, then it cannot advance, and holds back his urine, and inflates the groin, and when he goes, then it passes over the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who faints behind, are that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and it is the head of the thigh at the place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this resemblance of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are ancient, and they stay according to their disposition, so there is no cure; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the three manners of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint, and straighten inward and outward, and move to the right and left; perhaps by chance it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary that you strongly fasten the minister to II hands, or to the knee with a ligature; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands under the patient's haunches, then tightly fastens a soft ligature on the thigh; and another pulls the head of the ligature; and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not work, it is necessary to put a cure in its semblance. When the dislocation is in the buttocks, it is necessary that you place the patient on their healthy side, then put the ligature at the root of the thigh, and the place that is under the groin, then stretch the ligature upwards towards the groin, and towards the strength; then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large limb of the affected thigh, and stretch it in a gentle form: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft ligature above the two heels, and above the two knees; and let the affected leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other; then let it be suspended from the top of a post, and let it be two arms' length from the ground; then instruct the minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, who will strongly hold the thigh, for the joint returns hastily now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the hip, thus guide the patient as we have said in the one who has gout, and remove the ligature from the affected leg properly, and from the foot also; then place two tongs, one at the top and another at the feet, then fix one tong between the thighs of the patient in the form; and have placed moist drapery around, so it does not harm the patient, then each minister extends towards him, and the doctor puts his hand equally on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibbosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the injured leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and place the fingers of one hand on the edge of the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the hollow, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards, nor lift from the ground, but rather that it should be as if the hip were dislocated in the hollow, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and thus on his face, and the bandage is stretched as we have said before, and must press on the joint to the table; and it will be at a point when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be even; then put the splints, and apply the plaster, and restrain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and rest for three days or four, then remove it, and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, restrain as before, and let it be for three days; then remove it, and make it comfortable, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in 3 ways: it is to know, within and forward, and backward; and do not dislocate at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their knee to their thigh, and if they do not adhere to their thigh, know that they are dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg as much as possible, and place your hand on their face, and put their foot on your feet; then take their knee in your hands, and draw it between your two, then bend the two sides of the knee in a circular motion; and another minister stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that they have adhered well their knee to their thigh lightly; and apply the plaster on top, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then release; and do not trouble the patient too much, as long as the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all, if administration is strongly extended, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, so that it be sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	from the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the sinew is swollen, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated: the adjustments are easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is somewhat numb.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright, and pull the administration forcefully by the leg, above the sinew; then pull the foot to your right hand, and then to the left hand twice, then hold it high, and bind the foot well in a high position; and do this twice, as we have said, by binding and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, start the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the foot firmly in the ground between their thighs, and tie the drapery around, so the patient does not slip; then pull the administration by the thigh, and another administration extends the foot to their hands or to the lien, so it lies on the neck of the foot; then extend each administration equally, and the foot is held firmly between the thighs of the patient to retain the patient when they are seated; then put your eyes evenly on the dislocation at your hands, and another administration pulls the healthy leg downwards, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at the point, set the plaster and bandages on top, and hold the foot firm, and place the poultice on the knee behind, so that the ligaments are not too strained; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments are loosened, hold it fast; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and allow the patient to walk about for four days; and if it goes beyond this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses appear, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended without effort, and it's a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any of the two legs or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press your foot firmly, until it returns to its place; and when it is even, and there is no gap, set a small table under the sole of the foot at two heads, then hold it firmly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When the wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and have long used it, and be pitiful and merciful and slow, not hard; and use gentle remedies for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb now, so that the abscesses may come to life; and when the limb is in its place, then administer gentle remedies for hot abscesses, and cure the wound, as it is necessary, from desiccated remedies; and if with dislocation there is a break, and you do not find the bones, seek out the fragments, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and beware of entering into fear's path, according to what I have said, for it will be useless according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and body.
Amen	Where cautery of fire commands the patient
