Your voice, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of assembled medicine and have finished it through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from top to bottom, thus the science has perished and is decayed, and there remains nothing more of the fuels than the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is estranged.
It seems to me that I want to revive the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will assemble the forms of the iron instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands were found in our time, is the art of medicine extended. And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to thoroughly learn the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and their movement and rest, and how they issue from there.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much with the name, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, if he is not careful he will fall into error and harm people.
Therefore I have seen many of those who practice this science and abandon their sense and their experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut into an abscess or swelling on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of the neck. because so much blood flows out that the woman falls dead in his hands.
And I saw another mirror who treated a stone of a man's urine, and the stone was large; he took away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if they had operated on him, he would have died.
And I saw another mirror who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage he had a wound;
and the mirror blamed ignorance for holding the breakage against the wound with very strong binding, and did not leave the wound any discharge, and thus he left it in this condition;
and he ordered that it should not be dislocated again;
and thus it remained until the leg was completely swollen and the foot, and came to ruin.
I am called to come to him, and I hurry to come to release his leg; and when I saw it dislocated thus it was in a country and he did not feel any pain.
But all the way the corruption was already confirmed on the limb, and I could not heal it;
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb so that the entire limb became almost entirely lost.
And he saw another doctor who burst open an abscess that was hidden, and then it became inflamed due to the evil of his lordship's malice.
For cancer, when it is pure melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch with iron unless the place is entirely clean so that one can remove all that is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: it is to know, whether there is danger in many dispositions;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish mirrors cannot speak badly of you.
If you take your arms in a cross, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way that for God's grace you come to health and be praised.
and leave the maladies to reveal the grievous sanity;
and lift your arms from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may be able to come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says among some of his warnings: Do not take on the care of a bad disease, lest you be called foolish doctor.
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterization and medicinal cauterization, and these chapters are arranged from the head to the feet.
and about the forms of instruments, and the iron tools of cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;
and it is the ordered chapters and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and it is ordered according to the lower head just as feet, and the forms of instruments.
Here is the translation:
I say that the qualities of aid, and the harm, are the longest words and subtle science and the secret responses;
and from these they speak of the wisest men, and agree with them;
and I suffer little from their words, for I reduce the length.
I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, before the two complexions: it is to know warm temperament without material, and dry temperament without material.
In warm and dry temperaments together with material, they devised none and said that cautery is a great aid; and the others said the opposite: that cautery is of no value for an illness that comes from chill and dryness. For the nature of fire is warm, and it should not be used to cure a warm illness through chill, nor through dryness;
and he said that those who say the opposite, that cautery makes great aid to warm and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men. For when you examine the body of the man and its moisture according to the complexions of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times through experiment.
And in no way, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of time;
of other complexions we have not so much fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine burning with ardor.
For fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it is not named.
The fiery remedies pass from one member to another by transmitting, and bring the diseased limb to a grievous sanitation; and sometimes kill the patient.
The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is established on the truth of things.
and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I withhold the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of the body, as the philosopher said in demonstrating. for you receive in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree at the time when they should be done, the cauteries, and choose promptly.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries that occur are easily cured by the aid of cautery; and meanwhile the cauteries are for necessary pains and swift ones that cannot wait for the time when greater evil may come to the limb.
And do not think of anything, dear son, if you make the foolish mirror; for the illness that is healed by cautery has no relapse; and they say it thus;
and they say it thus; but it is not so as they think, because cauteries are not just a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the speed of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and its dominion.
And it is possible that the disease comes at some time according to the temperament of the patient and the location of the illness and its power.
and are gathered in him the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauterized in a place where there is little excess and moisture, just as cauterization is administered for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is true.
but they do not believe that cauterization is valuable after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauterization the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures for any illness and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it is effective.
Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancient ones said that cauteries of gold instrument are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and because of the height of its substance;
and they said that the eyes of the cautery do not make a bad wound, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some men;
and cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they said loudly. And always when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of gold, and it is quickly cooled;
and if one heats it too much; they make at the fire; and thus there is enough of impediment.
Now I have ordered this chapter concerning the wounded head just below, because the way is easier to find.
Fire cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and it is used for the cause of an illness called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for a multitude of sounds and pain in the teeth and pain in the throat, and also for all illnesses that come from coldness such as paralysis, sodic and apoplectic diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by solvent medicine modifying the head three or four times, according to whether the strength and the age and the habituation of the patient can suffer it; and then make the patient's head steady.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on your thighs;
afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and there where your two fingers meet, if it bleeds from the notch then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", because that is its form; And place it on the marked spot of ink, and do so by descending and extracting your hand little by little while twisting; then lift your hand slowly, and reward the spot if you see the bone I small; and if you do not see it, restart the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
afterwards take a little silk, and place it in warm and soft cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and let it be for three days;
after putting a soft cloth in a pouch; and let it be until the inflammation is reduced; after healing the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And the old men said that the more one delays opening the wound, the more it suppurates; and therefore it is helped little by little.
And they said that one should not leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And the others say that one should cauterize as long as one leaves it on, and thrust so strongly that one abates from the bone as wide as the veil that women put in their hair to collect the humors that issue forth;
and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and sew it up.
And these two manners of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all, unless in some men where there is a way of fear;
and it seems to me that I should let them grow;
for the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we demonstrate in other limbs;
and also when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healing and soothing for me, and that's why I often work together in harmony for health.
When the entire head comes with chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then one should use the patient's remedies of ghee and pills that are called "cochie", and purging of the head and eyes and applying plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it is not effective. Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize beneath that one, a little of what we said above. After performing fire cautery on each horn-like prominence of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and perform the cautery where it is called "vasels". and it is the joints in which one puts ventoses; and elevate your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patients feel too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the softness of the head, and this is the method:
for fire cautery of the head When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease is extended to the eye, and the head is purged by Mondificent medicines, and other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are made, and all this does not profit: then you do cauteries according to two methods, namely knowing of medicinal heat and of iron.
The cauteries of medicinal heat are that you take a bundle of hot ashes, and remove the scorching and recoat it with a little powder on the heads, and then make a temple where the pain holds in such manner that you may reposition the bundle of hot ashes beneath the skin.
and when it is repositioned, bind it and hold it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; and then unbind it and draw forth the bundle of hot ashes, and leave the wound thus for 2 or 3 days; then put on a cotton dressing soaked in water so that it penetrates to the bone.
After the treatment of the wound until it be sound;
and if you see that I have written about some burning medicines or twelve treatises on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery to where it is in the form:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a nail or it has little curvature, and appears small in appearance;
and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more gently, so that most of the skin where the burn is should be eased;
and lift your hand so the artery does not become hard, which is of no use, and abundance of blood will flow out.
Afterwards apply cotton to the wound, and place it on the spot for three days; then apply moistened cotton to the wound, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healthy;
and if you want to cauterize this emigraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at all points, and beware of cutting the artery in this emigraine which is not ancient.
of the emigraine
When you treat migraines as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and iron do not suffice for him, then it is necessary to burn the cautery which is called "cultellare" so that it is white.
and sign thus on the dull eye a line of half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and hold it so that you do not touch the artery and do not reach just to the bone;
and beware of the mandible that moves when one chews, and the nerves do not have regard for the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the disruption of blood from the artery when it is touched, where touching has great fear and mistrust in him who does not know himself, and who is not a student and experienced; and let the vein be in my way;
but I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it happens.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy at the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy;
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two edges; and these are better cauteries than that one and more helpful.
from the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain comes to the ear from cold, and we have applied solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", of which this is the form:
After puncturing all around the ailing ear, or around the two where the pain takes hold in both, and you will separate a little below the root of the ear before you have signed the place of the incision; and let there be ten points around each ear;
after healing, let the limb be sound.
of the torment of the mouth
Pains that must be treated with cauterization are not fiercer than those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
and do not apply cauterization to similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this kind of pain that moves with flux of waters and purgings of head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and put the cauterization on the part that appears healthy, and make it cauterized at the top of the ear a little below the crown of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; and let the cautery iron remain on the skin as long as the heat of the heart is felt;
and that is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the scalpel that we have placed beforehand, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the cuts be a bit larger;
after healing the wound, let it be as I said before, until it is healthy.
When the apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient has no fever, then you make four cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the spot called "vassels" as we have said before, and the fourth cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and pills that purify the brain;
afterwards place on the patient's head a plaster of mustard which is written or treated in treatises on plasters;
and this is the manner of cauterizing: if you do it as I have said.
If he is thus healthy, it is good; and if he is not, make three cauterizations on the skin of his head descending to the neck, and leave a space between each cauterization of two fingers' width;
and treat him as the others, and if you see that he is troubled, and the patient is suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if the mastery is, two others on the two horns, and treat until he is healthy;
and let the cautery which is called "olivare" be, as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be treated with years and with what we have said before;
afterwards treat the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the worst heat is absorbed, and lift your hand; after the treatment until he is healthy, and let the cautery which is called "olivare" that we have mentioned before.
from epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to moisturize the brain with years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffers from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, then make a gargling and mastication soothing the brain often with good foods;
After the king's arm is set in a circle, and you make the fire cautery according to what we have said before, and apply the fire cautery on the little vessel, and on each corner. and if the patient is strong and suffers, make fire cauteries as I have said to those who are paralyzed and have softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive-tree fire cautery be according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle cautery according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt and gross humors, then apply the cautery of such cauteries as we said for one who has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive humors declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain according to what was said before in the division.
After setting the head of the patient; after making the well-made lint tourniquet, just like a circle, if you put it on his head;
and the patient will be crossed, and be well held from all parts;
after applying the bandage, and wrap with a layer of old heather berries; and heat it with tempered fire, so that the fingers can endure the pain of the poultice. After seeing the circle deep within the head, let it cool down.
and do this for the patient every week once with another good government, as long as he is healthy.
Where you see that you are cauterizing, make points more often throughout the entire cautery.
This manner of cautery softens the brain equally;
and then put on cotton wool moistened with butter and goose fat.
from the warmth of the eyes When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient something warming the head, and the guard against all moisture, and let them sweat or bathe many times a day.
Afterwards, command him to shave his head, and make him undergo cautery within the head, and apply two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the brain is in both eyes, or if the descent is in one eye.
and cut all the cauteries to all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple.
and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a piece of cloth as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising cautery how you will anesthetize it;
and sometimes one makes a cautery or heats it beneath the two back bones.
and one sees that it is from the cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I spoke of at the beginning of the treatise descending to the eyes; I make a cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or heating beneath the two back bones; and if it is more bothersome, then one should cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give three bad drinks to the patient. after the king's head, and make a cautery or a thousand gold cauteries; and make two cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavulis" on the two sorrows, a little below the eyebrows;
and beware of the artery that you do not touch it.
And this is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavulis":
When the pupil of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivary". of where it is in the form:
And if you see that make two cauteries on the two sorrows as long as the sorcils are;
and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of hair that pricks the eye It never happens that the hair of the eyes is converted to baldness, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two methods: It is to know of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; after marking on the paper of the eyes a figure that is just like the pattern of a dead man's brain, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs;
then put a cotton wool moistened with egg white and powder of pearl on the eye, then heat the cautery to the form that it is;
After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked, little by little, many times, so that the vein is burned in that place;
and the signs of health in the skin are that you see the parchment-like skin drawn back, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye;
then lift your hand, and let it be for three days, then I put moist cotton in a bag until the inflammation is removed; after the treatment of the joint until it is healthy.
And if after that the hairs grow, and the parchment-like skin is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same spot, just as you did previously;
and if the hairs are burnt, then cauterize until the parchment-like skin is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye with the hairs.
The fiery medical cauteries are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as they can be, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
Then take French soap and lively chalk, a dot of each, and crush them well together; and make it hastily, so that it doesn't cool, then spread it on the form you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of eyes; and if the disease holds in one only solacement, one must open in one, and if it is ambidextrous also; and put beneath the eye a cotton wad moistened with egg white;
and let the head of the patient be in your health and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the poultice and move it every time the patient feels biting from the medicine, for it feels biting as from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then apply the medicine to your finger. And when the biting is past, lift the lever of awe, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted also as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, it is good.
If this is not so, reset the medicine on the wound or the medicine has not worked, until your workings are even, and your eyes are set in place;
then put on a cotton molliet in a poultice until the harsh corrosions are soothed, after curing the wound of the joint which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it be healthy.
And it is necessary for you to take great care with your work by great diligence so that there is no neglect in the medicine of the eyes.
And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that wound which is softened by the proper paper, thus as you have done before. after the cure until it be healthy.
and that is the form of the leaf of dead myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and in smallness, and according to that be your constraints;
and let it not deviate from the right path for him who is studying this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to perform cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor nod its head;
afterwards apply a cotton wool moistened with the juice of a pear or the milk of a peach on the eye;
afterwards heat the cautery which is thus:
and it is shaped at the head like the form of a hollow pen, together with which it is the cautery;
if you see, it should be pointed from one part of the head to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent;
but anyway, this which is shaped is of no value for your work.
After pressing on the fistula it is uncovered, and one removes the putridity, and the dryness. and it is closed, if it opens, and one removes the false bottom;
after placing the hot iron on the cauterized area, and holding your hand on the cauterizing iron at the part of the nail where it meets the eye, so that your hand does not make a fool; and place the cauterizing iron in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If this does not work, then recommence the cauterizing iron once more, and if you are not a master of it, leave it for three days;
after I put on a cotton molliet in a poultice, and cure the ointment of the desiccative until it is healthy, and if forty days pass without it being healthy, then I put on medicine against corrosive ulcers so that the bone may be uncovered; and let him rest according to what he needs in his chamber.
And there is a type of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then make a fistula, and bend the limb; after putting in the incision, I insert a subtle CAM (instrument) according to where it is the shape: and they make a quantity of an ounce of lead; and hold your hand or instrument firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the melted lead does not run to his eye;
and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a cotton wad soaked in egg whites or in water;
the melted lead thus forms the shape of a fistula, and the healthy part marvelously regains its health.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then one must administer poultices to the nave, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is necessary for its own site.
of cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks with what we have said in sections, and the treatment does not profit, then you should use a small cautery tool according to this form:
And apply it hastily to those cavities as far as life comes forth;
after curing the limb of corrosion until it is healthy.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, after it has made putridity and rot and is inflamed and becomes fistulous; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit at all: then it is necessary that you have cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron tip comes to the front of it, and where the rear of the hand;
and do thus one or two times, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it be healthy;
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it doesn't work, then put the patient's head in a healthy position. After heating the cautery whose form will come thus afterwards in such a way that you put a chain over the tooth.
and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
After lifting your hand and recommencing the cautery according to your will.
After filling the patient's mouth with salty water, and holding it for an hour and then blowing fiercely.
And in this manner the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the gums are softened restrained, and the moisture corrupts the scab.
of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or glass, and medical treatments are of no value, then it is necessary to use cautery according to the two methods. and burning cauterization and fire cauterization.
Burning cauterization is such that you hold a burning iron in a holder of iron or copper; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and dip it in burning bull's fire, and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down;
and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that it puts a cold flame and cotton in burning frost, and place on the aching tooth, and place on the hot iron as far as the fire reaches the decay of the tooth.
The cauterization with fire is such that you hold a iron rod or copper, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth;
After burning with fire cautery, because of this the wound forms a crust that way afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand so long as the cautery cools down.
Do this often, for the pain will be alleviated that same day or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good warm water in the impression of that cautery, and then he spits it out forcibly.
and this is the form of a good cautery:
And make a good cautery on the part that you want, and according to what you are able.
and this is the form of the burn:
of the scalp ulcers When the scrophules are of flux and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn with fire cautery, because afterwards it forms a crust, and it has two openings for the fumes to exit from the cautery on the other part.
and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is most needed, until it reaches the root of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it be for three days; and put on a cotton cloth soaked in butter until the discharge is eliminated;
after curing, anoint the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
When moisture accumulates on the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with dissolving medicines;
after you do cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not cauterize with a hot iron but rather a little.
After the fire cautery, apply another cautery to the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" because we have the shape in front.
and heal the limb as we have said before, so that it may be healthy.
When all the diseases of the chest are from cold and moist vapors, and the patients have no fever nor cough, and it is a chronic disease, then apply two cauteries to the strength in their veins. and another cautery between the nipples.
and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" according to the shape that has been mentioned before.
And if you see, apply cautery by pricking to the entire cautery that is called "points" because the shape is thus before in the disease of the ears.
and let the hairs grow just up to XXX, or thereabouts.
After healing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
And because they are lighter cauterizations, because you make them in three places at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Then let the patient turn onto his back and onto his side; then lift the heart that is within the little finger of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery that has two nerves where it is in the form:
and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces just up to the side, and there would come the figure of three cauteries assembled with four cauteries;
and for this reason, cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figures of cauterization are six cauteries;
and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tendon, and it is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
And often is applied on this same nerve because it has eight cauteries.
Then put on the cautery, pricking the burned area with a needle; After having put the patient at rest, do not touch the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little things happen, then do cautery on the thick part of the cautery nail, or many cauteries in pricking.
For the joint is closed again, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach coldness and much moisture occur until it affects his complexion, and multiple cathartics are given to him, and accustomed methods of cure do not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back, and stretches out his legs and hands. From these, afterwards make three fire cauterizations in the hollow of the thigh according to the quantity of a finger, with each entire cauterization being at an angle, and there should be space between one and another so they are not joined together when they form a triangle.
and let the cauterization be so profound that it reaches the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment.
And if you see a large cauterization in the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cauterization, let him cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at that point according to the quantity that you see of an inch. then the cauterizer applies all the cauterization which is called "points".
After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, until it be healthy.
When the liver suffers from cold and moisture and great windiness, so that it is far removed from its natural complexion through excesses; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, if it is necessary that the patient be anointed on his ulcer; and make three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, below the hypochondries, where the humor or the parts of the omere come;
and let there be a space between each cauterization the width of a finger; and let the cauterizations be two fingers' length from the body, and do not press too hard with your hand on the entire cauterization;
and let it be burned as much as the middle of the heart, and let the patient stand upright on their feet;
and if he cannot, then let him lean, and stretch out his legs, and lift his arms;
And if you want to, then cauterize these cauteries of the cuticular, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would make it drier than the whole body; and that it does not come near the bowel, for the heart is very subtle there, and one should beware of seeing;
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too excessively strong;
and if he is in a bandage, he feels foreign pain.
And when this treatment affects the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be warned about his head;
and then sign where the abscess or swelling is, and then heat the cautery that is similar to the reason, from which it is the shape: And cauterize with the cautery as much as the veins are burnt, and approach just to the siphac, until the pores are completely purified;
after the treatment, according to the treatment of the humors, until he is healthy;
and it is not suitable that anyone use this cautery unless he who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and whose hands these diseases have corrected many times.
Then it can hardly work, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
of the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make multiple cauteries at the roots of aristology, and in such a manner: Take a root of aristology as long as you can find it, the largest one possible, and let it be dry, and let it also be as thick and as long as your fingers. and grind it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize with a cautery between the shoulder blade and the neck, and apply small cauteries a little downward on the part that is beneath the beard.
and apply cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backward a little. and apply a cautery in the thigh, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on both sides of the thigh, opposite the cautery that is between the shoulders.
and do not press with your hand, but rather make an opening as if smelling.
And some old men said that no one uses fire cautery similar to a razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess. and thus the pain flees, as we have said in the aposteme of the foolish fever.
But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the spleen
When you treat the disease of the spleen according to what we have said as divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they perform three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
Since it is a manner that you make three cauterizations, or four, in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the foolish fever that we have said before.
and do not press your hand on all the cauterizations, and let the patient be warned to lie on their back;
and another manner of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the heart which is near the mouse, or where the stitches of the patient come from the left, and let the elevations that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After they burn the two nerves as much as the heart is perceived from the other side, and then they will make three incisions with the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you see that, if you cauterize the entire cautery at three nerves.
After the treatment when it has been obtained by lengthy tension, and this is more than the other cures mentioned beforehand.
Fire cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the bowels, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the pis. and let the cauteries be well close to the thickness of a finger.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to allow for putrid matter to flow out, and do not stop the treatment of the patient after the cautery. and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be assembled with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have placed before demonstrating; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is placed here before us.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and the anular; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply in the fontanelle, lest it would force out the bitter humor, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cuticular. and let the cauteries be of a length, one beneath the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
and leave the cauteries on for a long time without removing them, so that the water may issue forth.
after the treatment of other treatments that we have said.
When a belly problem comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are afflicted, and cannot be cured by ways of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, if you do the great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before, or cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery; and 4 cauteries around the subtle bowel for all subtle cautery, and 3 cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moistures abounding and the patient suffering, make him a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each rib, and two small cauteries on the stomach beneath the great one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all, if you do cauteries: On the spine of the back, which is all deformed below the shoulder blade, and slightly in a triangle shape, and I apply fire cautery on the nodule that is there.
and if you think that the stomach is chilled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face swell, then one applies a great fire cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the fire cautery of the clave; and let the fire cautery remain on for a long time. After healing the limb so that it becomes healthy.
When you touch the scar, heat up the fire cautery that seems to rasp, and then apply it all burned onto the touched scar. and leave your hand so long as the fire cautery reaches the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows out.
do this once or twice, and if there is much of the scar, cauterize each one as we have said. after the treatment of eye problems as long as they are healthy;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it will have even greater help.
When the patient cannot endure a surgical procedure or an operation, which we will describe in its place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a fistula comes, and it is wrapped and casts putrid and corrupt moisture, if you prove all of it under a subtle tent, and beware that you know all of the tent how deep it has penetrated.
After heating the cautery that seems to be a razor, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tension is entered, and recommence the cautery as long as the corrupted and rotten body parts are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of their need.
and guard against burning the nerves that are affected, and the large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, so guard against these evils, and do not make those false fires that are in the charned flesh, and think that it is not almost pierced.
after treating the flesh as long as it is healthy, and if the flesh is healed, and the materials are removed at length of time, then know that the flesh is entirely healthy.
and if the materials are not removed, it means that the joints are twisted, and the bones are corrupted at the source; and thus like one of those which we will direct to its place.
When pain from cold comes to the roots, and from great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization on the roots from one side and another at the clavicle cauterization which we mentioned before.
and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will bring greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make cauterization on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cauterization should be as long as our thumb.
and have them cauterize the back, where they will need an assistant;
and let the cautery iron be formed according to the aforementioned shape.
When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings delayed; and when they come, they feel great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the belly, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and they will cauterize the back;
and let the cautery iron be shaped, as we have said.
When the moist viscous humors descend to the hollow of the thigh, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measuring them together;
and it is found that the joints of the division are visible, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the box of the hip according to the cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the joint within the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle;
and if the cauteries are such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of the large olivary, and let the cauteries be as profound as all the veins.
and treat until he is healthy.
from the pain of the ankle When pain comes to the box of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment is not effective, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick, foul humors of fetid pills or other similar good pills. After the fire cautery;
and the manner of doing cautery is according to two manners: it is to know that it assembles burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such:
that you cauterize on the surface of the thigh three triangular cauteries according to this form, and it makes good depth and greatness, and has between each cauterization a space the thickness of a finger, and so the cauteries are olive-shaped;
sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on the head of the thigh, because there are four according to this form:
And if you see, it is cauterized at the circular cauterization that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh;
but do it in such a manner that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the heart should be burned.
And that is the manner in which they do it for sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach as far as the knee or as far as the leg.
And if it reaches the thigh and leg, have two fire cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds them, and three fire cauteries above the ankle, on the left side a little.
and let the cautery be cuticular, and let the spaces of the heart be burned;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes of the foot or near there, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points". And if it is necessary, have them do more.
and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, have them do a fire cautery at the cuticular or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery so much that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
And I have seen many who have undergone cauterization on the thigh, and they left it so long that the leg became completely swollen, and the foot as well, and was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After a flux of belly which led him to death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, perform cauterization on one and the other, according to this method.
And the wise men said about the cautery of the thigh, that it is in this manner, make the iron thus sharp and be at the tip as big as a thumb's nail, or a little less, and be by inserting and be from one insertion to another spacing out the quantity of a ninth of an inch.
and let the insertions be above two fingers' breadth, and let them also be like knots, and have the iron handle well made;
and that is the form:
And let it be heated until it is totally red hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the affected thigh's boil, and turn it on the healthy side;
and let it cauterize once, and then remove the cautery and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after the treatment of joint so that it be healthy.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery for fear of his regard, and we see few who use it.
and yet these are good cauteries, which can soothe, and there where they are applied.
The burning cauteries of medicine are so that you make the instrument at a stretch between the margins of the door, and it is either of iron or copper with a long handle, and in its height it has two points, and each has the quantity of the thickness of a finger. and be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
After put on the box of the hip to the ailing person lying on his healthy side, and then place your hand much on the box of the hip. After the hand is placed between the two circles of warm water which has been heated by fire in a small pot, and let it stay for an hour of gentle heat, and the patient suffers from chill and numbness.
For it is true that he finds biting pain as if from fire;
and when the biting pains have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the warm water of sweet dew, and let it stay thus for three days, and apply a poultice so that what is black from the burn may be removed; and let it stay three days until the pus flows out in a stream;
and that would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds, so that they may be healthy.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds warm water according to what you have done in the wound just so;
and it is the manner of warm water, and I have written it in a treatise on the rectification of medicine. Take equal parts of alkaline and living chalk, as much of one as of the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small opening to be made so that the tip of a scalpel can enter;
where there is a small opening to be made so that the tip of a scalpel can enter; and put on top of that pot another well-plumbed pot, and put on alkaline and chalk and warm water above, until there is a duo of powders underneath which you will have well prepared in your hand;
and let it sit until it descends into warm water and reaches the well-plumbed pot, then take all that water, and pour it over chalk and alkaline as before.
And then it will be very warm and is administered in many works of medicine and in cauterizations of other members.
For it does other works like fires, and if there are other medicines where one cauterizes well the thigh thus as thesis and honey and alkaline and soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galien tells us about a cure where one man was cured of the pain in his hainche and sciatic vein, and he limped greatly, and said that there was no other cure, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he was bathed as it is taught afterwards.
And thus in this manner you should take the green fresh and dry litargire, and crush it much with a little fat, and apply it to the thigh and to the knee and to the leg where the pain lies, and the relief.
and let it be for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the bitterness.
Then have him enter a warm bath so that his body is slightly relaxed, and have him enter bed, and the pain will all go away and he will be healthy.
And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines, unless it's after the evacuation of the body.
And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with hot iron, it helps much;
and it should be done by making the cauteries in this manner. Take a linen cloth and the warmth of old oil, and apply it to the fossa that is between the thumb of the foot and the other called fascia.
After taking dry hot iron, and heating it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and applying it to the loin, and leaving it there until it is extinguished;
and do it again thus, and do not cease from doing thus until you think by sense that it comes just to the thigh, and that the pain is ceased;
and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of the vein".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar matter expanded cold, none of these appearances is worthy of cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after that the patient is void of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three lines signed with an inch, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer.
and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called "points".
and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the claveable cautery of the middle finger according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a constricted arm when they get up, and fear. and you find in the posterior spine of the back and in the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery according to this method. When the fire cautery burns each part of the spine equally.
And if you see, if you cauterize around the spine with a piercing fire cautery in two or three lines, and the points are close to one another.
After healing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply fire cautery in curvature which is in a spasmodic nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pains of joints are caused by moisture that is spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the physician calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner:
Make the mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the olive oil cautery be according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make fire cautery at all the fire cautery that one calls a "point". And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make three or four cauteries on each knee, with all the olive oil cautery;
and if you have a more skillful hand, then do more, but do not hold your hand for too long, only as much as the thickness of the skin can be burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we described in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the finger joints two lines;
and if it remains a point of pain in two places, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come just as cuts or just as swellings, cauterize each part, and make good governance for the patient and prepare medicines.
For if you make good government and you purge bad blood, he will be healthy with the help of God.
When a fracture comes from anger, and the veins descend to the ankle and it is new, then it is necessary that when you want to cure the vein, it does not harm that one day. and that he uses things that loosen the belly, so that the threads descend from his belly;
afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the vein is repaired, and you reset it with your fingers, and mark from below the fracture on the bone of the thumb, and at all one sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery to the form that it is
until it is clear and it casts off unhealthy things. Then reset the bulbs to their place; and the ministers hold their hand on it so that they do not return backwards;
and work well the thighs of the patient, and put beneath him a cushion and a sheet on the thighs, and another on the foot which holds his hands;
then put the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommence again another time until you reach just to the bone; and take care subtly that the bulb does not slip when you perform the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and so that the patient does not die, or another evil.
And you know that when you do not approach the bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless.
And it is necessary that the cauterers of children be subtle according to the measure of their years, and of great men also great according to their measure.
after three days, heal the limb with a gentle cauterization so that the numbness is lifted;
after healing other limbs so that it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well cicatrized;
and it is necessary that his bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he gets up to go to his chamber.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, have a well-made crutch presented to him, and use it for 40 other days.
and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great a replenishment of drinking and eating, and of too high a temperature.
and when he makes this instruction, he will be entirely healthy.
And I will tell about the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
When roots grow into other abdomens and are conjoined, and you see that they do not grow further, then have the fire cautery made according to their quantity, and be careful with the third heat of heart. after the treatment according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
but first mark the level of the inch and make a line according to the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized claw-like [instrument].
But the first cauteries are lighter and more moderate.
of ancient pain in no member When pain comes to a member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no value, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twisting and of its pain.
if he is healthy from the first cautery, it is good;
by this name, recommend another cautery on top of that, for it is customary that it should be moved to the nearest member, because it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
The massages are often aided by cautery with great help, and likewise the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flux and melancholy.
You cannot see that it should be cauterized, take heed because the disease is at the beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the entire patient, then make five cauteries on the chief. I am the new head towards the forehead at the end of the veins; and it is behind the two horns, and it derives from the little hammer;
and it leaves so much in your hand that the cauteries come right up to the bone, and as much as the crusts burst forth if the vapors of the great humors can issue forth;
and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
And if the mixture is scattered everywhere; and it appears manifestly, if it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or head, and one cauterizes on the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one on the chest and another on the sides, and two on the shoulders; and it is on the joints, and it is on the tender flesh, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and be careful with the nerves that are on the last layer of skin calculating, so you do not burn them;
and never make a cauterization on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it does harm, and it hurts instead of helping;
and know that the patient feels no pain from the cauterization if it is done as the healthy person would feel it, because the body is already almost entirely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the iron.
Afterwards, treat the wound with flour dust several times with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
When swelling comes into a member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should make cauterizations on the member according to the size and smallness of the member;
and let the cautery be a little inserted between the skin of the arm; then heal the wounds so that they are healthy.
And often one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is relieved of the inflammation;
and in no way should one interfere with it unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is enveloped, and the engines of medicine are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the skin of the arm, until the whiteness is relieved, and its color is changed.
then heal with flour of veatches and of lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of the colon and blood of the almond tree, each a part. and let it be entirely wrapped together, and let it be tied with a bandage, and let it be elevated to the level where it will be healthy.
The treatment of chancre by cautery
When a cancer appears at the beginning, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with a cautery that resembles a circle, entirely around the tumor.
And always the wise men say that one should perform cauterization also at the middle of the channel of the sore;
and always it does not seem to me good, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to avoid it happening anytime;
and more rightfully it is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the superfluity that it does or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you hasten to amputate: then you cauterize around the area of small pricks, pricking; afterwards let it be so. For it hastens to worsen.
And if you want to pierce all around the cautery, then heat the cautery of copper, which is its form:
And put your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" so that the cauteries have pierced the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the disease is alleviated.
Afterwards, treat until it is perfectly healthy.
Another kind of illness there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a withering of the members, for it withers the members just as the rust consumes the dry wood.
If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer from cauterization together with fire, then heat up the small and large cauters gently, according to what is suitable for the patient or where the disease is.
afterwards cauterize all parts so that you extract all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that everything which is corrupted may be removed.
And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized places a soothing balm made with oil as long as the burning of the fire is removed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of swollen limbs producing flesh.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good.
and if not, then recommence the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted limbs.
And this mangy condition was never cured by medicine except in the case of fire cauterization.
but every way fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of the ague medicine in the division: take the quantity that you have in hand.
for pores that come to the feet Often it happens that the feet are paralyzed by a weakness which is called "cold" according to our intention, and it is a large faulty swelling that affects the foot.
And the cauterizations of this disease are in two manners. It is to know fire cauterization and hot water cauterization.
Fire cautery is that you heat I heated cautery as if it were a hollow pen, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can hold the nail on all sides, and that it has subtle margins;
after heating everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the source of the nail; and let it stay thus for three days until it begins to make a purulent discharge; then make a plaster of wild savages' herbs boiled with oil, and let the plaster stay on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots.
Then heal the wound of burning by anointing so much that it be sound.
And if they are turned around by defective limbs, and many times it happens in the hands and in the feet, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization of warm water; and it is in such a manner: take a cane of iron or of steel, or a pointed instrument, and place it on the nail and the ankle, that is to say for removing warts; and place the cane on it so that it presses all around, then I put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches to the root of the nail, and thus find the warm water way deep into the root;
and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot everything to its very roots.
Thus you do one after another, as long as you stretch those who are in the body, then heal the wounds that cause shame.
When some shudder with cold or nerves, or from a four-day fever or another, if it is necessary that you apply three or four fire cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra. and one on the foot, and one on the stomach for an olive-tree cautery;
if you leave the shuddering, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
Several times they appear through skin defects, or pus-filled boils, which come from corrupted large masses.
if it is necessary at first when they appear that one applies fire cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle fire cautery made from the wood of myrtle, so that the point is seized by the fire, or with the root of a long aristologe, or with a lentricular cautery.
And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow worse from then on, but are freed from the superfluities that come from them, and are healthy.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there occur great disturbances of blood in the artery that is connected to the wound that comes from the outer skin, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And always when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue forth anymore;
then apply to the fire the olive oil cauterizers, many small and large ones, as long as they are completely red;
then take I, or large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and apply the cauterizer to that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterizer there until the blood is stanched.
And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease from doing one after the other as long as the wound is still inflamed;
and beware that you do not irritate the nerve which is affected, and that another evil does not come upon the patient;
and know that when the wound does not close over the artery, one cannot easily restrain it meantime as the artery is large, so it is not by one of the four methods that we have said: either by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed upon which have the power to restrain blood; and be bound and restrained immediately.
Whoever administers the stanching of the bleeding wound tightly with strips or by placing heated things on it, or similar things, does not benefit if they do not do it little by little.
And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then one must put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind well until it is restrained above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but the millet of the cold water should be very cold so that the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped.
and make an inquiry beforehand about those things which he has need of cauterizations and of medicines.
We have said in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or with burning medicines, and the materials and causes and instruments and forms of cauterizations.
and I have placed that chapter of the loins just below the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method by which one finds more lightly what one wants.
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one of the cauteries, and because of this it requires more caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; Where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many sorts of people come to cures. if they come from such who aggravate their illness so that they die easily because of the weakness that they find in their disease, and the greatness of their evil. and of these one should have fear.
And of these there is one who gives you his sense, and says: Wait, I am beware"; and the disease is despising.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but place greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of those things of which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and lost.
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your ailments so that health may be converted to salvation;
and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of longevity.
Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter in divisions, according to what is before or the chapter of cauteries, which I have divided from head to feet, because you will find it easier to master.
Be aware that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the midwife holds the child's head too strongly;
and it never comes from a cause that is known.
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and nearly all those whom I have seen hasten to death; and therefore it seems to me that I should leave the work in part to other cures.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not support its own weight;
and the moisture was so great that it caused death, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone;
and the operations are such that when moisture is between the heart and the bone, and abscesses are small, you make a large incision in the head.
and let it be as long as two of us, so that the moisture flows;
and see there the form of the spatula-shaped:
If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the sutures of the head overturned in each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: if it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this method:
And after the incision, remove all moisture. Afterwards, hold the incisions with dressings and powders, and I put in wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day;
then dislocate it, and treat the wound with tents and with ointments, and let the head be held steady, and give to the patient dry meat in moderation, little by little, until the member is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incising is to examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water.
for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Cut then there where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water, and you do it according to what you can about it;
and beware that you do not cut the artery; and let flow a little blood, if the patient dies from the corruption of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens that a patient has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is chronic, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with fire, which one copes with by burning the .ij. arteries.
It is necessary then, when you cut the veins, that the patient makes his head recoil; after you rub the skin with a rough cloth so much that the arteries appear, then the patient stretches out his neck under the whole cloth; Then look where the veins beat, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and few are responded.
Then mark the veins of the enclosure, then cut one and the other with a sharp instrument of two edges, as long as the vein leads up to the bone, and it should be done by the width of the top of the head.
And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting also as .ij. two at the traverse.
And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark the enclosure and cut up to the bone.
and it is necessary to put blood flow there if it is six inches, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery.
Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone a little below the symbaphyphus, if you cut what produces abscesses here and there, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
of the emigrant When an old emigrant comes, and has a catarrh, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and the old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medicinal cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries of the temples and their cauterizations, as we have recounted.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs on their temples grow back, and pays attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is hardly restored except in some homes where they are too cold.
and if it is restored, then the patient stretches out their neck from some wraps, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and raises the area of warm water so that the artery opens manifestly; then take the spatula in the form of which it is here: then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with pincers, and separate well the membranes that are beneath each part;
and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the anvil, then cover that part according to the quantity of the two hips. For she is not cupped, if they do not jump the blood all at once.
And let flow three fluids from the sixth [degree of] heat, just up to the third;
and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you ligate it in two layers of a strong double silk thread, which will not obstruct before the closure of the wound, and will stop the flowing of blood;
then remove the superfluity which is between the two ligatures at that hour, and then, if you see fit, if you cauterize with a cellular cautery up to the bone as long as the head is coped;
and it is the moderate work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion. For the cauterizations are helpful in ending the moisture: because it is of greater aid against moisture.
Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the hole with much cotton and places well-made tents;
and when you dislodge them, they must be treated with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until they are healthy;
and without touching the artery so much as you can, if you hasten to cop the wound by cauterizing, or you fill the void with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is staunchied; and if you do not have this remedy, put your finger on the wound so that the blood is congealed, and raise the wound with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it steady as it is necessary;
And you should have between the two cauteries a space of a thumb's width, and then when you have signed on both sides, and you measure the iron rod fiery hot until it comes just to the bone, and touches the vein on both sides. and they should be separated between the two heads because it is not possible to cauterize everything all at once.
and that is the form of the cautery:
and that which is more deadly and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cauterizing iron of two edges, but the trenchant edge should be well sharpened to avoid staying too long over the wound. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
of the tears When the tears of the eyes are flowing down due to veins that are on the top of the head from the fire, and it does not benefit from a cure by medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feel at the forehead an abnormal gait as if from tremors. and the eyes are tired and moist so that the hair of the papers is fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, if you have need of this cure. And they call the old "contused cure", and it is that you make three incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, with hairs growing from the front, then make three equal cuts according to the length of the forehead.
And they call the old "contused cure", and it is that you make three incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, with hairs growing from the front, then make three equal cuts according to the length of the forehead. and let one of the incisions be thus, like two dots on the forehead going downwards to the nose, and the others two on the sides near the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on the sides near the papers;
and align your hand with the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across the joints;
and prepare a piece of sponge and much of cloth to suck out the blood, then apply the spatula acute at two parts where it is the shape;
of the incision that goes to the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off all the crust that is between the two fissures to the entire width of the syphac which is on the bone, then make another section of the mean incision just up to the other second, and then extract this spatula-like thing. if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellare", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is smooth, not very sharp, and that's its shape:
And place the cutting edge sloping towards the airy flesh of the heart, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and the joint as far as it reaches the middle wound.
And cut off the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision is continuous up to what opens on the bone, and then make another section in the mean fissure up to the other defect.
and then extract the blood equally, and press out the bone for the blood taken.
then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on soaked cloths in wine and oil and in vinegar, and beware that apostemes do not develop there.
and on the third day, release the ligature, and I will show you a great remedy of hot water, then the treatment with royal balsam ointment with rose oil, and other treatments that one uses to cure wounds, until it is healthy.
When a vein is inflamed from habitual abuse, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and dimming the sight, and blistered skin. and the hair falls out, and where the head is in the front of a painful ache, and the patient is exhausted; then you know through these accidents that those matters and this cathartic do not come from many veins, and the mournful cure that it is, if it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a great incision in the forehead, and another so large I do not dare. And begin from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and so let the incision be just up to the bone; and stretch out your hand near the roots of the temples that move to the brain;
and when the bone is uncovered, suck up all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the two lips of the fissure and put in much cotton, and tighten with a linen bandage; then apply warm dressings made of wine and oil, and beware of a sudden aposteme.
when it is numb, it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with exciting remedies that cause flesh to grow.
In such a manner: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colofinum, and make an emplaster; and administer it to these wounds to grow flesh throughout.
of the inflammation of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains, or beast, or rock from the mine or similar things like iron. or seeds, such as jasse, fava beans, peas; or flowing things such as water and oil and similar things.
When it falls in the pierced ear or another manner of thing that does not adjust to the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
If you see a stone, distill some little droplet of violet oil or sesame oil, then it facilitates extraction; and make the condition stern, and stop up the nostrils when the sternness comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and stop up the ear above.
Many times relief comes through this treatment;
and if it does not bring relief, then facilitate the extraction with subtle pinches, because that is the method:
If it brings relief through pinches, that's good;
if not, then facilitate the extraction with a subtle onion-like small doublure;
and if it does not bring relief through that, then make a pipe of copper and insert the head of the pipe into the ear or piercing hole strongly, and stop up what is around the pipe with wax so that air cannot enter with the pipe; Then the fiery cauterization is formed, because many times it comes forth as we have said;
and if it does not come forth in this manner, then take glue from that and take the eyes, and put in some instrument which is at a point to make it, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever that may be, and cauterize strongly.
And if it does not burst forth from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut open the ear thus so that an abscess falls into a vein, and spasm;
and the manner of the cutting is that you first make the patient sane from the cephalic disease, and extract some blood according to its virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where it depends on the fat or lean; and let the wound be as crescent-shaped as a moon, until you reach the stone, then suck according to your power, and hastily bring it to your mouth;
and the treatment so that it be healthy.
And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer an extraction;
and if it cannot exit, then administer the spatula with subtle thrust according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not do it when you think that the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be alleviated.
In the water that falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient use the sternuation of conditi first, and fill the ear with a lot of cotton. And let him sit on that shoulder where the ache is. Let her walk for this, it's good.
if not, take many pieces according to the length of your thumb, tender and light, and heat them a little at the fire; and put the patient a hole or perforation in their ear, and sew it with thread from another piece of skin, and attach it to another skin on the skin that is in the ear; and do not cease from making this skin to skin as long as the water issues forth entirely, and thus it will be entirely free;
and if you see, take the joint, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head is seized by fire until the most tender joint is burnt;
then remake another part of other joints until the water issues forth entirely, as we have said in the skin.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as a flea and similar things, treat it thus as we have said in the division;
but if it is of large body that one can feel it, then prepare an extraction with pincers; and it is the thing most easy to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the section and where you treat the distillations, and the cure does not profit, if it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight: if they open no worms, if they draw them out as subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the cane of where it is the form:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck formally all the way to the cane; do this as often as all the worms are seen.
And if they do not obey to come out, stop up the cane with cotton as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not sweat as we have said, administer gentle distillations that the ancients have experienced in the treatment of wounds, and you will find them or treat with distillations;
and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear with all this instrument, because it is the method as you see; And whether of silver or copper tubes below at the small holes, and above them pour to distill;
and to press within the distillation to the copper instrument well-made for that, and if you see take the receiver and envelop it around the point where the cotton comes; then you pour your oil or your juice, and that which you take of your medicines in the reed, and the reed is in the ear;
then put everything into the receiver with all the cotton, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled or flows out of the ear; and let the patient sense it internally, and so are the distillations; I heat them up with fire in this way, as one distills into the ear. and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the inflammation of the ears
No child is born who does not have some perforation in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men through swelling of wounds, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these swellings come sometimes deep into the ear, if one cannot see them;
and sometimes it happens that I thoroughly clean out the perforation, and then I see it very well.
That which comes deep inside, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many conditions, and in that case it is necessary that you place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look within: if you see the apparent obstruction, if the work is entirely of this spatula-like material from which it is formed:
And let it be sharp and cutting on both sides all along, so that it does not numb the ear;
if the obstruction is of flesh born or growing from the ear, if you hold it with subtle pincers, and gently touch, until that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the suppurations are deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle, light razor and heat it slightly by fire, then place it at the root of the ear.
If you feel the obstruction where the patient feels great pain in the ear, touch lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear;
then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and apply it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a tent and apply it with red oil, and sprinkle on powdered glass powder.
and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you apply the tent and remove another infected tent made of rosed oil and wax, so that the inflammation may be removed; then heal until it is healthy.
And if a flow of blood comes, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that eliminate the flow of blood which are or treat with distillations.
These are the thorns that come from papers of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and cut with a spatula of their roots; then put on the place a glassy ointment rubbed.
And if without decay, so the cautery of subtle lenticular fire, and the cauteryizer after the incision is worth more;
and many times they repair, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauteryized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the crust Often times there come in papers of the eyes certain things that appear rough in their form and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below. The works are such:
The works are such: Take heed when the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know.
Make the donor of the large wound, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers, and cover.
If you cannot cover it without piercing a little the skin, do not harm anything to the patient.
And if the wound is large, sew it up with a suture, and treat it until it is healthy.
And if it is small, do not use force, for the joints will soon restore themselves and become strong again.
And if the vein is descending from the bottom of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and stretch the vein to a pinch, and press on one side and the other.
and if the paper is separated by incision, it does not hurt at all;
and when the vein is pressed, lift the salty water with oil, and heal the place of those who are injured so much that the patient may be healthy.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fatness that is injured in the papers above, and this happens more to young children, and hurts much their eyes, and they come to cathars at dawn, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hurry to their eyes;
and for this they lie down on their faces immediately, and sleep on them, and their papers beneath their eyebrows are moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered over the exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press your hand against your fingers and feel the muscle tension between them.
And the manner of the treatment is that the patient puts his head on a healthy side;
and then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains excess of each part, then place it on him; and press with your two hands on one side and the other, so that the excess is gathered within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture a cutting spatula making a cut of a large width, and it should not be larger than the wound one makes when opening a vein;
and make the skin deep enough so that you reach the excess; and in many dispositions comes excess from the cut, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Remove then all at once a piece of torn cloth between your two fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out;
and beware that you do not thrust into the fissure, that you do not reach the entire spatula up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
And if the instrument does not open at the beginning of the fissure, increase it a little bit so that the fissure opens more easily as it appears;
then extract it as we have said, then wrap in a clean cloth and in water, and put on the limb, and strain with bandages.
And if there are such men who break their own skin and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is retained.
Then heal until it be healthy.
And if there comes a hot abscess to the limb, then heal with emplasters soothing until it be healthy.
the hairs of the papers When in papers (skin) unnatural hairs are thrust aside from their natural place, and are enveloped, they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as customary tears and softening of the skin and albumin, so much that it is the cause of destruction of the eyes.
and it is the treatment in four ways: Here is the translation:
It is necessary that you put the patient's head upright, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand.
if it is converted, it is good; see if not, if you push a needle all along the thread above; and let it be along the margin of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and pull the thread above all the way to the paper, and turn it to the razor;
then make an incision below the paper, below the aligned hairs, all the way to the spatula-like instrument, from the large lancet up to the small;
then extract the thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, like the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into toes.
And if you take a part which is mastered, one copes with a great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened.
then make a whole spatula on the two lines that you have signed, and start from the great large lancet just up to small; and let it be one of the incisions near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the horn, then scrape everything;
then assemble the two lips at a seam of a needle with all the subtle thread of flax, and suck out the blood, and make a bond of the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows at all kinds of gluey things, if you want to do this;
and if it doesn't work, if you don't have a cure, then leave the seam and the threads until three or four days;
Then cure the wound without tight constricting things, for the skin revives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the constricting is murderous (as the ancients said), and it's work without fear; and if in another manner:
and if in another manner: and it is that you shape the skin into a figure like the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, at three ounces of ointment according to the form which is here:
then apply this to those who have small equal forces in harmony with the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the bandages, and the thing is not even, take a needle or it has one thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread from the large larder, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble between your two threads evenly;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin upon which you have signed, as we have related, then assemble the two lips of the wound by constricting, and cure until it is healthy;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with a gentle and similar soothing application;
and often it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted:
if it is necessary, you should use what we have said about incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you should convert the parchment and make them inside according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula-like instrument is; and cut as two heads of two parts or where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly above what overhangs from the parchment of the eye, and pull out the two wounds of the two parts forcibly; and let it thus for some days, and the skin that is constricted will become numb and weak, and porous, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, if the scalp adheres to the bone, then cure it until it is healthy;
and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer puncture the hair;
and it is the shape of the two canals that you will make according to this design, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and insert a soft and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width long;
then order in the hunt another subtle thread of briefly twisted silk, and tie the two heads of thread;
Then put the patient's head in your healthy one;
and let it be under the sun so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and minor work, then put the needle at the root of the hair that is affected, and make it pierce the papyrus hastily until you draw it above the natural hair;
then extract the hair up to the root, and put into the root that hair, if there is one or two or three or more;
then extract your hand so that the hairs come out from the root into the papyrus with the natural hair.
And if the root is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the root down to the bottom of the thread that you had ordained there, so that the root comes out from the hole above and you see it by the sight of the eye;
Then you should pull out the splint and the thread, and close the eye and let it close for two or three days, until the hair grows back into its place and the flesh grows over it.
and if the hairs are short, accompany the long hair of the natural whiskers, and be lifted with that which you let it be, until it is elongated and then set free.
from the burning of the eye When this disease called "aleacrati" or the pus comes into the eye, if there are two manners of it:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from cauterization, and from similar things.
And the manner of operating on it is that you open the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put in threads of linen, and leave it until it is healthy;
and it is not suitable that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrain. Because you do this, if the illness returns worse than the first.
but I observe things that are soothing, like fenugrec. and the rose-water or ague, and flaxseed, being cooked, and anointments of dyaquilon founded on none of the oils, and I enveloped a tent, and the cure of this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take heed that it does not sink according to the form it had before.
and these works that we have said are not stronger than the treatments of this illness, so it does not relapse according to the form it had before.
This disease that is beneath, which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things;
and the way of the operation is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and prick the flesh, and make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the threads come together at the head of the flesh;
Then the flesh is above all the bristle, and the scalpel has a large spatula. And if the shape of the skin returns according to what it should be, that's good;
if not, then take the rasp and put it in the crack, and turn the skin, and make two cracks or sew up inside the skin;
and let the heads of the two cracks at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is just like the shape of a letter which has not "I griesche";
then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are thus arranged beneath, of what follows the skin, then adjust the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of flax;
then apply the treatment of what we have said about softening medicines, and of tents, until it is healthy.
And if the illness comes from a crack or a stitch or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain crack underneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what is presented here. then dissect between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
then dissect between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to engineer everything so that they can make it return to its natural shape;
and the same patients, according to what they need in terms of work and instruments in various arrangements.
When this joint has stuck together in such a way that the paper on top is glued with the white of the egg, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it up high.
and hold the pincers, as long as you cut what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too pointed nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula is too pointed and does not blister the eye;
and let your incision be, where you carefully strip away the assembled one, lightly, so that the skin regains its natural shape;
and it is healthy throughout the assembled one, and never irritates the sharp salty eye, and raises the sweet water, and the collarbone;
then put between the skin and the eye a linen bandage, and place on the eye a moistened flaxen cloth in abundance of egg whites; and after three days, use sweet collars and similar things as long as it is healthy.
Know that the nail is according to two manners: It is nervous and resembles ivory, and another that is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture, which when touched by iron and pressed by the pincers, it cannot be moved.
and one and the other resemble the great artery, and grows little by little until it covers all vision and all light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in a healthy position, then he opens his eyes. and lifts the skin with your hand, then bends the finger into small doubles, and holds it above; then take a needle, and insert the hair of a horse, or of a calf, or of an ox, and pull it strongly. and double the point of the needle a little and fix it in the finger, and pass it through the entire needle, and tie the finger with a thread and hold it above, and strip all the hair from the side of the finger which joins the vein and the artery at the head, then cut the remaining part into the root of the artery with subtle and small forces, and let the natural flesh or artery, so that by the incision, the body of the veins does not become accustomed.
and many times the nail is pierced at the ankle only, and at the thread, as we have said; then the scab forms a whole spatula full of pus where it is in its form:
And take care that the spatula does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the prune is not pierced;
and after the incision, pour into the oil a little of bruised sage, and make a poultice from litharge, and leave it until the next day; then heal those things which he needs as long as it takes to be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the ankle joints cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured by medications;
and grow thus as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, then open the oil of the patient, and take the lighter spatula a little gently according to this form: And you raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes at no point and the reason is pressed, then distill from your mouth into the hollow colier made of litharge and red colier, and wipe the eye just to the other hour;
If nothing is contrary to you in the wound, as an abscess grows, then lance it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the work as before, so that it may be healthy.
then recommend the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely restored.
And if the appearance of the skin is painful from the tears at night in the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it on the onion, and cover one part and not entirely, so that tears do not come there;
then distill into the hollow red colier made of litharge.
The eyes of some men never saw the red flesh, and uncover the plumule and hold steady on the papyrus and turn to the deformed, and resemble a rose of balusters;
and the operations are such that the patient puts his head in a healthy position, then he opens his eyes, and collects all that flesh as convenient signs to this, and holds it with strength;
then grasp the first flesh, and take all grasping to the healer just until the end, and beware that you do not blink an eye during the operation;
and let the incision be a gentle spatula which we have said in the incision of the ankle and with small forces because one breaks the sebum, thus like the form afterwards this chapter demonstrates;
and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is broken, then apply the oil of broiet or you distill red coliere and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a piece of cotton with water of eggs, so that it be assured against hot aposteme;
and if he delays nothing, and the blood flows back up, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things that reduce the hot abscess;
then return to your work as soon as he is healthy, and thus make sure that the flesh is adjusted in the eye by this resemblance.
But always it is necessary that you adjust the treatment of each weak eye according to the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron;
and do not put your hand into any of these works as long as you see that this member is suffering from that work.
There are certain red veins that are covered on the eye, and they obstruct the vision with their work and totally blind the eye sometimes.
It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the eye, in which it is, it is false, and there is no other illness besides the cataract. then operates on it in such a manner:
Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around the anointed area according to his wisdom, and let the anointed areas be subtle and doubly so according to this form.
And let them be of one circle by degrees in the body according to this form.
then one coils the veins subtly, and drains the blood hourly after another, until you see the removal of the veins that are farthest from the eye.
and beware that you do not blind the eye at the points of the spatumiles, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not omit more than those veins.
and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red color to corrupt what is morbidly swollen below.
And if you are not able to coil all that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to calm the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pain is calmed and assured against hot abscess, then recommence according to this method which is before, as long as it is healthy.
and it's the shape of the fractures:
The mirror is called "arissati" a fistula:
when you treat it with cautery and with ardant medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if it is engendered in it that you make an incision on the abscess, there where it must be softened, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take out all the instrument of which it is the shape;
and it is called "asper chief", and it should be made of iron indeed at the chief part, and should be pointed like a file as it is in the present shape:
And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that this corruption is removed;
and do this several times, then restore the place of effective medicines.
if the joints are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not recover and is not abscessed, and bad accidents happen, since he is healthy;
if this does not work, then there is no other technique than to bring the fistula back to the perforated nostril according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone for the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when they are discovered if they take the forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and the fistula should be attenuated until the head as you see here:
then place it on the bone of the armier, and stretch out your hand from the eye to the pouce, then turn the entire forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by that which comes in if he holds his hand on his nose;
and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh is born and endures the joints, thus goes the matter to the nail; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes open fully everywhere, and it does not come to disturb the nose, nor diminishment, so it is necessary that you read the patient.
then the vein, then put ventouses or heated iron without piercing to suck, then put on the eye a linen made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and apply a plaster made of bandages and drapery.
and the manner of the drapery is that you take drapery quite soft, and fold each in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes have need of.
Then hold back by means of a sturdy bandage above, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck out the infection without causing an ulcer.
Then remove the cupping glasses and hold the eye steady day and night, and if the veins are numb, it is necessary that you extract much.
Then remove the vein after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good.
If not. If you reapply the plaster and the bandages and the vein and the cupping glasses until it is healthy.
because of the tearing of the woven fabric When ruptures occur in the web-like membrane, then open, and come forth from papers as if it were grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
Then if you see the web-like membrane, the operations are such that you put a needle in the root of the affected part below, then put another needle where it has a double thread from the part of the arm. and have them pierced, and leave the first needle according to the disposition;
then thread the double filament and tie a part of the tube around, and hold it well, then extract the needle and put it on the other moistened eye in abundance of egg whites;
and let it be until the threads coagulate with the egg white, then heal the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy;
and often the wound is held back by the egg white, each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healthy.
And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if you pierce with a subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and correct the moist albuginean humor and descends to the eyes, and enters thereat once;
then extract until it is healthy.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not other than a swelling that gathers in the eye, resembling a vein descending, and it is not a real vein.
and the manner of the appearance of the swelling is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it so that you see the swelling come above to your eyes. then be steady, and do not descend or be disordered in the light, and see the patient's things as they are accustomed to.
and if it does not descend below, know that it is a vein, and the descents of the swelling are not apparent as we have said.
if you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and touch on the cornual web at the point where the conjunctiva continues with the cornual web and the crown, until the swelling subsides.
and when it is dislocated, then distill into the sharp warm water mixed with honey, or warm or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another treatment until it is healthy.
from the tears of the eye We have here the similarities of the sharp waters in the division, and that which it needs to pierce; if it works according to health.
It needs that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy oil firmly and strongly;
then put the paper of the oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right;
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right;
Then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a ray in that whitish part of the eye at the lower minor eyelid, then apply the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so it pierces into the whitish part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing.
and it is necessary that the measurement of the way of almagda be at the forefront of the measurement of the spaces which are from the prunelle up to the end of the blackness; and it is the crown of the eye;
you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the horn-like tissue, and then place the instrument next to where the water is, then press it down one way after another.
Here is the translation:
After resting a little, and if the water rises by the second way, place the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little;
and then put back into water a small piece of gemstone, and remove it from the eye within. Then put by default the eyes stupefied or soiled in oil rosat and in abundance of egg, and bind with the healthy eye.
We, and those who are of our tension, put on common broth with abundance of egg.
And if the almond eye cannot enter into the oil by its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which this is the form:
And pierce then the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deeply in, but make the subtle layer, then inject alum water, as we have said;
and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient the doorkeeper approaching, in which he sleeps on his back in the darkened room;
and be deprived of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day;
then disengage him from that darkened house, and test his vision, and make him see no things, and then put him back in the bandage until the seventh day;
and it is not suitable that you do this in the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate it, because the water mounts hastily.
because abscesses often come, that you delay the ointment before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess.
and when it is appeased, if you delay the dressing and put on his face an ointment to cover for some days, and be then in that darkened house.
And then exit from the house little by little, and it converts into its cases;
and know that no disciples should intervene in this case. And one came to us who was from the IRArch, who told us that in his country they made a certain almagda powder, which attracts water, but I never saw any of it in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see the way;
and be properly prepared: And the head is of gold in this same subtlety, and the handle in four angles alike.
No time is born or engendered various diverse characters, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet;
and if there is such that has an enhanced charm of fixed color, and if it has a soft charm of good color. In that gift of those charms which is soft and not enhanced, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;
In that gift of those charms which is soft and not enhanced, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and cast the onion at those charms, and pull out the fierce roots; then take what you have in your hands to support the subtle spatula on one side, as much as you know that this charm is entirely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be coped, open everything to the subtle and lightweight instruments, so that nothing remains. and without swelling above, or abscess burning, if you drain it as it should be done;
and if it's malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned away, then apply either oil or vinegar. If the oil does not work, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy;
and if moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is new flesh growing in the bone above, where the instruments cannot come to cut;
then it is necessary that you put a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and sew with our hands, and have between each stitch of space a doit or less; and place the patient's head at the end of the thread in his nose to purify, and draw it out odorous as it comes through the nose into the mouth;
and many times they do thus to the infant at birth, and it is a light thing for one who wants to do it;
then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them out one after the other while being gentle as we are with the thread.
Do this until you know that the nostrils have purified that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back into the nose as before;
Do this for three days or more, until the oils corrode all that remains of flesh;
and then put or apply a compress of pounded herbs for some days until it is healthy, and if it needs medicine treatment, use it;
and this is the shape of the instrument for cleansing the head, where they distill oils and medicines or apply them;
And whether of silver or copper, similar to an overturned lamp, like a candle, and the conduits thus;
and if you see, make a closed candle, and let the instruments be plain for cleansing the head;
and hold the handle to the head to keep it steady when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh over the nose
Many times a tumor grows on the head which is called "telul", and it increases and becomes large again, until it is visible to behold;
and therefore it is necessary that you cut them off at the beginning, and remove all the tissue, then apply the cautery or the burning medicine;
and if you delay in covering it until it is large, take warning if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sense:
do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, because when you cover it sometimes, great evil comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that it can be fully covered, then look at the patient and cover their sense with fear, and heal the place with dry and restraining things.
Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilaginous passages, it profits little, because in some homes.
It is necessary therefore that you take care of it when it has come to nothing, if you look at the wound whether it is fresh in all its blood. and then adjust the two lips to a seam, then heal until it is healthy;
and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their heart until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a seam, and restrain, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and burn incense; and put on the poultices a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it be until it sticks by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
The method of the bruise is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the bruise of the belly; or with a thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
Many men have inwardly had abscesses in their lips, similar to grains of vezes, and smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and split on each nut, and take them as pincers and cut into each part;
then apply the oil after the incision of vitriol broth, until the wound is stained;
and then apply the oil of iris, and heal the limb of dry things as long as it is healthy.
Many times a swelling appears on the gums which the old people call "albulus";
it is necessary that you hold it back with bandages, and cut to its root, and let the blood or fluid flow;
then apply on the limb a glassy paste, or other powders that restrain and dry;
and if that which returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return again after the cautery;
Sometimes they gather at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and often the teeth turn black and yellowish and decayed, so that the rot reaches the gums, and are the foul-smelling teeth;
it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and their head be in your lap, and take out the teeth or the scabs that appear, so that nothing remains; and thus make of the blackness and the greenish color, and of the yellowness and other stains, so that they be eradicated;
and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then start again from the second day and the third, until you have everything removed;
and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one extracts from the teeth have other forms than those that one extracts between the teeth; and these forms and others are prepared with you equipped.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of his pain that you delay to treat as much as you can, for this must not be done in a hurry. for it is a very high substance just up to then so that one has no excuse to rush.
Then when the patient is constrained from treating, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth that hurts. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and believes it is in a healthy tooth, and makes the good tooth decay. and never does the pain depart from him for that, as much as the bad one is extracted, because we have already wanted to do it to these healthy ones.
and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on every side, strongly to guard the gum from all parts.
then place your fingers or subtle pincers at the first little by little, so that it is well loosened, then firmly fix the pincers. and let the head of the patient be stable between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each part lightly, and remove it as you did previously.
And if the teeth are broken and worn away, it is necessary that you fill them with cloths, there where the holes are. and if you hold it subtly at the roots, so that it does not break while holding.
and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And you do well to be wary that you do not break it, and leave a part remaining, and reattach to the patient through the evil of the root, which causes greater pains than the first.
And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeon, who through their haste and hardness often break the instrument, and do not amend what we have related.
but often come instead through the examination of this great disease for the roots that they remove, or for the instrument that they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is decayed, if you wash the affected area with wine or with vinegar and with saliva;
and we stop the flow of blood that comes, which often happens, if you apply the area with powdered vitriol;
and if it does not help, then cauterize it.
The forms of instruments, where one must extract the teeth first, should be long and pointed and have large handles, so they do not slip when you pull the tooth;
and these are the forms: And they should be of large limbs so that they do not bend in the shaft, and they should be of well-made iron, and they should be held by muscles to keep steady.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the pulling, it is necessary that you place on the affected area cotton soaked in bitter wine I or II, as long as the gums are numb, then you apply the clamps called "algefri", from which the head seems to be like a beak of a swan;
and let them be made thus like a file and it is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and apply the instrument called "althali", that is to say a scalpel, of which this is the shape.
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break easily, and if its root goes up through this, it is good;
if not, then help with all the instruments, because of which the forms come here afterwards:
And if one helps with this instrument that has many grooves, from which comes the form: and other iron tools that are before in the arrangement of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large forceps, from which comes the form:
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of these dense instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted;
and the wise masters subtly find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument for the diversity of wounds; and it does not break at all in the cartilage or in other bones, or it becomes porous, if they seek those instruments that they need, which I have told you, and help with the gestures, from which this form is:
And let it be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but then it can hold and ostrute;
and then restore to the bone the suitable medications, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then take all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural course, and its shape is ugly, and especially in women with small mouths, then it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not born after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot make them straight or file:
then the root; and if it is attached with the tooth, then take this instrument which has the shape, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be of iron pointed in a hook:
And the instrument takes a little and little in the jaws for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, thus take the file of one part file as it is the form.
and it is also like the file with which one makes the needles;
and apply a gentle touch with thumb and finger slowly, so they do not move until it takes hold;
then apply a gentle pressure at the end without any raspiness, and if the teeth are too sharp and it bites the tongue, you must file the asperity until it is even, so it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When the front teeth are locked, whether by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on them so they chew, and you treat them with constricting medications, and that does not work;
you must restrain it with a golden thread, for the silver wire turns green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all;
and let the thin thread be not too large nor too small, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth;
and if you want to realign the teeth, take the thread and double strand between the two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you feel strongly just up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then recommence the covering just up to the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and strongly, until it does not move at all;
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then seize the heads of the thread with pincers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue;
and then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the threads break, hold it with another thread;
If it stays and serves thus all its tension, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the adjustment of the two healthy teeth, and of the two jaws, as you see.
And when the tooth falls out, if you reset it in its place, little by little, as we have said;
and do not interfere with it, for one is not skilled and suffers, and never makes the shape of a tooth of ivory, and puts it in its place where the defect is, and holds it steady as we have said, and it stays and serves thus long tension.
Never is it a natural bond that comes from under the tongue or naturally, which grows thus; or by accidental wound soothing;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue;
Then cut the nervous cord as wide, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it's a sudden injury, if you cut the uncinate and cut wide the cord.
and beware that the wound does not go too deep in front, because of the artery which is underneath;
and when you have done it, lift the lever of hot water and of hay, or of cold water, then put underneath the tongue a tent of linen;
and touch the patient's gum every night, so that the jaws cannot close.
And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the lever a glassy powdered vitriol; and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize it with a slow-cautery, which is good for that; then the treatment of another treatment until he is healthy,
and if you see a flesh-colored or black or hard spot, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer;
and if it declines to a blister, and there is moisture, so he applies an onion, and makes a subtle spatula, and delivers from one part and another; and if the blood does not come to your work, so put on a warm vitriol ointment until it is stained, then return to your work as much as you can draw out;
then lift the skin of the axle and of the seat, and the treatment of other treatments until he is healthy.
of abscesses of the throat Sometimes there come within the throat ulcers which are called "godath", and they are properly called the II abscesses, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, take heed:
If it is a hard abscess with little sensation and of foul color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of the flow of blood; but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will divide it, lest it break apart by itself;
and if it is of white color around, and the root is subtle, then have the instrument ready to cut, but first make sure the abscess has cooled down and is calm.
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be in your healthy hand, and hold their mouth and grasp the surgeon's hands between theirs, and press the tongue below all the instruments, so that it is in the correct position;
and let it be of silver or of subtle iron, just like our cautery instruments:
Can't you press the tongue against this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and fix it in the amber, and pull it out strongly above what you can;
and draw something from the tiles with, then match it to the instrument, because of its shape, which seems like a kind of force; and all ways the head is curved, and one end to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
And if you don't have this instrument at hand, then cover it with a bandage, because of its shape. And let it be cutting on one side, and named on the other side;
and when you have matched one of the embers, then match the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and hot and gentle, and if there is a flow of blood, then gargle the patient with hot water, or scorching pomegranate seeds that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is staunched; Then let the wound heal until it is healthy;
and often other abscesses do not grow in the throat besides the two glands, if they collect there just like the two glands adhere.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, it is to know the small abscess of little sense;
and it had almost closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was obstructed, and she couldn't eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like that for a day or two.
And the abscess was so elevated that it had almost put two threads through the two openings of the nose.
I hastened then, and made an incision in one of the tonsils, then the flux of blood flowed out, and a large portion of pus came with it.
then I made another incision in the other perforation of the nose, and I opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue;
After applying fire cautery to these abscesses, and cutting into a part of it, only a little blood comes out. and then the throat constrictions of the woman were relaxed, and now she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time.
and the abscesses grew back again, and filled the void that I had emptied, so much that it became very large.
then I tricked it and cauterized it within the throat: then I waited for a while without growing worse.
and I departed from those regions, and did not know what God would do about them after me.
of the eye
When the humors descend to the vein, and it is swollen and long, then it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is grossly swollen and round, it is called "uve".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, and you see that the painful abscess is alleviated, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cauterize it;
and the one that is round and assembled and is not long; and it is blood-red or of dark color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger to the patient.
It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, by its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before. then prick the onion in the eye, and draw it thus, and cauterize with one of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two handles.
And it is necessary that you do not remove more flesh than the excess which is beyond the natural terms;
for if you cut more, it grieves at the voice, and at the speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the II wounds, and cure until it is healthy.
And if the patient has fear about cutting, it is necessary that you use skill in the cautery of the senses for fear.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp and piercing. And it is that the patient puts their head in your healthy hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cauterization, and confirms with living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using the handling of this instrument, from which there is the form:
And have on the head a lock of hair or where one puts the medicine, like the stirrings of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the vein;
and the patient should be leaning on their side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth with the medicine inside, so it doesn't descend to the throat, and the blister;
then put your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the eye, the quantity of half an hour, until you see the nausea and the stingings of the medicine are appeased;
and if you see, take cotton and envelop it in some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument on all the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the eye;
and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and apply again after three or five days.
And if you have mastery of reapplying the cauterization of the medicine, reapply it, and after cauterizing the eye, clean around the eye with cotton wrapped in cloth, and remove what is around the medicine.
and let it be risen with cold water, and let it be cured of gagging as long as it is healthy.
This treatment is safer than incision, not that the cautery;
it is cured of fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it there, and make it boil;
and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and in the pot have an instrument that is arranged in this manner: And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be placed in the patient's mouth as long as the vapors rise to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified;
after the vapors cease, until the eye dries, and be careful that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of the hot abscess, for many things can happen; and do not make a more fierce fire than at the decline of an abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and place a small piece of egg white in the chief's mouth, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot. for the egg white does not let the hot vapors bother the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether for healing.
Many times one finds at the throat an os or a fish bone, or something else;
so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing clearly.
and what does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit thus, so that the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if they throw up the bitter thing through vomiting;
where the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and the sponge filament sticks to it, and then it is swallowed; and when it comes to the place, if it sticks, and then it will pass through;
and if it does not come out of what we have said, take the instrument of puncture according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high and lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest everything goes awry, and do not push the bone within;
and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows when the thing is bitter; If you cut below, or if you draw blood for all the instruments equally, as long as it is drawn.
from the hollow of the throat
No medicine is suitable for the patient, as I said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not benefit him, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, then press his tongue to the instrument that I told you.
And if you see the wound, if it draws to all small unevenness, or subtle tenaciousness that are worth it.
And if it's not worth it, take a twisted hair, and put it in the patient's throat, then put or remove the twisted hair with the hot iron, and make it breathe. And if you touch the patient's water all day.
then take a full view of the water of cold agua, and open the mouth, and let it glide in sensing, and move it to his hand often; and if the patient soon feels the water, he recovers.
And if he does not recover as we have said, then fumigate the patient with assafetida at the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the urine.
Do this many times, for it will fall beneath less pressure.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot or it has visible coals, and let it be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in this pierced one is the head of the instrument;
then you throw in the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to the saneness;
and the saneness will fall now, and if it does not fall, then recommence the fumigation many times;
and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water;
and then the liver is treated so that it is strengthened by this government.
And the shape of the instrument is where one treats the blood, if it is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs for entering into the throat; and has resemblance to a beak of a sign, and it has roughness of a file, if what it takes, it cannot release;
Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size;
and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own resemblance, and because of what it holds moisture.
And the second method is through the eyes where they are at the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the body are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the bowel is tender according to its accomplishment;
and if there are such that one must pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are on the joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets them be until they are ripe inside, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Where the abscess is on the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it becomes ripe, then it will not hurt the principal member.
where it is at the foundation, if you pierce it in this way so that it becomes ripe;
and it is not suitable for you to pierce an abscess without complete digestion, unless it is at the foundation, so that it does not putrefy within, and becomes long and narrow, and an fistula forms; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the soft debate and adjustment of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and it is necessary that you make a seat for the perforation or more dependent on the boil, and where it opens muscles;
and let the perforation be far from the long course of the body, and if the boils are on the hands or feet, or in joints and veins and arteries, and in all equal parts where there is no obstruction. In these cases where they complain, according to the condition of that member.
And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is necessary that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you make a hole in front of that, it will be lengthwise along the body from his vein, and it is full of much foul matter; and perhaps they harden the lips and the deep wounds of him.
And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need.
And it is necessary that you bring together small boils, small perforations; and in large boils, large perforations, and many divisions according to the likeness of the greatness of the boil;
and if there are such boils where it is necessary to shave the head, and cover; when it has thus come to pass like I envelop, and is numbed, so one must do thus as one does for bruises:
and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are those that one covers thus like the leaf of myrtle, thus like abscesses of the loins;
and if there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Those who have no head, thus like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce them, so do not drain all the pus at that hour, but drain a part of it; then staunch the abscess up to the next day, then do not drain anything there afterwards; Do this often, many times a day, so that the wound heals entirely;
especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men in decline. Because the desperate often die suddenly with the issue of the bowel, which by chance kills the patient, and you do not perceive it.
Examine therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, examine the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain ulcer, apply a dressing made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it is necessary that you put a dressing on each one so that they do not touch each other;
and if you have caught in the abscess a piece of soft skin, and you have shaved around it, it is necessary that you fill it with much cotton or dressing of linen threads without moisture, and leave it just until the third day;
Then the bone, and the treatment of the joint so it becomes healthy.
And if you remove blood that has accumulated in your work, if you apply a cold and easy treatment, and wrap it with a cloth, and put a soothing ointment on the affected area many times.
And if the blood persists stubbornly, it is necessary to govern and treat it with the powders I mentioned in my book, and if it's a matter of winter, and the nervousness of the joints or abscesses is very great, then you should apply warm tents and soft drapings soaked in wine and hot oil.
and if it's in summer, and the joints are weak, then you should apply soft drapings soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
and then dissolve the abscess and the swelling and treat it, as it is necessary, so that it becomes healthy.
And it is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses:
where you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
Where the skin of the head becomes small abscesses, and there are ways for us that are in tiles, just like the joinery of a joint, and many have similarities.
There are some fatty ones and such that have moisture as well as pus;
and if there are some that are hard and piercing to the cutter, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
And the operations of the cutting are that you test all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", because the form comes from this, whatever it contains.
For if it contains moisture, one feels it by putting above the hollow of the loin.
And when the moisture is evacuated, one clears away everything leaving no skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing.
then insert cotton in Egyptian unguent, if it is present; if not, in water and in wine, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; and that will corrode what has remained of the pus.
And then reinsert the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains of the pus.
Then cure the wound of puncture at the suitable time, so it may be healthy.
And if the abscesses hold in a thick nut, then scrape according to this form, from afar off; and you cut the onions, and scrub the entire surface, and apply all your cures to draw forth the humor from the spot where it lies;
and if the artery does the opposite, then do what I have told you afterwards.
And thus do with the abscess if it is piercing, and from cutting and from curing as I have told you.
And cut into the piercing abscess and the moist one, it is less serious, for they are of little blood. And if there are none of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and it was an abscess that I touched on the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess as hard as a dry stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if one had touched any of them, one would have done as much harm as from a stone.
In other apostemes coming to the head, because those that come to the head of children and roots of the ears, one should open so it be entirely dependent on the top, in order to issue the bowel;
and the treatment if it is necessary.
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and beneath the shoulder blades, and in the loins, and sometimes they come to other parts or limbs, and are many, and are entangled one with another.
And each scrofula is properly in its side, as the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scrofulas are many.
and the similarities of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
in that one then which you see of good disposition in the touch, and is similar to the color of the body, and changes in each part and is not at all hard as the veins of the neck nor in the artery, and is not deep;
if it is necessary that you cut through from above, and scrape the skin of each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart as oncines, if you are in need of it, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and prick little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not let the scalpel slip, lest it cuts, and do not cut too far ahead, so you do not touch what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop bleeding, then put into the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound. and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound becomes soft, and begins to pus.
And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, until you complete it.
then seek with your finger if there remain small scraps, if you cut and mend them.
And if there is in the root of the vein a large vein, it is not necessary that you cut that vein at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall by itself, without harm.
then apply the old cotton wool dressing in an Egyptian application, then the treatment.
And if you cut out the entire abscess, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no more superfluity due to the greatness of the abscess. it is necessary that you understand how to cope with the root of it, and draw out the pus, and sew it up as we have said.
it is necessary that you understand how to cope with the root of it, and draw out the pus, and sew it up as we have said. Those scrophulae that hold a surplus, pierce where it appears to me;
and pierce thus as that mentioned beforehand, depending on it, then I will treat the tendons with dressing and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains from the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then the treatment with dressing gives a pleasant warmth, as long as it is healthy.
The old ones said and spoke of the cutting into the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the scripture of their words.
For those who have a squint, it is necessary that the crack in the throat called "epiglottis" be examined; and one must not help with that, because all the veins and the forearm of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the loins.
When the disease is in the channel of the purging, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent the destruction that comes from the strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it beneath three circles or four a small traverse cut between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the siphac, not in the cartilage.
and if it is consonant to the section of the epiglottis that there is no spot of flesh, and the vessels are long enough to inquire.
And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire tonsil, then cut the cartilage as far as it reaches the uvula. and clear the blood vessels, if you do not see anything, and then cut the siphac, as we have said.
and it is shown by the section of the two veins of the shin where they burst forth by the limb that is broken, and by the defect of the voice;
and let the wound open a part.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the whole heart, and sew everything beneath the cartilage;
then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Avoid doing this just as much as the throat is entirely stuffed, and the patient is judged to death, and the default lacks the wing. Then cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is protected from death;
and for this reason the old man commands to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it will pass in three days or four; And then they command to cauterize the wound and cure, until it is cured.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took the cautery, and she applied it to her throat, and burned part of the sinews of her arm;
and I was called by the surgeon, and I found her almost dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not been properly covered, nor did a vein lead to the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until she was healthy;
and I did not have against the young woman except that her voice was hoarse, and she recovered afterwards to her usual state;
because I thought that in the cutting of the epiglottis there was no danger.
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the colour of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natures, and accidents;
where there is no natural obstacle.
And the accident is according to two manners, one of which appears as a thick swelling to us, and the other manner appears as an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not seem to be working with fiery strength except in the small area, and it tries and searches everywhere for the internal obstruction: if you find it thus as I do not find a thick swelling, nor does it penetrate to any vein, if it is a cope, if one copes the nous, and draws out all its filth, if there is none; and search well everywhere, and heal it as it is fitting, until it be perfectly healthy.
There are many kinds of nous, which I will describe all the similarities;
and thus it appears that I die from all the difference that is between not and issue.
I say that issue is heat and fever holding, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it accomplishes the purification; then replace the fever and the heat.
With the noontide there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the syrup, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus as a jaundice, and becomes thick;
and they are according to the second similarities, whether gray, or moist, and many colors are thus as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth [remedy], that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring into the abscesses of our noumen is that you take or make more moist the place where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you feel that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the greatness of the abscess.
Then extract the entromesis, and take heed of this, that it will burst forth suddenly.
If the moist humor flows, whatever its color may be, thus they make them as I have said about other abscesses;
and after the entromesis, if moist humor does not come, know that it is thick, thus they make a cross-shaped incision, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and examine the seam where it lies, so you may treat it healthily with the nouement;
and if you cannot treat it healthily, then treat it by pieces so that nothing remains.
For if something remains, it returns to us many times;
and if it remains a little, and the wound does not grieve you, then fill the wound with certain corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and apply soothing things to the hot abscess, and heal with other cures until it is healthy;
and it is great to us, if you cut the two lips of the wound, and the cure of those who cause char.
and it is good to apply a dressing of vitriol ointment, and leave it two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterizing what was deadened from the tumor.
Behold here the forms of inward-turned instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, for encircling the abscesses of a fistula;
and they are like the needles whose points one burns to make them yellow, and they are of citrus iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more experienced in inserting the cores of fistulas;
and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
The forms of the cauteries are very similar, as you see here:
and there are cauteries that have two cores of three kinds also;
and there are cauteries that have three cores, and they are also of three kinds;
and there are cauteries that have two cores, and cauteries with only one core, and they are of three kinds;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these is sharp to those who make them, and of such there are some that do not cut except from one side, whence we scrape the nails, because one does not touch the vein nor the nerve;
and of these instruments are the lancets put in handles, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and moderate, as you see;
and we do not use them more than in the flesh of calves, as with legs, and arms, and limbs, and in similar places;
and sometimes we make another small instrument, resembling the scrapers of fists, according to this form, with which one stains blood; and set it at no time on the joint that heals by joining of veins, and as arteries, and no time is found according to this great form:
Never inflame the limbs of certain men when they begin to be corrupted, as much as they seem to be feminine;
and they remain lazy and inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, if it is necessary to follow this form of this line, from b to g: then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicine by charming the wound, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and treat until it is healthy;
and the limb becomes weak and feeble, and is amazed by its greatness as if it were a woman's, if it is placed in two pairs of ribs above, through two similar fissures; because one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g; Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and prepare what we have said about dressings and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, so that it may be healthy.
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the deterioration of blood, it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. and let it be until it eats away the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healthy.
These abscesses that come from under the seats are kinds of hard scrofulas or they have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Those who hold moisture must be treated according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: And when the entire abscess is empty, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and heal by applying ointment to make it healthy.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, do as we have said for wounds of scrofula, and if the wound is open, apply cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is damaged, and the skin that is above it becomes swollen, then often abscesses occur, and similarly it happens to the inflamed and abscessed vein.
and if one recognizes thus that it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel an imbalance;
and when it is because of the vein, it seems that the veins are deficiently appearing;
and it is folly to touch this abscess, and likewise when it is under the arms and in the angles and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and he who is at the head must choose also, and in he who is inflated with artery wind make above the skin of the loin;
then open the size of the incisions, and beautifully separate the artery from the tiles, until it is discovered;
then put beneath it a needle, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then prick the spot which is between the two lines of an intro-missive so that the blood flows out, and be free from the abscess.
then administer the treatment that starts to swell, so that the swelling subsides; then heal the wound of the joint, arriving at it, so that it be healthy;
and if the abscess is by the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess from all the skin, then push the needle beneath the spot that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side. then lay on the abscess, as I have told you, or the swelling of one of the two parts as two heads of a double thread.
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then you reinsert another needle under the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three places;
then cut into the abscess until the superfluid comes out, then cut into the superfluity of the tumor and let go what is tied;
then put on a dressing made of millet in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
Also, as abscesses come into the artery and into the vein, they come to be abscesses as nerves when they are irritated, or by too great effort, and similar things.
And it happens more often in the joints and the two toes where there are joints, and this is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body, but beneath the skin;
and it must be well aligned on all parts, and does not go ahead or back, nor above nor below, and the one that is in joints should not be touched by iron: perhaps they will encounter contraction; and those who are at the head or forehead, make the skin on the spatula-like.
and those who are at the head or forehead, make the skin on the spatula-like. If the abscess is small, then hold it with a tight grip, and cut into its root;
and if it is large, then suspend it from the anvil, and scrape, then bone and assemble the wound to the suture, and cure until it be healthy.
It often happens in the belly and not another part of the body, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by the resemblance to mushrooms, and has subtle roots, and large lumps.
and there are some small and very large ones;
and I saw that there was a man who had it II or wind in his belly which were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had little roots, and they were split apart, and they immediately corroded from moisture.
I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces heavy, and the other 6, and the work of the incision shows that if you examine the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is pale and moist with subtle roots; if you cut into the spatula-shaped instrument, and thus they are in your presence the fire cautery.
if you cut into the spatula-shaped instrument, and thus they are in your presence the fire cautery. For when the surgeon often encounters too great a flow of blood, and if the senses fail you, then hasten to give a cautery.
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the iron, take a well-made thread, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days.
and then hold back, and do not cease from holding back the flow of pus until it touches the joint, and divide it by means of skillful work;
and if the roots are thick, so to avoid cutting into the belly, but you can well cut most of it, then cauterize so it does not return;
then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cut into the tissue that is of faulty colour and poor sensation and weak regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted abscess later on.
when the swelling is full If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or fracture of the syphac, and it is on the belly and in some of the buttons, as it happens in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of windiness;
and if it is by the rupture of the syphac and by the outlet of the belly, then the colour of the abscess is similar to the colour of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various outlets. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it swells up, and then returns, and perhaps by chance it is severe, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it's a light thing, and it appears clearly when you press on it with your hand, it doesn't resist at all.
And if it is due to blood, it appears by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity. And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are such that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are such that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. It must be that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to stretch out his intestine, and be straightened entirely, then sign from the inside all around the bowel. Then instruct him to sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the place where you signed to the entire spatium, then stretch half of the abscess above to the entire great groin. Then bind it with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and thus we will give the patient absolute comfort.
Then open most of the abscess that is extended on the thread, and you should indicate with your finger, and examine the intestine. If you find the true threads taken from the thread, if it dissolves, and examines the intestine at the bottom of the belly.
And if you find the bowel, if it takes on the groin, and cuts away the redundancy.
And if the artery does contrary, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take two needles, and you should thread two strong threads, and thread the two needles into what you have done in a cross so that you make them pierce.
Then stretch the abscess into four layers on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it will take, and kill the dead flesh by itself. where you hold the cup when it is subtly warmed and purified, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave around the abscess as we have said;
where you hold the cup when it is subtly warmed and purified, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave around the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb of what needs to be treated, and sew up the limb.
swollen tumor We have spoken in the division about the similarities of cancer, and how one must operate with medicines, and how one must avoid the treatment with iron.
and we say that cancer takes root in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in the limb or where one can reach it if it is like cancer which is in the breasts, and in the hips, and in similar places, and one must remove all of it when it is at the beginning.
I have seen none of them heal before me.
And the works, when it is in place or where you can open it, as we have said, is that you cleanse the patient of black bile.
then make him healthier if he has shown fullness, then prepare the patient in a good place to do the work;
then cut your incisions or gangrene, and shave all parts, and bone all parts without leaving anything.
and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or anything, and if the flowing blood makes you counter against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding is stanched. then heal with another healing as long as it is healthy.
of dropsy We have already said in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
and one must not touch with iron in these two similarities: it is to know, tympany and hypochondria, for it is mortal things;
then when you treat this symptom of dropsy which is called "inflamed" from treatments, and the cure does not benefit, if you see that the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as a tumor and solution of belly and similar things; if one must not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient has strong virtue, and they have no other illness besides dropsy only, and it is not too young nor too old, then you must work thus: raise the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the belly at the navel, bending the water to the lowest part of the pis, then take the spatula-like spine according to this form: And let there be two incisions. At a point, and in no way should it be so introduced that it can come just up to the intestine when one thrusts it in, and it cannot be blocked.
Then look if the dropsy is turning towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision above the swelling, three fingers' width directly above the navel; and if the dropsy is due to the liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the swelling, three fingers' width;
and if it is due to the spleen, then make it on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient's gaze falls upon the incision, lest the superfluous fluids run to that weak spot;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the swelling, and lift your hand to the entire spatium between the skin and the fascia, just as in scraping out the quantity of an ounce or an eighth;
Then prick the sharp point as far as the spatula comes to the empty space, and it is the level of the water, then draw it back, and it pushes this instrument from which it is the shape. And it resembles a subtle silver tube, and it is of copper or lighter arching, and has a small hole at the bottom. and where it is shaped on one side, three holes; and two on another side, and one on the other;
and it is the head cut like a pen, and it is the shape of the incision where the writers sharpen the pen:
at the top above is the scalpel, so that when the instruments come to the water, they descend now onto the instrument;
empty it then by half or a third part, because if you empty more than it needs at that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the relaxation of his spirit of the arm, or he falls into a swoon, or he approaches death;
but according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the dispositions of the strength of the patient signify, and his pulses;
then draw the instrument and hold the water, and it is held back now by the heart which stops up the passage that is on the skin, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
then reinsert the instrument the other way, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw water in a small quantity;
do it no way, and guard yourself from flowing too much but only a little water.
And if you doubt on the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the grave or sandy heat, and by very sweet or bath and in the sun, and abstain from drinking. and the care of drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and to cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
No time is born a child who does not have holes in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
If you want to pierce them so that they do not have to perceive everything in the very subtle spatium, according to this form:
then put or pierce with a subtle instrument, and tie it up and hold it thus for three days or four, and when he wants to make urine, let the closure be opened, and make him urinate, and then replace it.
and by chance, you will not find a problem, because the urine that comes forth does not let it close.
The place where the perforation is small, if it is medicated with a thick cloth of wool, as we have said, so it will enlarge.
Those who do not have the penis in their place are blighted, because none are born with the penis at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before they lift their rod up high. and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come up to the marrow, and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, then the head of the rod and the handle are equally sized like the width of a penny, so that the perforating instrument is in the middle, as it should be.
and beware of the flow of blood that comes often, and if it happens, then stop what is bleeding blood, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
blisters of the penis Many times the abscess bursts on the rod, and there is an appearance of ugly flesh;
and in it there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
it is necessary that you take them to the subtle anointed one, and handle all the parts, then place on cotton cloth in Egyptian ointment; then heal with diafinicon ointment until it is healthy.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you must apply fire cautery to it.
When you have taken hold of it, and the white swelling is in a state of numbness, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary to remove the white swelling that is inside first. and when it is sucked, then heal what is outside.
For when you cure it together, then the swelling of the limb is not assured that it may not be perceived, and blackening and corruption come to its limb and in that place.
then it is necessary to remove all that which is black and corrupt, then place on the plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the scorched skin of grenate pomegranates and of veal, then cure with other cures until it be healthy.
And if a flow of blood comes, then apply the lunar cautery in this form:
The cauterizations thus aid in two dispositions together: it is to know, at the deterioration of blood, and to the corruption;
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you apply a tube of plum to the penis, and inject the patient with;
and when the skin is torn around the head of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it happens from a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a blunt instrument, so that the threads are disentangled and the head of the penis is freed on all sides;
and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a spatula-like instrument around the head of the penis and the skin;
then separate it gently between the two, and I put a subtle layer of a cold ointment on the millstone, so that it does not become inflamed again.
Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity as with other wounds; In every way when we make this work of our will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for health.
I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of my masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around the thigh, and with force, and all at once;
if the skin is cut because there are two layers, and by chance if one cuts on that above and delays that below. Then the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the healing which is two days hence it is not assured of the point of the limb;
and in the healing of the ankle by chance the iron slips, and corrodes the work, and many times it grows so that they have no need of healing and I have seen it.
From the mending which is done with forces all the way to the thread of wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, if you cut equally throughout, you feel it all tense; but the thread should be well stretched around the skin;
and the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you do not force it to tie the thread around the penis too tightly, and then you make it move in all the ways that you can;
then you make it stand between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then put your hand on the penis and blow or touch, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is in; then clean well the ordure that is assembled there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below one pox to another ligament;
then clean well the ordure that is assembled there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below one pox to another ligament; and you will hold it by the second finger on the pouch and on the index finger, and grasp between the two ligaments, then lift the cortex above hastily and draw the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the remedy; and put powder on it and on the powder I drizzle glue made from a half-cooked egg white, mixed with rose oil, good and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat with another treatment until he is healthy.
The shape of the bandages for the mundification is this:
the two heads should be tender and piercing, and the heads should be as large as the equal joint of the hand:
The mistake in the mundification is when the heart within goes to the incision;
then it is necessary that you stretch out to your finger, thus so that the humors make an abscess;
and equal balance, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, so hold it with a bandage, and then balance it.
And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, so let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and scrape off lightly;
if you balance it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm it at all.
Heal then the limb of sudden wounds with powder, which we have said or treatise on powders, and if you balance double the measure of the outer, and it goes above, it will not harm at all.
Heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
due to retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction of the kidney, or of congealed blood, or of a blow, or of a new wound, or of similar things, which we have spoken of in the division.
and if the urine does not flow, and you see that the retention is due to the kidney which is hurt or compressed at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and they should place their feet on the back, and stretch out their belly from the upper part above the back, and the patient should strain to relieve himself as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the kidney above, because of which the urine flows;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction with all the instruments which are called "syringe", of which this is the form:
and let it be of subtle silver threads light as a bird's feather; and let it be the length of a palm and a half, and subtly at the head.
And the method of extracting the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head with a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe;
and cut the excess of the wool and insert it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist olive oil and water;
then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod downwards towards the bowel;
Then apply the syringe before it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it reaching the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order because of that which conducts or leads it astray.
Then stretch the thread to the entire lane little by little, and the urine follows the lane, then it strays outside, and makes the urine flow.
and continue with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and relieve the patient.
When blood or pus comes into the vein, where putrefaction is assembled, and you have seen to distill sharp points and medicines, if you make all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has three punctures: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the veins are chosen because the short medicine is such that it stops well the erect penis without addition, if one can then draw out the moisture, and apply as much as necessary;
and when you see that your medicines are in the bladder, put the head of the syringe into the moisture, and pull out the treating instrument which is inside;
If you draw moisture to the joint, and then strongly rebend the drawing thread; if you enter the moisture there, and it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and it is the subtle form of the catheter by which one catheterizes the bladder:
And it is of silver or of copper, and it is the head higher;
and below at the seat or the chains fall;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it that you want to catheterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts in the form of a twisted double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
then put the head of the catheter in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming at once, until the patient feels that this moisture has just arrived at the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle on it, and pierce it around entirely. then insert the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a beam, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument;
and do as if you had done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have previously stated in the division the methods of piercing, and the extraction of assembled medicines;
and we have said the difference between the piercing in January as reins, and all the signs, and in what piercing one should operate by size; and in the bladder, and in the rod;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder if it often happens to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similarly to water in its subtlety;
and it appears here and there, and rubs the patient's rod, and it bites many times, and then becomes stiff; and at much of these jumps the foundations;
and it is easy the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is much grievous in old people, and it is as gentle moisture, to those who are between youth and old age;
and it is the cure easier for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient with a clyster, in order to expel all the bad humors that are in the intestines. For it often hinders one from questioning the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and make them lean forward and move downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and jumps out several times from the high place;
then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands are beneath his thighs, so that the vessel is entirely declining downward;
then the vein and touch inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall to the toucher of the whole, then anoint your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your left finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and thrust it into its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then anoint the neck of the vessel;
then press on with your finger, and thrust it to the depth where you want to cut.
And instruct the minister to press the vessel with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand hold the skin which is beneath the loins in the part where the cutting is done;
Then I apply the spatula, which is the shape: And make an incision between what is between the hip and the perineum, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh;
and be straight on the stone, and the two should be equally or at the foundation, and the cut of the traversing tree should be wide enough to pass through, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
by chance the press if the two that are at the foundation, so that they burst forth without effort;
and know that there is a part of the stone where it has angles and margins: if it is difficult to remove;
and if there is a part that is underneath, similar to a pebble, and rounded, whose removal is easy.
Where there are angles and margins, make the cut larger;
and if it does not jump, then you must stretch on the tendons which are like a thread at the head of the bone, to strongly stretch the stone so that it doesn't escape; where you apply underneath the subtle curved instrument at the head;
and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small hole, and if the sense is disturbed, then stretch with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, then apply the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it out forcibly, and the small ones afterwards if there are many.
And if it is very large, it needs to be operated on, and to make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: where he dies, or the urine comes back immediately because the bladder cannot hold it;
but you must exert yourself to treat, or to remove the tendons, so much that you treat them by pieces;
and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put it on with a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or with oil and warm rose water and cold froid water, to soothe the hot abscess; then restore the patient to their bed, and do not dislodge the bandage just until the third day.
And when you loosen it, rub very well the joint with oil and water, then apply the ointment of diyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healthy.
And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by that which holds back the urine, which is known in such a way that without passing with the urine: put forth your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy;
Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of serum, and aid it in all the ways that you know, so that it may be healthy.
and it is necessary that all the openings that you cure, that you tie the two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the wound.
And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; if the cure of what I say thus, that you often cut away, is an excuse for the cutting away by this cure. I have already proved it thus.
Take a rod of iron in this form and it is fixed at three angles in the thigh.
then take the thread and tie it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
then push the iron into the rod gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron in your hand on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
If the urine comes immediately, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone which is within the penis. If it is immediately broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this because of anything that is defective, if you fill the space beneath the stone and another above, then make the penis in the place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract it out, and release the ligament, and clear away the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat until he is healthy.
of the stones of women
It rarely happens that a stone is in the genitals of women, and if it happens at all, the treatment is grievous, and is defended against by three things:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman well acquainted who uncovers her mirrors, especially when she is pregnant.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well acquainted in this hand craft;
and the fourth manner is that the skin of the woman is more in the forefront than the skin of the man, because it conceals doing deeper cutting, and there is great fear. And if you need to sew it up, then you must take a wise woman well acquainted, and prick the place on, and if you don't find one, at least ask for a subtle mirror.
and the present is a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the craft, and she instructs that she do what you command her to do from the examination of the skin; and look very well if the woman is a virgin:
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to thrust his finger or foundation and seek the stone;
and if it is found, if it is stuck under his finger, and recommend that she thrusts her finger or with the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder firmly.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gently from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh;
then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft flesh, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger on the stone or below, and let it be cut at the first small size;
and do not move her finger on the stone or below, and let it be cut at the first small size; then thrust the razor in the incision, if you feel the stone if it increases the wound so that the stone can be extracted further, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
It is to know, small and large and thin and swollen, long and round, and which have roots.
you examine the symptoms to know the issue.
And if the wound does not heal, then apply to the vivid broth a poultice, and hold it in place for an hour until the wound is cleansed.
then return to your work, until the stone is broken, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as tools for you to help in your operation.
and if the wound does not heal, and it is of the artery that is cut, then apply powder on the wound and hold with tourniquets and bandages, and do not restart this, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient may die. then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the veins are purified, then return to your work, until the stone is loose.
Rheum is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white flux, which is beneath the skin of the loins, that contains the egg.
and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly on the web of the egg, if one believes that it is another eye; and it's the skin of the conjoined twin between the white "syfac" that we have mentioned;
and they did not have a small pouch. And the generation of this limb is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
And sometimes it comes from a blow on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: where it is declining into a yellowish color, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and this happens more;
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is or white "syfac" that we have mentioned, then it's the swollen abscesses, a little long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own web, then it's the swollen abscesses with part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white membrane, then it feels very good;
then when you want to know the color of the moisture, it is tested by the entire introspection, because its form is thus before. According to what comes after the inner quarter, judge of what is inside.
And when we cure with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
then he places himself on his back, on a somewhat high thing, and puts many wraps of cloth under him;
then he sits on his left, and instructs the minister to sit on his right, and stretches the rod to one of the two rib bones near the joints;
then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just up to the nail, and make the incision entirely straight in dividing the skin of the joints up to the white membrane, and scrape subtly according to his power;
Then prick the swollen siphac plain with a large perforator, and extract all the water, and then put your onguines, and it is the siphac above;
and do not touch the core of the joints, but only the siphac suffers; take all or in pieces the subtle part of his costal, that if you do not take it very wisely, the water will return;
and if the egg (vein) bursts for a tonsil, if you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the siphac;
then assemble the two leaves of the core of the joints to a crust, then cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the vein corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you ligate the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood.
Then cauterize the entire affected area, and extract the humor, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cauterize the other part just as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a soft linen cloth anointed with rose oil;
then cauterize the other part just as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a soft linen cloth anointed with rose oil; and put on top another soft linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, and put over the two joints, and put above double layers of cloth, and bind it all together with a bandage that is according to this form;
Then take two cloths, and fill them with linen fragments according to this likeness, and assemble them by sewing along the throat of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just up to the back, and the other at the part of the thigh;
and the other two fingers on the two angels, and let the entire assembly of the restraint be in the loop of the arm;
and no time is it medicated with this remedy of cautery in the size of iron, and it is that you grasp the subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the thighs, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syphilis which contains the water is discovered;
if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that syphilis as onyx, and burn it with this subtle cautery hot iron:
And cut in all the ways that you can, until you extract everything;
and be careful that the iron does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more salvatory; and beware of the deterioration of blood, and dread the operations of size;
and if there is no thing that does against you, whether an abscess or a break in the blood or something else, if you cure what does against you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to attend to this work due to its horror, if you make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the water is there, then seat the patient on a raised seat; then prick the abscess in the part beneath all the spatula, and put the perforation at the length of two fingers from the body;
and let the wounds be wide, so that all the water flows out;
then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remainder of the water flow out, then cure it until the wound is healthy;
and you should not let the white cloth issue forth the water in the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you apply a pen or instrument with which one treats the water of the hydropic, whose form is thus before;
and enlarge the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or within a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will spend their days.
Know that in the treatment of this disease there is fear in many dispositions, because it seems to me that few are worth leaving;
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to a crisis, and meanwhile are like boils; and it is in most cases.
It is to know by excessive inflammation and fever, which spreads to the joints, or from a blow;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find a point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance it is a grievous abscess, painful and piercing, and of bad color, and sometimes it comes from a blow on an artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
When it is from a blow on an artery, it is recognized by the warm disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it does not seem to you that you touched it.
That which is made from inflammation of a vein is recognized by its disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers, and one can well make an estimate about it based on this similarity, and on other symptoms. and it is that you cut the cord of the joints, then place the egg white above, and rub the dough fiercely with a white cloth, and release the suspension from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already mixed with these new charms, then it is necessary that you extract the egg, and cut the cord.
and if it is stuck to the cloth, or in that which is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all that tension, and cut around completely.
And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is behind, then it is necessary that you cut it all, and withdraw the vein, as we have said.
And when the operations are completed, then apply the plaster of boiled linseed oil and wine, then heal with other treatments until it is healthy.
These are abscesses wrapped in a wrapping resembling a finger stall, with the softening of the joints, and the patient's grievance increases greatly when it worsens.
and the treatment of this illness is very similar to that which was before, and always we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high seat, then put the suspensory of the joints below your fingers, to all the vessels that are near the edge, and touch the masters, and stretch them out forcefully;
then cut with a sharp spatula widely through the place where the vessels are, until they are uncovered, and then scrape away from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then insert a needle with a double thread, and tie it to the first vein where the blood flow has come, and then tie it again to the other vein; then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted humors;
then heal the wound as with others or by putting a bandage, so that no vessel is injured that does not nourish one of the joints;
because through this there comes no harm, and if all the veins are seen, then it is necessary to treat all the joints; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the veins, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
The happenings of this vein are through the section that comes out or goes back in, or the extension into the belly in the part of the gutters, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the joints;
and this routing is either downwards or back in, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes:
or from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a heavy weight, and from similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension downwards, are that it happens little by little, in long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is equal abscesses just as far as the peritoneum, because the systolic pressure presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is a section of the syrup, which causes sudden onset of pain, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and this is due to the issue from the intestine and the body being weakened by the syrup.
And sometimes it descends beneath the circles with the intestine, and is retained inwardly, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments to fear, because they think they will escape it.
And the manner of the surgery is that you instruct the patient to reintroduce the intestine into their hand within the wound, if they can re-enter. then be supported on their neck between your hands, and lift the hips;
then stretch out the cord above, and sew up all the skin of the conjoined long wound; then put inside the leaves of the waist uncinated according to what you have need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth;
then scrape off the systolic pressure that is beneath the skin of the conjoined wound, until the hard systolic pressure is uncovered on all parts;
then put your right index finger into what follows the wound, into what is between the white systolic pressure that is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second systolic pressure, and separate what is behind the vein, and between the second systolic pressure;
and then put the cotton on the right hand within the circle of the joints, and hold the white cloth above at your left hand, and lift the cotton to all the joints around the waist; and instruct the assistant to stretch the cotton upwards, and release what is behind the joint;
and seek with your fingers if there is a point of the intestine wrapped or hard white cloth, and if you do not find anything, then thrust it into the belly below;
then take a needle where there is a large thread made of X threads, and thrust it into the back part of the joint's cloth, which is behind the skin of the joints; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the cloth, which we have said is behind the skin of the joints, with a strong bond of two parts; Then envelop the heads of the veins, and bind them firmly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter there, lest an abscess forms there. and put the ligature according to the first ligature, a long way from that one, and after these two ligatures allow the surplus to flow which is below the heart of the joints, the greatness of a finger. and afterwards all the others according to the roundness that the egg produces;
then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the joints, as long as the saneness corrects, and the swelling, as we have said before.
then grind the millstone in oil, and put it in wounds, and I grind the ligature that we have spoken of. And at no time is the white skin cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of blood deterioration. For this happens many times, and leaves the ligature until it holds through itself.
and if it delays at the wound, so be it raised with warm water, and put on it what we have said, until it heals.
then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshy hernia
In this case I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is done as the branch which is near the vein, in such a way that you tie the veins, after cutting lightly underneath.
then cut into the middle, and treat the abscess with what opens, until the veins are cleared.
and heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and opens the abscesses.
and do not descend into the intestines to the intestines, and if it descends, it is little, and repair all hours.
and always if it remains too long at this point, so the wound or ulcer suppurates, as much as the intestine descends;
and this happens through the extension of the ulcer that is at the angles, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then becomes softened and inflames the eyes and opens;
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before;
and it is never cured by iron in this manner: and it is that the patient places his back between your hands, then takes the limb of the affected part inflamed from the large wound according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the ulcer that is beneath the skin where it attaches, then take the branch and put it on the limb appearing from the ulcer;
and press at the deepest part of the belly, then cut the two limbs appearing from the ulcer on the head of the branch, and cut one and the other;
Then extract the head of the vein, and do not cover the point from which it emerges, nor does it stretch to another thing, just as I have made you understand in the treatment of the inflammation of the intestines; Then heal by healing the wounds.
Then heal by healing the wounds. And when you cut the threads, if it is undamaged and cures the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
The blood flow is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterizations are moved to this place, and closer to health.
of the softening of the skin of the thighs
Many times are softened the skins of the hips in some men, because the flesh that is within them is softened, and it is easy to see;
and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, that one makes the patient sit on his back, and covers the skin that is softened with natural skin;
then bring the two lips together at a seam, and if you see, first remove the excess of the softened skin at three seams or four firmly;
then cover between the seams, and heal it like the other wounds, until it is healthy, and sew the seam.
two cauteries
Be aware that I am forbidden from speaking about it in our law, and therefore it pleases me not to speak of it in this book;
and it is not necessary to make a fuss about it for two reasons:
one of which is that the doctors know how to respond when asked and know the treatment;
and the other, because we often have experience of chastising certain beasts to help us, such as goat and sheep and cattle and other beasts.
I say therefore that chastisement is made according to two methods: either by attraction or by cutting.
In the one that we make by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water, until the joint is softened and flexible; then take them with your hand, until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Of the correction of wounds: it is necessary that you hold the best, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie it with a suspensor, and cover each opening with a cup, when you have well scarified them;
and let no pouch dwell under the syfac and the subtle syfac which is above the vessels;
and this manner of correction is better than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction something of the joints often remains, which is why the best desires luxury;
then heal the wound until it is healthy.
of hernias
Hermaphroditism is in two ways among men: one is when between the two joints opens as if the figure of a woman's nature appears, or has hair, and sometimes the urine flows out.
And the other manner is in women, and has on the little finger as if a penis and two thighs.
And the treatment of the shoulder and of the groin is that you should cauterize all the adjacent areas, and treat them as other wounds;
in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of their thighs, there is no cure.
A tentigen is an adjacent area on the genital part, so much that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment.
It is necessary that you touch the superficies of the tentigen with your hand or with onguents, and cauterize lightly;
and do not go too deeply into the flesh, lest corrupted blood flows out, then treat with another treatment as long as it is healthy;
and at another sore that is born at the mouth of the marrow, and the abscess, and by chance it bursts forth, and it is according to the resemblance of a cowe, and for this reason the ancient ones called it "cow disease". Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: and it is natural from birth, or happens by accident due to illness that comes about.
and it is natural from birth, or happens by accident due to illness that comes about. or it is through a displaced cartilage, or a subtle or thick douleur, and is made deep in the marrow, or in the ribs, or beneath, or as it may be.
and hinder conception, and impede growth, and by chance cause flowers to have.
and the knowledge of this is through the examination of the ulcer.
If the symptoms are nearly apparent, then examine with your fingers or on the radius.
If it is a subtle douleur, and it is near the liver, if you hurry, and turn it thus.
put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs.
then stretch out the two livers firmly, so that the subtle douleur is round, and is above the swelling.
Then take the lancet, and the millstone in oil, and place it on the limb, and guide the woman to her husband each day, so that she cannot become pregnant.
And if the swelling is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you apply cups to the spatium-like leaves of myrtle.
If the swelling is from new flesh, then they suspend it from the ninth rib and the coping;
and there are stain-releasing medicines, blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and a mixture of many waters;
then insert a large poultice of plum, so that the wound cannot become septic.
and let it be for a long time, and then insert a tent of dry flax;
then be cured by other treatments until you are healthy.
And when a wound comes to the marrow, if it needs to be covered according to this method, then it is not incising enchasing abscesses. For the encasing abscess which is in the marrow, one should not touch with iron.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are overgrowths of veins without a natural adjustment, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed.
and we have already said in the division the similarities of these, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive cure.
I say that embroilments and hardenings, when they are deeply rooted in the marrow, and they do not appear to sensation, if it is not a cure by iron.
Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, next stop the flow as with tourniquets, and apply the cupping on its roots, then sprinkle medicines stopping blood flow, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
then dip her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her in cold air;
and if blood comes out, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gale and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make an plaster on her back.
And if it sticks, that's good. If that does not work, have her apply cupping glasses to her back and do not rub her breasts with iron;
Then take a candle, and apply a poultice made from plantain juice or angelica juice with old wine, and set it on the wound.
And when the abscess breaks, heal the wounded area thoroughly so that it becomes healthy;
and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough, harsh head, so it must be covered as I have said previously; and then heal it thoroughly until it becomes healthy.
Many types of abscesses occur in the marrow, such as cancer and piercing abscesses and herpes and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
It is necessary therefore that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes from the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus.
and if you want to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscesses are agitated at the beginning of their coming, and full of bitterness and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but make meure so long as the pain is assuaged.
and then make the patient sit on a chair, and have small chairs or he leans, and supports himself on his back and brings his feet together in parts of the leg;
and let his thighs be expanded, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a soft linen bond;
then suck the swelling towards the right side, and I will minister the instrument through which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the form;
and it is necessary that when you have seen to minister this instrument, you fix the rule first in order to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters in from the instrument does not go more deeply than it should, and it does not harm the patient; and if the swellings are larger, it is necessary to cover the deepness of the thigh with bandages, so that the swellings do not cause grief.
and it is necessary to place the point of the instrument above, and to hold the instrument.
And when the abscesses open, and one feels it with the soft hand, then it is necessary to cover at the head, with a spatula-like sheet.
and when the wound is empty, it is necessary that you put in the wound tents moistened with rose oil, or with green dry oil.
and put the tent far from the wound at the depth of the thigh, and put beneath on the thigh and on the whole clean nettle moistened in water or mallow being cooked.
then heal after 2 days of anointing coming to that, until it be sound.
and sometimes lift up the marrow and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and a long aristology so they may be cured. then return to the joint.
And if the wound is repopened in the marrow, it is necessary to guard against cauterizing with iron, but rather cure it as we have said in the division.
of the swelling It is better first to know the natural shape of the child's birth, and the signs are when you see the woman approach from below, and want to odor the arm.
then one hastens the children to issue forth strongly; then one knows that this child's birth is according to the natural shape, and the issue is under its head, and the second with him;
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press his belly lightly, so that the child issues forth quickly;
for when he descends on his head, the second is with him, and the marrow of his superfluities is purified by good mundification;
and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes against the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or waist, and is converted by chance upon its neck, and by other bad shapes;
it is necessary at the handling that it be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them.
If the infant comes onto its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of it are weak, then make it sit on a saddle, or the women hold it;
and raise its natural oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then put the handling between its two small spatula-like tools of which this is the form; and burn the second layer, and cut to his finger as much as the moisture which is inside corresponds to his fingers.
and pierce the belly of the woman as much as the infants are inside, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with a mustard-based enema with oil of sesame.
then make her take a purge and evacuator of conditis, and hold her mouth and nostrils for an hour: if the infants are now stuck.
And if the two hands are frozen, it is necessary that you reset them lightly, little by little. and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet high up; then remove the chair from the ground, and hold onto the woman, so she doesn't fall at the removal.
and if he cannot put his hands in, and the infant dies, if he places his hands on the counter which is placed before him, and extracts the child, and resets equally.
from the birth of the child on its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, then it must be pushed upwards; and then turn it little by little, until it is straight;
then take its feet and stretch them little by little.
When it jumps just to the hips, if he instructs to take hold, and makes it stretch out with condition; if it jumps far, so God wills.
And if it does not jump frequently as we have said, then it turns a little and a little, until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is lighter.
And if it does not come far as we have said, then take a poultice of high altitude, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush all in the mortar; and put on the nature of the woman within and remove this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until below the ribs;
and when it is softened below, have them make a collar of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour; then have them sit on a seat, then have them stretch out and hold their mouth and nose, and gently press their belly, for the infant now jumps.
from the issue of the child on his knees When the infant comes in this form, if you place the bath of his hands little by little; then be swooned on his neck, and let his feet hang down, and be reclining on the bed; and fold his hands little by little, and then press his hands on the belly, and lift the cushions from below, until it is prepared downwards; and if the infant does not jump, take his feet and move them forcefully, then move the belly upwards, then you will thrust your hands; and heat it little by little; and instruct the woman to grasp them as much as the infants issue.
from the delivery of the child who is coming out with one hand while it is necessary to re-engage to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and go;
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and bend her legs forcibly;
then massage the muscle that I have touched;
and if she does not conceive, then make her sit on a chair, then study how to bring back the hand; and heat the infant according to the natural figure, and make her stretch out, and instruct her to grasp them as much as the infants issue forth.
from the issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. it is necessary that the patient holds his hand, then turn it little by little, and heat it lightly;
and when it is even, then place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
and when you have done this, then make it sit on the seat, and instruct it to take hold; and make it stretch out. in the same manner for all the secondary ones
in the same manner for all the secondary ones When it comes to be in this manner throughout the second stage, then touch the second stage with your finger, until the moisture is evacuated;
and if it forms a crust on its face and neck, then touch the swelling, so that it is not retained, and soothe the inflammation;
then put the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to take hold never again;
from the issue of twins Know that wounds often grow worse, and sometimes do not heal at all, or only partially. and this is not a strange thing, and it happens little. Two are strange things, and do not live well, if they have a little name;
Two are strange things, and do not live well, if they have a little name; I know that they should be multiplied, and are divided by the Syphac who separates them, which is tied to the belly;
and sometimes they issue naturally like all things under us, as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, thus the cure is as we have said, and let the subtle balm be, and make it smooth and light in what it does; and do it thus as it brings health to salvation. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious sage, and it is necessary that the balm knows all this, because by chance similar things happen; do thus according to what is suitable.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman with a dead or stillborn child in her womb, as I have said in the section, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to operate with your hands; it is suitable that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
it is suitable that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs be bent downwards, and her thighs lifted;
and the midwife holds the two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart by the descent of the child;
then anoint the mouth of the womb with moist oils of sage and fenugreek and flaxseed, then rub the belly with these oils and these unguents;
Then he puts the bout in the marrows lightly, then wants him to hold his legs where the onions are, and takes care that the veins are apparent as they descend onto his head;
if he fixes the onions in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the forearm or near the ribs, and if the descents are on his feet, he fixes or pricks them and thus affects the moist places;
and it is necessary to hold the onion in his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and he puts his whole hand lightly, and fixes the onion in none of these places that we have said, until he comes to the empty thing;
then fix one against another onion, or let the third be in a similar way, so that the extractions are equal;
and then they steady themselves equally in moving one way and another, to issue forth, and let the uncle's teeth hold for issuing forth, as it is the form.
And if it stays in one part, oil the bail with some of its fingers of oil, and rub into that part, and treat the other part.
and if it does not stay in point, put this uncle or higher up, and do that until it issues forth completely fluent.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by straightening, then you must wrap around the drapil, until it issues forth completely. then put a bandage on the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus you must do with the other hand, and on the two feet.
And if the head of the infant is large and it is constricted in the issue, or it has an assembled sharp head, then you must put the spinal spatula between your two, and make the head and extract the sharpness. where you take hold of the instrument that is called "almidach", because its shape comes with the instruments or surgical tools that are behind this one;
and thus in the same way, it makes them have a great natural head;
and then treat the bones as tendons, and if the head slips out and it holds onto the forceps, so be careful, as much as the moisture that is or issues forth;
and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces in the muscles where you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it as much as the moisture flows.
And if the infant is on its feet, it is light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the mother are lighter.
And if it is constricted in the belly or in the chest, then it is necessary that you stretch it to the wrapping envelope under the hand; and make an incision in the belly or in the chest, as much as the moisture that flows from it;
and if the other limbs are numbed, and the head remains, if he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and draws it just up to the mouth of the marrow; then he puts II on the jugular or XII, and draws it forth;
and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not need to be operated on, but rather to be soothed with moist and fatty things; and the soothing plaisters, and apply them in gentle, softening, and moisturizing ways.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then soothe what we have said in the living infant;
and do not have power, if you draw it forth by parts, and leave nothing of the secondary.
And when you have done this, steady the hands on what we have said concerning abscesses that come in the marrow;
and if a flow of blood comes, it should be placed in a tight restraining bandage, and steady other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose belly had been dead with a stillborn child, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the other dead one. After a long time, a abscess came to him in the belly, and it inflamed so much that it opened, and began to discharge greatly.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and extracted a bone, and after some days another. I marveled greatly, because the belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and I drew back my hands, until the woman was at her best point; and the woman remained lying thus for a long time, and then she rose up a little from the bed;
and I did not recover from this chapter further than because of that which, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it in aid.
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, to which one owes the books;
and it is given to two turners as are the heads of the veins. However, the horns should be more subtle on the constrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the tube be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees it should be, and a palm and a half in length; and inside the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same tube, which are closed at one end and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
and these two adjustments are pushed into the mouth of the mortar to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, in its likeness more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the tenacules. and it has two heads and two adjustments, as you see, a palm in length, and two fingers wide.
and when you want to open the mortar with all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet pendant and her legs covered, then push the two adjustments together into the mortar, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs; Then open your hand to the entire instrument, just as you have done with the equal-sized tenails, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marrow, until the bale makes it do what it wants.
These instruments are all mounted above, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the miry ones have been prepared, so much the more hasty is the work, and the higher it stands among men according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessities are not excusable.
When the second one is retained in infancy, it is necessary that you command the patient to retain his wing, and then make him stretch out his condition, and hold your hands at the mouth and nostrils; and let it jump through that, well it is.
If it does not, take the pot, and make a perforation or covering, and put there herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, sassafras, and centaury; All these herbs, or some of them, should be cut or placed under the fire;
then put a cane or perforated tube, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh, and hold it until the vapors come out from the marsh;
then make it distill, as we have said. If the second [injury] happens quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment, and does not get better, instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or mastication of alta, and then put it in a natural place, and seek the second [remedy]; and when they have found it, take it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the marsh does not hinder the extraction;
but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then draw it out; If it comes apart and falls out of joint.
And if the mouth of the thigh is constricted there, we have spoken of the treatment of stretching, and of fumigation with herbs;
and if it does not respond to all that we have said, beware that you do not fall into the trap;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the thigh, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then anoint it with ointment of four herbs; if it will putrefy and become swollen, and will come to a crisis;
but in any case, when it putrefies thus, bad odour comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. It is necessary then to use fumigations of covenaubles for this:
none of the ancients have experienced fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument is where one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second thing, which is this.
And it is to make similar to a dog, and place the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the blistering as long as it is roasted, and start another one.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, thus it has been stopped by subtle signs: then it is necessary to give to the patient who perceives it thus at his finger, and does not feel it from a subtle touch, and warns of the bandage that it does not touch it;
then put on the affected limb in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it does not stiffen, then put or insert a poultice of warm plaster, and leave it on for many days, and be careful when the children want to go to their chambers.
And sometimes these stoppings come suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then it is necessary to cover that suddenly: be cured, as we have said about the treatment of the spear wound.
Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are a swelling, and those that come from beneath the deep foundation are a furuncle, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
and when that swelling is old, it opens, and sometimes moisture introduces a white or subtle pus, and often these fistulas are persistent.
and they are known by the fact that there is an emission or flatulence when the patient makes an effort to vomit, and sometimes by chance it jumps up suddenly.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at the bottom, and does not miss it: and it is that you apply your index finger to the bottom, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horse hair, until you feel the probe or hair on your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from bad pertussis or ventilation or vermin, as we have said: know that it does not pierce badly; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is piercing near the bladder or near the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and it cannot be soothed by medicines.
If it is pierced just up to the joint of the thigh, then the probe comes just to the place; if there is no twisting and the discovery of the pain within, then it is that he immediately bows, and no medicine or sudden remedy by anointing;
and in these fistulas one has no cure unless they work hard, and vanity of foolish doctors who intervene.
In one that is not a persistent case and not an old one, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back;
and he lifts his legs up to his knees, and has his knees inclined towards his belly; then apply a straightening iron, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the straightening comes.
If the patient feels it in his foundation, then you should apply your right index finger, and thus you will feel that the straightening has penetrated;
and be discovered where you feel between your fingers the vital spirit or the flesh, then you know that it is persistent; if one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
One can almost always heal everyone, but this happens rarely;
and the help that one does, if it is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was said before; and heat the entire area thoroughly in the fistula, until it reaches deep into the foundation; and do this two or three times, until you know that these withered fingers are scorched, which resemble a bird's claw;
and then treat the moist gangrenous area with powder, until those fingers are dry, then treat the ointment by sprinkling and applying it suddenly.
If he is thus healthy, it is good.
If this, nothing else can be healed;
and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the knuckle which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the tent [probe] a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that which follows the covering of the vein; If you cut open the beginning of the fistula, and cut ahead before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent. and the tent will be freed, and will fall.
then I will describe those swollen veins that resemble a bird's claw, and none of them remain.
And if the wound does not heal, and it is short between you and the joint, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
For the fire cauteries assemble two bone things: it is to know, the art of joining these veins, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the treatment of swollen tents in mud or in broken pieces of wood, until the juices flow out, and it makes the veins dry in the mud;
then treat the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed with hard charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes near the fontanelle of the fundament, and is separated from the body, then apply your finger or fundament, and inquire into that.
If you feel the tension, and between there is the cloth or the silk or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways of fixing and hoping, by the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize as we have said, or you cut just to the foundation, or if you can place tents and cure as before;
and do not go too deep in the foundation, lest you cut the holding that holds the base, and come upon the evacuations by the senses willingly; then the cure, as we have said;
then the cure, as we have said; by chance it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the world then it is cut from the deep foundation, either by tent or by another sharp instrument; then I will define the faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can; Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is below the foundation.
Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is below the foundation. if it is something lighter for the patient.
And often they are fistulas according to this method: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is or costs against the foundation below, so take a perforated tent at the head according to this form: And thrust the twisted thread into the fistula, and thrust the tent into the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that perforation, so that you push your finger or foundation;
and pull the head of the thread, and assemble the two joints together, and hold one to the other, and leave it a day or two;
and restrain it often, until the threads absorb the flesh that is between them, and heal.
Then heal the wound until it is sewn up and healthy.
If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside. For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the ulcer's dressing too deep inside, and then heal it, as we have said, so that it becomes healthy.
The shape of the spatula-like instrument that one uses to make a fistula is very sharp at one end and cutting; and not on the other side, because one should not cut where one should not cut, as you see here:
Embrodings are in two manners: where they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they cut short the blood flow, and there is one or more, and they are deficient in the foundation and at the head of the foundation;
but those that are deficient have little moisture, and they cut short either a little of citrine water or a little of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them deep in the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to stretch out in a chamber, until the foundations issue forth, and they appear as threads; If you hurry, and bend it as tendons, or you hold it with your fingernail, then he covers it in its roots;
and if the tendons cannot hold them back by their moisture, if they take it to the apron, or to the cushion, or to a piece of chamelot; and stretch it with your fingers, then cover, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are in the fire of cautery; or you cauterize it as it is said or chapter of cautery, then heal other wounds until he is healthy;
and if the foundations cannot issue, then cleanse the patient's fundament with a biting and harsh clyster, to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can open freely; when the patient cannot pass, and if the veins are far from the fundament, then it is a light cure;
when the patient cannot pass, and if the veins are far from the fundament, then it is a light cure; and it is that you take them with your fingernail or with the tenaculum, and you cut, then you cure as we have said, until they are healthy, and they fear the incision by iron. It is necessary that you adjust the splint according to this method:
It is necessary that you adjust the splint according to this method: Take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread above and make a piercer pass through the needle from another side, and twist the two ends of the thread below the needle, and so it is doubled in size;
and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to correct the excessive flow of blood;
then put on the foundation a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that they should rest;
and then let it rest as long as it heals, and when they are calm, if the treatment of bandaging and other treatments, as long as it becomes healthy.
you must drain thoroughly at the bottom or foundation Many times there is draining of flux in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. It is necessary that you reach the tip of a spatula or your finger under the scab, which does not allow it to become moist. then treat it as long as it becomes swollen, as it is necessary.
and if it cannot swell, recommence the rubbing more strongly than before, as long as it discharges much and becomes scarred. then treat it as long as it becomes healthy.
due to trembling A formication is a small faulty appearance beneath the skin, and it goes very deeply inwards;
and sometimes it finds the cold place, and one feels it as if dead from cold, and it comes into all of the body, and more in the hands than any other part.
And the treatment is that you take a vein from a goose's wing or a strong vein from a vulture, and place that vein on the frigid area, so that the purple circles encompass the entire frigid area; then turn your hand all around the vein so that you grasp everything entirely around the frigid area, and place it in the foreground, and scrape the frigid area of its roots.
And if you see, make a cane of iron or copper according to this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above. do not pierce, because you must hold at the finger, and press strongly.
And if you see, if you cauterize the frigid area, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of melted tin or lead;
and never make any of these small and large instruments, according to those for which they are prepared. These are the things one uses to treat children who are weak and painful, they are small.
These are the things one uses to treat children who are weak and painful, they are small. The shape of the enema device is small and large above, where the belly is tied in this manner:
and there is a disunion where the intestines are tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within;
and it has one of the ribs pierced, and in the other I;
and it has the intestines where one puts medicines in a bladder of beast or parchment, and it is perceived all around with small piercings, and there is between each piercing I ought to space, then insert into these piercings I strong thread twisted from X or within, and assemble the intestines as if it were a tube; and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front of with a strong thread, then inject;
and that's the form of a circle:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then insert it gently; Then the practitioner prepares his hands together, so that they are completely steady, then extracts the lancet, and lifts the patient's legs to the bench, and if the medicine wants to exit, it will do so as much as it can. and if he sleeps a night completely, it is a greater aid.
And if you cleanse him of the disease of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to be issued, so recommend it as much as he may be healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or an abscess, so let the lancet be as subtle as for a child.
and it is the shape of the subtle lancet on which the skin should be held firm.
We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the previous section.
Now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and of medicine, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the locations or where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and cut of sword and of dagger, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things.
where they are made according to the laws of the body, as it is a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it's not a fracture of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely broken and the wound is large, and you doubt strongly about an abscess being hot: if it makes the cephalic mixture healthier meanwhile if there comes little blood from the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the injured part;
and avoid giving the patient a full meal of wine and coarse meats.
And if he does not want to get better, let his food be diminished, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any meat;
and put on the wound, apply a warm compress, or cotton soaked in rose oil or violet oil, or wine steeped in it;
and if there is no warm abscess, put on the wound, so it is fresh in all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will tell a little about later;
and if the wound is moved, put on some ointments, until it be healthy.
And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be assembled by tugging, then assemble them by suture, as I will say for wounds of the belly, from the suturing.
If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and it bursts, and no longer holds except for a little, then cover it. then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, as if testing and roasting cooked, just like poultry, and similar things.
And if you find a skin lesion, and it does not adhere to the bone, so scrape off the entire lesion, and apply a poultice, then treat.
and if it has become embedded in the wound or vein, without being able to cut it out, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, so try to remove it, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. and if that does not benefit, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which sticks thus that the wound will close.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense, a part; Dragon's blood, two parts; living chalk, three parts, and powder subtly, and fill the wound, and hold it firmly, until it heals well and joins all its blood;
and then lay it well, and let it not swell; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
And never does one make a poultice of chalk solely, when one has not incense nor dragon's blood, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the arsenic has touched the wound, especially in this case, then do not put any of this powder;
but apply some digested ointments, or powders made from water and honey of barley, until it brings forth a scab; then heal with other treatments until it is healthy.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you about the fractures of the head afterwards.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be soothing, as if warm water is poured gently, and mixed with rose oil, and cooled in gentle water, and other minerals of mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, sew it up with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then pierce or cut below the hair;
and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for that is the trade;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular vein, and the conduits are guarded, because that's where the flesh goes, then sew up the jugular vein on the canal of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then he holds it firmly, and leaves it for some days, then cures the wounded place so that it be healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound putrefies, and separate and alleviate the discharge;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then treat it as I have said in this chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if the wound has any windiness where the patient's breath passes through: know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not absorb the blood that flows deeply, and revives the heart, and kills the patient; but I put an attractive ointment, and apply it twice a day;
and if you have no ointment, put a lot of cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if no spasm comes, nor bad trembling of the heart, it is not a sign of evil origin; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is healing. Heal the thumb of tendons and other cures, until it be sound;
and if it cannot heal, and ulcerate, then know that there is a fistula;
if the cure is as one ought. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then cure those that are in front. If it is large, of a suture;
and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and in having taken pieces, so that the wound closes, and the torn fibers are reunited; and if they are not reunited, let the wound putrefy, thus alleviating the extractions;
and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
because of the obstruction of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are large and medium and small;
of the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, because of the introjection of them;
and the sewing is more troublesome, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one, because one puts the intestines back in place more easily, if one does not put them back hurriedly;
Here is the translation:
And you know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
the two common stitches have in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds of the body and the two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and however they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will describe each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and easy thing is to repair, it is by one of the two manners: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner: soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in hot water only slightly, or you cook in hot water squinancy and cypress and spike, and lift up the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and often makes these veins retract, and it is murdered that they are loosened by desinflammation.
And when you see the inflammation departing, if you moisten the intestine with water or wine and bad humors are cooked, because by this the entry is aligned to a small thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument by which one gathers the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is murdered that the cutting, that we must not cut without great necessity there is;
and these are the instruments for making a fissure:
if you cut within the curve and do not stray, and see there the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, you should be able to put it back, for that is worth much.
When the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, then you must make the patient sit on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, set the head and the foot higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts then put attention to this, so that the injured part may be higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large wounds and injuries.
For small wounds, use what appears suitable to you, then hold it between your hands and apply gentle pressure that touches the entire rupture with your hand, and bring the lips together;
and this is the common method of sutures, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound a space of two fingers, and insert a needle or have a strong thread. and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the siphac, which is beneath the skin within, until you make it pierce through that part, and join the two heads of the siphac together with the four.
Then strain with a double thread beneath the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound gradually, and then leave the finger of space, and fix another needle;
Then thread the second string just as you did with the first needle, and do not cease from doing so according to what you have mastered of needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
And let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse, for the subtle needles grasp all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well; Because it is necessary that they be moderate;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin, lest they grasp and open the wound before the suture;
and then grasp the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put tents or drapes on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn;
and this method of treating with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use a single needle or two.
The second treatment is common, and it is where you bring together the two heads of skin and the two heads of the superficial fascia, assembling them to one needle or having a strong middle thread.
and when you have pierced these heads all four together, then reassemble the needle at the part where you began, in the manner of sewing clothes.
and put a space between each stitch the width of a smaller finger.
this stitching suits the man, and I sewed a wound that a certain man had in his belly, which was injured by a knife, and it was more than a palm in length, and it was two palms deep into the intestines, and it was in the middle of the belly.
I will bring back the intestine then when it had been stopped for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up to 15 days, and it healed, and was healthy.
And they looked at him who was judged to die, and this was a miracle;
and did not care for his treatment, because I stood in the place where they did not find any, nor any medicines; and applied sense upon the wound cotton very little twice a day, and washed with warm honey water until he was healthy.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
Take the needle, and sew up the defective part just to that inner depth;
when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if you have sewn up the head of the siphac or stitched or you have sewn with the needle, and make it pierce another part of the defective inner area;
and the intention of this suturing is that you sew thus as the pelletier makes the pellets, and that you leave one time the siphac of one part, and take it again from another, until the suturing is entirely complete.
The second way of suturing, which Galen described properly, is like no other font, which naturally assemble the two parts together, and apply one head to the other head, in such a manner:
Take a needle or a head of a mirror close by, and make it pierce the limb only slightly, and let the two heads of the suture; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the weak part just up to there within, as the two heads of the suture;
then make one and the other pierce from the weak part just up to there within, in the two other heads of the mirror that are on the other side;
and it is the worst way of suturing and the most common.
Galen said this in his speech, and none of them testify, that one should sew the belly with two needles, or thread in each.
and one must thrust a needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, it is the suture more grievous than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, just as the arrow had moved, then reset the intestine, and the skin;
then put on the powder soothing charm, and if the arrow had moved, then put on no ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the thread, and be sewn the seam, and the membrane; then cure the wound as with the others, until it is healthy;
and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, much cotton, and change it twice a day so that it be healthy.
For you have no other remedy in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not make a community with the principal members, then it is necessary that you anoint lightly with oil of tempered heat, or oil of rose, and put it between the limbs, and beneath the wounds;
and if it feels pain or bloating in the belly, and many times it happens, then they are cleansed with red wine enema, and meanwhile the bloating reaches just up to the intestine;
and it pierces within, and knows that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it is because of the abundance of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approaching of its nature to the kidneys.
And if he jumps away from the wound, set him back just like the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned towards black, then you must lay the black spot, from which the blood flows, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and place the two heads hanging down from the part below the wound just until it reaches to ease the extraction when the hairs fall, and the wound heals.
of the rupture from the swelling
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some homes, because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by a lance in his belly;
and it was the wound on the right of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus stopped the evacuation and the flatulence;
I make a cure according to what I can do, and did not cease from subtling until it was healthy, and the eyes were sound.
And when I saw it sounding, I doubted that the patient had a bad condition in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better disposition, and was eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in such a manner: take firm threads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has covered the mouth, place it on the two lips, so that it draws its mouth together;
and then cover the head, and it holds so that it cannot dislodge, then put another thread afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed; and cut the wound.
If the intestine is torn inside, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
Take the head of this intestine thread that is very clean, and then tie it to the head of this twisted subtle thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it in its place;
and this manner of suturing the intestines is not forced except according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, if there is no ingenious way to heal it, except with subtlety.
of a fistula or whether it is Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it is hairy and produces a swelling.
And a fistula is according to the true notion of a hard and white scab, where one does not feel pain, and it is also shaped like the feather of a bird.
and sometimes in a clear hollow, and another time thick; sometimes little, and another time enough;
and I have already spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healthy, and there is no flesh, this is only due to one of the 8 causes: it is to know, by the small passage of blood or flow; or through its badness; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much hollow; or the liquid is putrid, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and weak by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
It is fitting that I teach you about the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation with hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and from the arteries, and from the nerves, or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar things.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is a fistula that does not come near the place I have told, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to recognize it, if you take a thread of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, if you seek;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle tenderness of pricking, because the pricks pierce much into the twist.
and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot explore well by pricks, then cleanse it through one of the perforations, because moisture runs from one perforation to another, and it is clarified.
then ask for the power of your judgment, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is cut off in the deep, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it.
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the putrid flesh and the corrupt humors that are within.
and then the treatment so that it be healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you must cut deeply, as much as you can, then you put tentacles of medicine ague, and the joints just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity which remains at the bottom.
and then I put ointments in a healthy clear skin, so that it be healthy.
and if it is not healthy through this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut.
If a vein or nerve grieves or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it as much as the corruption is entirely removed, then treat the things in a healthy clear skin so that it be healthy.
and if it is not healthy, and renders void thus as before, know that you have not been misled just until now
if it becomes uncovered and seeks as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the joint
and if it is thus healthy, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to it; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tongs, if it is suited to the instrument convenient for that, and if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave any behind;
and if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, if it is moist and dry and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot dislodge them at one hour, then put on the wound a poultice that promotes suppuration, and let it be until the abscess is formed around the bone, and then they will have less difficulty with the bones.
and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, then remove so much of the decay until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound.
and if there is a large part of the corrupted bone, and it reaches to the marrow of the bone; if it is necessary to saw and cut all the way to the corruption, and then to cure until it is healed.
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you take example and aid in your work.
He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to remove it by surgical opening.
but the mirror shows them by their foolishness overpowering so much that the abscesses open, and they corrupt many materials, and become fistula, and it comes from many perforations that everything goes to waste and moisture of the body;
and many a mirror that mirrored a cure within 12 years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands, so much that I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and those that corrupted through the perforations to a great body; and the body of the young patient would become red, and had a yellowish tint.
I thrust a probe into one of these holes, and then explored all the holes, and found that one vein came against another from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
I saw that which appeared to me from the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption, except for that which I had seen;
and begin to restore the wound with medicine soaks for a long time, and cannot be sutured;
and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the continued corruption in the bone, and the decay, and then I stopped, and thought about suturing the limb; but I could not do so much that I grasped around a palm of the bone, and pulled it out with all its thickness, then restored it with medicines; and it was healed and sutured quickly, and did not need to begin the work again for the faintness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for fear of death that I had of him. Because the bloody evacuations often occur, but it was entirely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the bone, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in everything, neither to alleviate nor to come.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: take a lien, and hold it at the head of the bone that is open, and instruct him to stretch it upwards; and put another thicker bandage on top of the first one, and tie it to the flesh that is above the bone, and tighten the head, so that you draw out the corrupt flesh from below, and uncover the flesh on the spot where you see swelling, lest the swelling burst the flesh;
and put a probe or a tube below the bone to drain out the corrupt flesh;
and thus it is necessary to explore as one can see and feel the corruption, and explore again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the whole flesh;
then put a probe below, and then explore from one part to the other for the corruption, and be the surgeon who removes the length of the corrupted part, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and sew up the bone or where it connects to the other part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other remedy than to amputate;
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or finger of the foot, then it is very strong that thing, but anyway it is necessary that you investigate that corrosion, how it appears to you; and treat it in all the ways that you can, but make sure the vein or nerve does not work against you;
and know that the incisions and the seams to cut these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the holes, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and therefore he must prepare each similar appearance of work his instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and it will testify to the methods of the diseases; if you prepare the instrument you will need according to what he requires.
The heads perforate either because of denseness or because of fierceness;
and when you have medicated that corrosion by the treatment of medicines, and it does not benefit, if it is necessary to amputate that member up to where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes death or malice, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
and the signs are that the members turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards the blackness spreads, since it goes from one member to another, and takes over the whole body;
If you hasten to cover, and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, like scorpion of sea and viper and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, if you touch, do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if you touch at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if you touch at the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and no remedies are of use except the quantity of its virtue;
and thus always do when the corrosion reaches to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then touch after another joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then touch the entire foot; and let it rise in the leg, if it gathers at the joint of the knee;
and let it come above the knee, if there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
and the way to bandage or to splint the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister below the lower ligament, and another minister above the upper ligament, and you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
then bandage or splint, and put a layer of linen on each part, so that the splint does not touch the healthy skin, and comes to the patient with another wound and abscess thus.
And if a flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the skin hastily, or apply some restraining powders above.
Then return to your medicine as long as it is accomplished, then tie the numb member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healthy.
and I will count that it had an ounce of powder in that pie:
it had a blackness that seemed to be burnt by fire, and that corrosion came first in his finger near the pie, so much that it seized the whole pie;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the pie, and was healthy;
and long after that the corrosion returned to his hand, and it came to me, and I put on things receptive to the purification of the body, but could not stop the corroisons;
and he saw that I was treating his hand, and I did not want that, for I had hoped to repulse the matter; and I doubted also that he cut off his hand, so it wouldn't die, because the strength of the man was feeble;
and he despaired at once, and returned to his land, and ceased to coop up his hand, and was healthy;
and I have not counted it a failure because of this that one does another task, if one has mastery.
At no time did an abscess come on the flesh, and it stayed so long that it made a great gathering of pus; and then it burst and pierced, and the pus jumped out, and the veins were empty, just like a vessel; and the skin which is above is as subtle as the delicate sheets, and does not corrode to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula";
but if it is so enlarged that it reaches just to the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin if it is that you cut entirely around, and likewise when it is subtle, just like a thin sheet; and do not be afraid of its corruption.
And if you think that the skin is rotten, and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is thick with flesh, then heal it with a poultice thus:
look if the wounds are large, and the pus that is in them is of foul odor, then cleanse with a medicine made from Egyptian remedies, which is thus prepared: take ashes, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your necessity, and make it into a point and in the middle, and cleanse the wound, and hold back the pus; and let the medicine sit for two hours, then wipe it off by sprinkling;
do this many times, until the wound is made whole, and the pus is gone;
and no time is cleansing with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water on them, then stir, and cleanse, until you know that the wound is well healed;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then cleanse with water and honey, or where there is a little bit of crushed litharge; where you mix honey and wine in a blend, so that the honey has properties of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the healthy.
and when you have done this, and you are confident that the wound is well cleansed, if you blend what makes flesh grow in it, and it is that you take a plaster made with rose oil and wine;
where you blend some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatise on ointments;
and if the opening of the wound is small, and the cane of the syringe cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with an iron tool, and apply there a tents of Egyptian ointment, or royal balsam ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then sew it up and let it heal so much that the syringe or cane can enter, and if the opening that gushes out is above, then cover or apply below where it is.
and if you cannot cover the lower back in this way as you see, it appears in such a manner that the belly reaches the lowest place it is, for when the belly is in depth, if he does not let it swell there; and if you cannot cover the lower back in this way as you see, it appears in such a manner: that the belly reaches more lightly downwards, and does not let anything of the belly;
that the belly reaches more lightly downwards, and does not let anything of the belly; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and stretch over it a layer of linen that covers the whole wound; then cover the forces in the right place of the deep wound as much larger than at first, then stretch a soft ointment over another layer according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the belly to alleviate it, and do not remove the large bandage except after many days once;
and he who is above the breast's pertussis, often suffers to open the bowel, and knows that which runs from the bowel, whether it be venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take heed that the patients feel pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps upon the breast's pertussis, then knows that the breasts have altered already, and approaches health;
and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you open the wound, if you change to another dressing, and renew the binding.
And if you come subtly to a long tension, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
For there are men who delay in healing their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if the bowel is undigested it jumps from the breast after many days, knows that the breasts have not altered;
and if the senses are slow to understand, and it is delayed, if you add medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as we have defined, because there is a great part of glass, and this is the last medicine;
take a definite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of much wine equal in substance;
then congeal it and use it;
and this same thing makes honey cakes thick, when definite ointments are not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire;
and then glue it to the plaster, and apply it to the breast, and many times it helps an Aristologist, and celestial roots, which is also like flour of veins and a hundred; and in use of simples or of compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use;
and if the wound is lengthy, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption has penetrated deeply, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the ligaments; if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that grows under the nail of the thumb or toe, or happens by chance to grow in other fingers;
and when it is enveloped, and one does not take care, if it comes to the abscess thus, and corrodes and eats away so much that it corrodes the root of the nail, and by chance it corrodes everything;
and there come the ulcers up to the bone, as long as it comes to painful swelling, and is the head of two large fingers, and is the color dark.
When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, it is necessary that you cut away all the excess flesh that remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh inside, and it begins to prick, and the blister, then you must put the straight edge underneath the nail so that it does not touch the flesh, and bend it upwards, and carefully and gently lift the subtle flesh, and apply the remaining flesh with burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then heal the wounded areas until they are healthy.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, you will cover it, and pull hard, for as much as the bone is corrupted it is, so it cannot be healed;
and if you see the finger corrupting, cover it with one of our remedies as mentioned before, then heal it until it is healthy;
and if he is bruised, and swollen, and feels great pain, then it is necessary that you soothe him first;
then cut the edge of the spatula obliquely while cutting across, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the ankle, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on it to calm it down.
The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all flesh, and by chance they have a part where they have bones, and sometimes they have an angle, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is not in any of us from the two.
He who is born without a nail on the finger does not move it, and he who is born with a joint on the finger, perhaps moves it;
the cut of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold it with a copper.
In one that is born with a toe in the back node, it is necessary that you first cut the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable joint for that, then cure until it is healthy.
The sudden pains that come together arise from birth, or from sudden wound, or from burn by fire, or from similar things.
If you know how to bind this wound, then you must repair it according to its natural forms. then put between two clean cloths or moistened drapes in rose oil, so they do not stick together; or you put between two subtle pieces of plaster, until the wound is closed, as it is fitting.
they suddenly come together with the palm, if they grasp that joint so it is necessary.
They are gross, swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come into many parts of the body;
and they happen more in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the intestine, and then the blood of the basilica vein.
The iron treatment is according to two manners: one is that they are bound, and one draws out the black blood; and the other manner is that you raise the vein, and draw it out entirely.
The cutting is done according to this manner: Raise the leg first with a warm, very hot, towel, so that the gross sinew becomes subtle, then stretch the patient's leg from above the hip down to the part beneath the knee;
then cut the vein in I, II or III, with a large incision, then release and draw out black blood at your hand, from one head to the other, until as much of the blood as the patient's virtue can suffer;
and then lay him down, and instruct him to abstain from eating black bile-inducing foods;
and recommence the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
The elevations of the bone are done according to this manner: Raise the patient's leg, if it has a lot of hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with a warm, hot towel, until it becomes red, and inflates the veins;
and if you have no bone, if you heat with fire, and then touch the vein at the bottom of the long thigh at the knee, or in the part below the joint;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of each part, until it appears as one feels;
and it is seen red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
then apply the treatment below, until it is raised from the skin, and then bend it at the ankle more lightly, then touch it in another place above three fingers;
then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the razor, as you have done, and bend it to another ankle, as you had done previously;
then touch another incision, or more if you have mastery of it, then lift it, and touch the toe of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second incision;
then strip the patient to the waist, as long as it takes full strength, then the scalpel;
and if you cannot draw and lift it, if you push a needle to the strong double thread, and tie and pull, and you push underneath, and turn your hand from one side and the other, as long as it takes; and beware that it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot draw or lift, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have entirely drawn it, then put on the place of the wound a clean linen cloth soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat until it is healthy.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and rolled up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must bend it straight, but do not cut it; and the treatment thus as we have said before.
The shape of the iron that one uses to open the vein is curved, and does not cut, so it does not cut the vein.
and is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is the form.
This vein is in the legs, in warm regions where there are no herbs nor trees, and in earth where there is no moisture.
and perhaps grows in another part besides the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that arises beneath the skin, as it comes from within the serpent-like and worm-like courses, growing between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the joints, and the vein begins to issue forth, just like a root of a plant.
When the head opens, it is necessary that you envelop around a piece of cloth one and a half inches long, and the knot, and leave the cloth on the leg, and all the times when there is no deficiency, if you envelop around the cloth, and the knot.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is entirely extracted. for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putridity in the limb, and a bad disease.
because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body.
and it happens often with this vein when it is treated with a long lancet, or with X, and a man came to me who had an issue with X fingers long, and when you cut it, the reason bursts out or perforates, and pierces all the way to the bottom, so that everything flows out.
and let the material that is inside be evacuated, and mix in the limb medicines that prevent putridity any day, then heal as with abscesses.
And at no time does the vein often break, and likewise when it opens in the joint of the foot, or of the hand, and much pain comes from it, and therefore it jumps often;
Cure then the fingers thus as we have said before.
of wounds that grow between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "disease of the ox", because it has often affected the oxen, and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the whole body ascending and descending, and one feels it well as it passes from member to member, until it dislodges the skin or where it goes, and jumps suddenly;
and it is generated by putrefaction of certain humors, just as come worms and serpents and lice and ascarids in the belly;
and doubt not of its malice, for when it travels through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance returning, and destroys the eye; and there are often times
When you see that it is curing and treating, if one cannot do better than when it was:
it is necessary then that you lift the limb above and below with a strong and tightly bound bandage, then cope with it and treat it firmly, and if the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or approaching near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly below him, then cope with it, and treat it firmly;
and it is necessary to use the patient's purification of body by medicines that dissolve bad humors, and beware of eating foods that cause putridity.
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member;
and I see this which I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and I soon saw, as it were, a vein rising like a worm at the shoulder, swifter than anything, like living silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then soon after spread throughout the whole body, until it came into the other arm;
then she told me that it often turned back towards the body, as I saw it.
I was very amazed at how it moved in this way from member to member, for I had never seen this illness behave in this manner. However, I had wanted to know well how the pain moves from one place to another, but I did not know it, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and therefore appeared constrained by this wind;
and I did not appear to follow this reason according to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patients feel that pain, it appears to you as we have said, if you lift up and down quickly, and then cut above so that this windy constriction releases at the site of the injury; and cauterize the site;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, so the treatment of that which drives out windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and serpent's pills, and similar others.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
The diversity of their is that there are those which have large points, and small, and curly, and swollen; and of those with elbow joints, and of those with knee joints, and of those where there are broken pieces;
and that which falls in no member if it falls according to two manners: where the principal member is injured, such as head, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore in no place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appear: you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply in, then pull it out, and cure the wound.
And the signs of the head when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and falls upon the brain, are when there is concussion and swelling and inversion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it happens without force of the nostrils, or of the ears; and perhaps it affects the speech and the voice; and jumps from the white moist spot resembling an abscess, and jumps out as if breaking through skin;
and it is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow so it does not remain.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not soft. and perhaps the arrow moves as if it were an abscess, and cuts out black blood, and brings on chill and cold sweat, and fainting: you will then feel no doubt that death is approaching.
And the signs of the arrow that never leaves the forearm are that without flatulence of scum bursts from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold region.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the bladder, it is between the small ribs; and gives great numbness and great pain and sighs; and moves all the shoulder members.
And if the arrowhead remains in the stomach, perhaps it bursts from the wound some undigested food matter.
And if the arrowhead is in the chest or belly, and there is no escape from the intestine's route, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrowhead.
And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes back, and the patient feels strong pain: Know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, as with the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and the similar limbs, are safe according to several dispositions. When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because that's how you should do otherwise.
It happened to a man who had an arrowhead shot into the root of the nail: I touched it, and drew it out from beneath the fat of the ear, and it was healed without any harm.
And I drew out an arrowhead that had shot into the fat of the eye beneath the skin beneath, and the arrowhead was repulsed, and I could not touch it except for the point towards the wood, and it was a large arrowhead from a Turkish bow, with a very light iron without ears.
I was healthy, and no evil accidents happened to me.
And I extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow at the ears:
I shaved the beards, and subtly touched until I extracted it, and the Christian was healthy.
And I extracted an arrow from the man whose head or belly it was piercing, and I thought he would die;
and then after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change at all; I cut around the arrow, and I dislodged it, and I extracted it forcefully, and there was no evil accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow falls on his back, and the wound was swollen above;
and the arrow remained within him, and he did not change his natural disposition, nor did I find harm in any of his natural functions.
And you see another man, who had an arrow shot into his face, and the wound was sewn up; and he lingered thus, suffering great pain;
and many other similar things.
And he extracted an arrow from the king's prince's hand, which was stuck in his nail, and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed.
I was called to the treatment after it had been stuck for three days. I found the wound very constricted.
I applied a subtle tension, and I did not feel it at all; and he felt piercing pain and hurt beneath his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow I put on the affected area a topical plaster, attractive and digestive, because the wounds did not become inflamed; and it appears to me the abscess of the arrow.
and it appears to me the abscess of the arrow. I put the plaster on the wound yesterday, and redressed the wound itself, and afterwards the patient felt the arrow for a long time, until he felt it in his nose.
and he told me about it. I put a corrosive medicine on the wound for many days, until it was opened, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which had lodged in the flesh.
then I probed into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me.
and it went beyond the limits for four months, and then I enlarged the wound if I touched the tendons, and moved them from one side to the other, but could not remove it.
Then I did not cease to refine and to engineer in ways of instruments, until I took it the next day with well-made tenailles, according to what its form would come at the end of this chapter, until I treated it, and restored the wound.
And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for the book cannot take everything in.
but the wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on what is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, at the understanding of the strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not issue from limbs where they are fixed except according to two manners: or through the soil or they enter, or through another part;
and that which jumps forth where it enters, it is an arrow entering into their flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
And if it does not jump now, let it be so that the flesh is purified around it, and may its exit be eased;
and thus if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be so for some days, and move it every day;
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around it with a subtle iron, so that the flesh around it is enlarged, and then draw it out.
And if the arrow-head is embedded in the body of the corpse so that one cannot see it, then seek it everywhere with a probe. and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow-head, and there is no bone or nerve, then make an incision until the wound is large.
and draw out the arrow-head if you can, and if it has in the arrow-head hooks by which it holds, then remove the flesh that is fixed to two parts of the muscle where you can, and then break or bend the hooks of the arrow-head, so that you can extract it.
and subtly understand that you do not break the arrow, that you remove it more gently.
And if you cannot at one time, let it remain until the surrounding flesh is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood makes you act contrary, then amend what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and set in motion how you can safely remove the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently;
and place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow fell on him, for it is the greatest aid that it be so, and if you cannot, then arrange him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears to be nothing of his, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it outwardly.
Cut then above, so that the tongs can grasp, and then it is stretched. If it bursts forth now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pull it.
And if it cannot exit, let it be left again, and then resume the extraction until it bursts forth;
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it back into the whole shaft;
and if the shaft is short, and you want to administer a push, if you administer the instrument skillfully, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument;
and then push forth, and if the arrow is shaved, push the instrument to the entering point, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut around the whole flesh where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it fits.
And if the arrow is short or heavy or in the belly or in the bladder or in the side, and it is close by, and you can cover above, push it.
and beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, such is the craft; and the treatment until it be healthy.
The shape of the tongs with which one extracts arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and you see its shape:
And there are many ways: large, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the instrument for extracting is like the claw of an eagle's foot, to grasp at the point of the arrow, as it is the shape.
Of the veins from which one bleeds are 31, where there are 16 main ones, it is to know: two veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples apparent; and the two veins that are in the two eyebrows of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two bandages which are at the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and laypeople call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and laypeople call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and laypeople call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and it is the one from which they bleed, which appears manifestly above the pouch.
And the savior is the vein which is between the auricular and the anular, and if it has two branches;
and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left thigh on the left side, and the second Sophia which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nese", which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient catharrhes, and migraines;
and the qualities of the health, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; Then he tightens the patient's neck to a vice, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two dependent dew-collecting vessels of the head: where the tubes reach your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
Then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein just up to the bone, then lift your hand above the whole vein, and cut and open the skin and the vein well, two inches deep, and make the blood flow out until you see;
Then stop it and hold it, until it is healthy;
and I have already said about incision and cauterization in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the temples, if it is to emigrate an old and worn-out optic nerve, and accustomed to obtalmia, and in the course of tears, it affects the eyes;
and the quality of the healer is thus as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly; and feel beneath your finger, and then make a sign of engraving;
then lift the heart up to the vein above your finger's index, and insert the lancet beneath, and lift the vein above, and the cupping, just as you have done in the other veins, and make the flow of blood according to your need;
then lower the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place on cotton; and then form it firmly, and let it be until it is healthy;
and we have already spoken of their cupping and their extraction, which is the beginning of the book.
The sanity of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the sanity of the head in ancient diseases of the face, and in migraines, and in redness;
and the quality is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and leave the vein until it is healthy and never again will it be swollen from a large flame.
However, it does not seem that the flames should be too sharp; and the sanity of transverse, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
The health of the two veins that are in the two arms helps the eyes, and the tongue, and the nostrils, and the little filaments in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is such that the patients strain their neck by twisting in some direction, as before;
then the health, and so the healthy part of traversing, a little thick, a little long, a little wide flame, for there is no spot of flesh. And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it breaks;
then make a correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and place it well.
The health of the vein of the nose is worth ague, and to severe headache, and to diseases of the face, as in migraine and redness that comes into the face, and especially when it is ancient;
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient strains his neck, then he stretches out his nose to his left hand, and takes a subtle flame long, and fixes it in the lever which is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will now begin to flow.
and do not go too far in depth, and make the blood flow according to necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is nearly completely restored.
The blood of the two gums helps with the constriction of the vein, and at the beginning of messelerie, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corroding, and in herpes, and similar things.
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient strains his neck on one side and then the other, as we have said.
and be the masters standing over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on the stool, then opens a vein on the arm a little widely, then draws out some blood temperately, or as much as is needed;
then reopen another vein, then release the bandage, and hold both veins moderately, so the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so the wound may be healthy.
of the health of the liver The health of the veins above the liver helps in the collection at the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks of the lips, and painful nose and interior.
And the quality of the healing is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the leaf, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right leaf and the other on the left, and you recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins;
Here is the translation:
of the health beneath the tongue The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the veins is such that the patient's blood is between your hands before the sun, and lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a dark vein;
examine one and then the other, and do not press too hard in depth, because beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly examined are divided into two manners:
where we prick with a flame making a large scar, or subtly with an olive-shaped instrument as if cutting with a scalpel, and it is called "anesil"; and are large and subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The shape of the flame burning so is very renowned, and it is large as if you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins with a broad, flat needle that appears to contain much blood and turmoil; and it's the form of the flame of olive oil:
and it's more subtly pointed, and is for clearing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus blood.
The juice of the basil, which is one of these veins, helps with the diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
and it is necessary for the vein to bleed slowly, and that it be wary of the artery that is beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a lot of blood comes out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one must not hold the flame in a piercing way, but rather cut skillfully as if with an anvil.
And if the basil does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; where you want no vein of it, where you sensibly feel in his hand the vein within the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cupping at the flame anus, as we have said.
And if you want to recognize the hand of the wound, it is necessary also that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the hand as much as you recognize the pulsation; then signal the hand of the incision, and then stretch out the arm, and cup the vein at the flame anus; and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the hand swollen, for it is an artery: avoid the tendons.
And if you see it spout out above like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery: Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
and be above fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
And if the wound is not cleansed, and it fails you, and the medicine does not present itself to you, then cut open the artery, for the head of the veins retreats. and cleanse the wound.
And take a fistula of figs, and apply it, and take one of the embers and lay it well just up to the other joint.
if the wound is cleansed, that's good; if not, then make a cure, as we have said, with powders that cleanse blood.
and the cleansing is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possession of the ease of the arm.
The health of the vein in a thousand ways helps it draw blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be wary of the nerve that lies beneath, and if he presses too hard in front, and he touches the nerve, and he inflames and the health becomes grievous, and by chance he cannot heal;
and this nerve is exposed many times, and if it does not appear in any men due to its subtlety, it is necessary that you anoint the instrument with oil; and avoid touching the nerve with your thumb.
And if he has a vein between the two fingers, then make it bleed far away.
The surgery of the head is helpful, because it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to surgically puncture at the flame of olive or at the flame of myrtle, because it is the safest of all the veins, since there is neither nerve nor artery beneath. However, it is necessary to choose the lightest hand, and not to hurt anything if one fails the first time, and one recommences; and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when they fail at first, but it does not harm anything.
The quality of the health is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not maintained except by guarding against disease and avoiding future illnesses.
and let the health be made in one of the three veins that are at the joint: that is to say, cephalic, fasting, and basilic; and one must heal at the beginning of taking medicines in spring, and in autumn and in winter after digestion, when the signs of replenishment appear;
and one must heal on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The health that is maintained against diseases has no fixed hour determined, but only when need is of day or night, in all hours and in all tensions;
and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus for less than four months until the seventh month. Nor should they be cauterized, the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that they empty the intestines with a light clyster, if they have much retained wind, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the principal members.
nor should one be cauterized who is too full of food, nor who is drunk, as long as it may be fervent, nor dropsical.
and one should beware of cauterizing after passionate colic, and vomiting, and decay of the stomach, and multiple births for a woman, and labor, watching and fasting, and that which is all virtue, or by means of the arm or gentle body.
then subtly balance the humors, if his blood is thick, through food and through drinks and through medications, so you have little power over it;
then enter into a bath, since nothing can deflect it, to subtly balance the blood, and you will be healthy from the vein of the foot up to the third, as we have said;
and beware of that day of labor, and of point, and of luxury, and of similar things;
and be gentle and joyful, and let the healthy ones be higher than those whom one heals, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently extract the limb above, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the blood;
and then rub the joint with your hands, until the veins swell, and feel them;
then anoint the healthy ones with a little warm oil, then put his right hand on that vein below the joint a little where it wants to heal, so the vein does not flee and fails to be cauterized.
Because there are veins that flee like cords to the sainier, and if there are those that are full of windiness, so when one puts on the flame, it draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those. and if it opens the vein, so is the wound too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be informed about these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good. if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the hastening, if the veins are not swollen.
And if the veins are swollen, and the patient is in a hurry, let him go for a day or two, and do not tie up the arm. perhaps he will come to ripen abscesses.
He does not enter into a bath, then renews his health as it pleases him.
and if the perforation is small, where the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue so much blood as you see, then prick in the same perforation all the way to the right vein;
and let the instrument proceed slowly, so that the veins are not inflamed; for it often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the vein inflamed, do not renew the health, and put on a little of lukewarm oil, for it alleviates the pain of the blood, and is mixed in this vein with the oil;
and thus administer the lukewarm oil to each health that you heal the veins, in order to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same makes a triangle and bulge of eyes, when one places it on the place; if the sensation is subtle and separates when it is too large.
And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not healthy except at the time or the opening of the vein is small, be quick, and place on the spot a wet sponge in water and boil it slightly hot, and hold for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the spot for several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm him; and if you see, place on something of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calendula, mastich, or similar.
And often there occurs an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica:
Put your hand on it, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, then that is the bad appearance. Beware lest you do not put it on anything of what we have said, for perhaps in the short run without an artery;
but you make a counter-pressure there to harden the spot, then heal with another healing, until it be healthy.
And bleed each one of blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it issue forth until it be red; and if you see it gross, let it be until it be subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and be the flames large;
and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits them healthier slowly and often, and they must be healed by cutting across, not by pricking.
and this manner of healing is free from deterioration of blood and gathering of nerve, and is worth more than the healing of a long or wide wound.
And to one whose body needs healing, it suits to give a soft poultice made from the juice of green apples; if it is inflamed, then draw out three or four times the blood; and if it is of cold complexion, then anoint beforehand with a soft poultice in muscat syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-fragrant syrup.
And if he touches the wounded area, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he applies a warm poultice of flesh, and a subtle smelling syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
And if he wants to relieve his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is weakened by great bleeding, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And he who wants to relieve his arm after the first bleeding, and it has a strong course, should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to bleed from another part, should be bled on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that is already inflamed, and it brings on fever; if you need to treat a large quantity, and widen the hole as much as it takes in a poultice; then you observe all the signs of health, and place your hand on the pulse when it is healthy, so death does not occur in the poultice, and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
and do not hesitate when you see the arm relax, and make the blood flow a second time, and the hole is closed, so you press firmly on; not if it is curved, that he stretches the arm hastily, for that would be harmful;
but let it be until it heals a second time; where you apply the tip of the flame, until the blood that has congaled at the opening of the vein flows out, and put on the soft skin a little aqua, and press lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to bleed twice, if the vein is in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is bled in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the healing is such that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the vein becomes red.
then it should be wrapped moderately, so that the vein appears good, then the wound is now sewn through, not too wide nor too long;
and let the punctures be large, and let it be well sewn near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot get it out, then put the hand in warm water again, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in winter, do not put the hand in warm water again, for one puts it more in ice than in summer;
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are neither artery nor nerve.
The healing of the little finger on the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is the method:
Hold the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein becomes swollen, if you see it. and if you cross it over, and if you touch it gently all around, so that nothing hurts;
and do not go too deep in the front, because the nerves are very close to the bare skin, and then put the hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot issue forth.
And when you have drawn out blood as much as necessary, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
The health of the hand on the left side is worth it against the disease of the thigh, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
The wisdom of the sapient is worth all the diseases that are beneath the body, as much as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his vein is such that the patient puts his foot in warm water, and rubs against the vein until it appears, and lays it above the joint of the foot. and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot many roots go forth;
vein where there is a larger root, or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
And if you make an incision on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and make the incision as in copying.
and be the flames gentle.
And if the sensation cannot emerge, reset the foot in the water, and let the vein be well cleared.
And if the surgeons fail the first time, start again a little above, because the sore is salty;
do not doubt of nerve, as we have said, and thus make a suture from the same foot equally.
The veins of the sciatic leg are at the junction of the thigh, and their surgery is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of his wound is that the patient will be in a bath, and extract above the Villon III veins by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
and if it opens, then make an incision in all the ways that you can, and across. and it is worth more that you copy, because the sore is dry, and it is much restored to many homes.
and it is worth more that you copy, because the sore is dry, and it is much restored to many homes. And if you do not find it, then there is no healthy vein that opens or closes under the little finger, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
and make the blood flow as you see, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and hold it in place; It is now healthy.
Cupping vessels are made of horns, or of antlers, or of glass;
and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
And this cupping that is without striking is done in two ways: either it is with fire, or without fire;
and cupping that is done by striking and by extraction of blood is done in 14 places on the body, one of which is entirely on the top of the head; and the other is in the neck; and the others are in the hollows of the neck; and the suction underneath the chin; and the suction on the shoulders; and the suction on the crops; and the suctions in the arms; and the suctions of the legs; and the suctions of the ankles;
and the suction does not draw out blood, because of the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one should not be afraid to do it, as is done with healthy veins; and it should not be administered, neither with full fire nor without sensation of fire, in any disease that comes from excess, as long as the whole body is evacuated.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to suction, or for habitual conditions, one should administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time;
because there are those who, when they have the task of bleeding, have a heavy head;
and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are those who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit out blood; and there are those who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to evacuate after three hours of the day.
The saliva of the mouth helps with the grief of the head ... that comes to their eyes, and it is not suitable that it be after the evacuation of all the body.
and this bleeding is in the place of the saliva of the head, and it is not suitable for one who is of a cold complexion or has a catharr, because that does them great harm;
and because of this it does not seem to me that the old men who have or have had cold diseases.
And he who often feels dizzy, becomes oblivious, and therefore it is suitable to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
The ventilation in the neck is in the place of the healthy head and the basilica, and because of this it is worth to strengthen the foot of the thigh, and to sew up the channel of the forearm, and to touch, and to replenish;
and it does not seem to push much, because it holds too firmly, if it injures the obliquity or stomach or heart.
The ventilations at the ribs of the neck are worth the pains of the head, and obtalmia and emigration, and to constriction, and to the pain as roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the healthiness of the basilica;
and it seems that you instruct the healthy one to press his hand to put, so he does not cut the artery, and does not cause a flow of blood.
The evacuations below the chin are valid for a disease of the mouth, and for a decay of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the area of the healthy lips.
The ventilations of the ribs are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
The evacuations of the thigh are as valuable as those of the three large veins of the arm, for they attract blood from these thick veins;
and instruct the surgeon to not make too many perforations, for the leg is nourished by flesh, and knows of its lower nerves and arteries.
The evacuation that is on the backside is as valuable as hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the evacuation be large, and be of a kind, so that it has mastery to treat well; and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break. and you make large wounds.
The cupping on the legs heals openly, for they attract blood from the whole body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and restore the flowers;
and they are in the place of two siphons, and of two tubes, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring about gangrene in many dispositions.
The way to apply the cup is that you put it on empty, and suck in moderation, and put it on hastily, and remove it equally, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the flow of blood.
then heat, and reapply the cupping, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have such a temperament, and clear pores. it is necessary to cauterize once gently, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep ones; and to suck lightly.
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize twice: the first time to subtly open up the way for the large blood.
And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time;
and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, then we suffice with a single cauterization. And if we want much blood, we recommence often;
and if the wound is deep, fire in deeply, and the terminations are such that the coursing should be perceived suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have stiff pores, to anoint the keys of the ventouses with opening and dissolving oil: If it is in this case, of violet oil, or of almond oil sweet, or of oil of cucumber seed;
and if it is in Iviera, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar.
And if the one who is applying the fire cautery has a tender and large pores, it does not require putting oil, but it requires washing after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
And he who has much moisture, if he raises from aniseed, or from aqua of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And those who have gross superfluities lift themselves with old wine, or water of sage, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar.
and do not consider it healthier to apply a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two.
and do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he be warned, when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped.
And beware of those who are healthy and choleric, and their blood is too sharp and inflamed. if it is necessary to take cold things, such as unripe apples and endives and lettuce in the shade, and similar things; and mild sauces, and flesh of pheasant, and moist meats.
and mild sauces, and flesh of pheasant, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and mild sauce, and mild sauces and small birds and pigeons;
and the day when he will be purging, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat before purging, or after, to comfort the main members; and let the juices be subtle, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The purges that are applied without fear of wounding are those that are applied to the liver, and to the spleen, and to the podagric parts, and to the belly and the bowel and the kidneys and the thighs, for these members cannot suffer wounding on the skin, and one does not do it except to attract blood from member to member, just as we put them on the marmots when the veins are healthy;
To remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and on the hip to diminish the limb;
and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
and thus it does when one puts them on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these cupping glasses are ministered empty by sucking too strongly; and sometimes they are ministered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in maladies of the pleura, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with warm water or hot water where herbs have been cooked.
The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is thus:
And it has two large and half palm-width of perforation, and it has or is coated next to the mileu a small hole, just as if to put a needle, and so of arain, soft in front if it does not bother the patient when putting on the limb;
and have in hand a rod of across iron or steel, to put a clamp in place, and be they large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the blisters of children are different from those of the old, and of the lean than the fat.
And one must then put this blister on the limb:
take the clamp of wax or linen, and put it in the blister across the rod that is in the blister, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the blister, lest it burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and be careful that it is on the part that we have said, so that when one looks, if the vapor goes away, and remove the blister;
and take the linen as before, and reapply it often, if you have mastery.
In the cupping device which is administered in disease of the lungs, to all aquosity, it has no edge nor perforations, and is not administered unless when it is full of aquosity, and is placed on the limb only so much;
and that's its shape:
Without them being administered unless on members where one cannot put cupping devices due to their smallness, such as eyelids and cheeks, and similar places; and in the naked parts of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the usage is that when you find cuppings that are in gentle, sweet, and clear spaces without roughness, if you take them;
and put them in a gentle and sweet spot, so they become familiar, and have nothing in the way; and then be cleansed of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the bandages;
and when they are full, and attract, if it is the place where one can put a cupping, one puts it, for it is very useful afterwards.
If not, lift the place of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and if the places are too sore afterwards along the course of the bandages, so soak a linen cloth in cold water, and put on, until the wounds are strengthened;
and if the wound is multiple, so put on a vitriol ointment, or warts, and similar things, until it is strengthened;
or you put on the place of soft peas, and let them until they adhere to the place, it will staunch now;
and if you are more skilled, take other sinews.
And if the sinews do not want to take, rub the joint with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so the sinew goes out, and then put them in place, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere.
and when you see that they cling, sprinkle on a little of aloe and silk threads, or of powder, they will now adhere.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror lies about this chapter, for they did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter.
and for this reason is strange the science in our land, because I did not find anything good there.
and I knew nothing, except by the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habituation of my life.
and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wisdom places its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or twist or fracture occurs to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so that nothing is lacking to you entirely, as weakness of body, or infants, or old people; or if the tendons are not very strong, or too fragile;
and avoid eating cold joints, it is to know frozen meats, and flesh of birds and goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat raw fat meat, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you do not doubt about a hot abscess, nor an expansion of matter in the limb;
if the patient returns to their first government which they have used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, as if they are strengthened in water, and rice, and bread, and pies, and pork of a calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and old wine, and similar things. For the nourishment represents itself in muscles and soon repairs the fracture.
And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well taken back or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children.
but there is no cure, reset the broken bone with large tendons which are reunited and join the limb together, so that it strengthens as it was before. and do not touch the entire area of his work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish with thick soups, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Because there is a break that goes to the armpit, and another in adjusting, as the handle of a pen for writing.
Because there is a break that goes to the armpit, and another in adjusting, as the handle of a pen for writing. And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks into a small crack entirely.
And in each manner he has his own engine, and his own instrument proper for restoration, according to what the remembrance brings back to its place.
and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and appear well by probing, and sound to the pressure of the hand.
and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no sign of fracture;
but it can well have twisting, or crack, or small fracture. It does not seem that you move to the hand, but put on medications that come here afterwards, and then hold it subtly now.
And know that the fracture that goes in a curve, and are the two disjointed parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not come to life;
and if abscesses come, let them be, as long as they are quiet, until the abscesses subside;
then put it in a position where you can lift gently and easily, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of one who has broken pieces;
then restrain it, as it must be afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it is of two parts, it is by hand or foot, or with your hand if it is small members, or with two cords, or with a cord and your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are dislocated, you reset them by all means in their proper places as you can, and beware that by your work no harm or injury comes to the patient.
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to their best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
if you set it straight beautifully, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who make them come by their work causing abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is in place, chastise well the patient so they do not move it, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and it is good if the limb is so stabilized that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, it's not at all points, and one must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
and it is good if the limb is so stabilized that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, it's not at all points, and one must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and you ensure it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb's condition is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small limbs, like arms and fingers and similar ones: one must envelop them with gentle and subtle drapings; and those that are large, like hips and legs:
one must envelop them with a wide and hard bandage, for wide bands embrace the entire large limb, and hold it steady on all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness;
Then the interior is stuffed with light poultices, three or four according to the member, and hold your hand a little above all the ligament, then go to the top of the fracture and hold it less, so that the fracture disengages a little.
and soften the ligament little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another ligament, and turn again towards the broken limb;
then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first lecture above;
then put between the ligaments poultices of linen or drapels, so that it is entirely even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then place your well-made stitches above, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, apply something soothing to the hot abscess, which reduces the inflammation, and let it be so for some days;
then hold your rods straight, and let them be of the thickness of a large cane reed, or of wood from which one makes writing instruments, or of palm branches, and let them be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the rod which one places on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large; then hold the rods as you did at the first bandage, then tie them above with a vein-binding thread, just as at the first bandage on the fracture; the more tightly it is bound, the less it will be;
and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of a single mold;
for if the threads are large, as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted cords, and it is a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that there should be less than two inches of space.
And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after being tightened in their healthy places, put beneath them a poultice of linen or a piece of cloth, so that it does not become black.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the courses are broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not fitting to tighten the stars all at once on the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to put these threads further apart than five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the aposteme that is supervening;
and see here the method of the ancient surgeons for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and it is that you take flour that holds as by the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant egg white, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common method of the surgeon restoring fractures in many dispositions, and even for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another way of restoring plaster for fracture and dislocation and twisting: taking Abrams and ladano and enamel and asphaltide and Arabic gum and myrrh, in the name of X; myrrh and aloe, in the name of V; aloe VIII; and make into powder, and mix with egg white; if the complexion of the man is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is good for many men.
Another way of plaster that is good for twisting: taking myrrh and vismalve, in the name of X; myrrh and aloe, in the name of VIII; acacia VI; Here is the translation:
Another way to reset joints and disjointed bones, and appease the sudden pain, and the cutting of the bone, and the fracture: take a new linen, and the softness in oil and cooked oil, and put it on the wound.
These plasters do not restore at first, but it is good to appease the hot abscess, and properly relieve the pains.
Another way to reset which restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a poultice.
Another way to treat for the restoration of the bone fracture and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of oats, one part of each;
and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are cooled, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use.
Another way of applying a more forceful treatment than the first, when an abscess becomes difficult to restore a limb. Take roots of violets, and seeds of flax, balusters, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, one part of each; and crush, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the cold of the limb, and its rest.
Here is the translation:
And it seems that one should apply warm things to the broken member, to restore it, such as a warm poultice, if it is like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of applying it that is good for injury and pain: Take mugwort and leaves of decapitated omes, or feathers of a bird, and vasmalve, and make them equal, and crush them, and make an emplaster and put it on the affected area.
And then lift it up a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has their bone moved out of its place; if you do not lift it up by hand for several days. And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, if you hasten, and lift it up, and remove the emplaster now;
And take a lighter dressing, and a sponge of seawater moist, and dip into water, and lift up the limb, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry linen cloth, softened in water or rose oil, and place it on a nut, until you are certain of a warm aposteme.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be removed, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little bit of emplaster, and do not strain it so strongly as before. and treat subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have need of emplaster and bandage, then resume it, as you did initially in equal measure.
And if the limb does not respond to what we have said, do not dislocate it further except after three days or four or five or seven. and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is evident, and approach the adjustment of the flesh thereto.
then he restrains more than at first, and his flesh swells up, as I have said before;
and if you see the dry place more than master is not, know that nourishments cannot come there; apply the warm water therapy often, every time you dislocate it, and let each tier be a day, and leave it in place for a short while;
by this work then the nourishments are cut off from the limb, and immediately it seems that they do foolish miracles, which restore the twisted member:
it is bad, and if it is a painful work, and I do not see anything else but to soothe the pain and to open it straight away.
There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are determined;
for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone breaks all the bone up to the fascia which is beneath the bone, as if it were a hatch or a split; and for this reason it is called this type of breakage "fracture".
Where the spear point touches the bone from above, piercing sense, and is called this type of breakage "absolute".
and it is the wound of these two large or small breaks.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or a split or fracture of the collar bone, or a fall onto stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a penetrating wound that approaches just below the skin which is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
And if the wound that is repelled into the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this breakage "capillary".
and if the wound that is made by hitting with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of bone go down, and it is like the joints are dislocated as when the joiners set them on their joints; if between the bones within.
And it happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, like the head of a child;
and they have all these ways of breaking which small pieces are dislocated if they are like this. and I will speak of it in its place.
And we recognize all ways of breaks through the withdrawal from them, and the inquiry into their tendons, and by the rotten flesh that is on them.
The capillary similarity is known through this: when one discovers the bone and rubs against it, then the black break appears.
In the treatment of breaks, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and palpation, and ague fever, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, so that one cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a sudden accident, and you expect health, thus begin the treatment.
And when the nausea comes to you first, and it is in winter, thus you should open your bowels before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, thus hasten to open your bowels before the seventh day, lest the intestine under the bowel be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
And if the break of the bone reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you sew the sewn part thus:
and it is that you take hold of the head of the wounded patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can, and if a flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess bursts, then it is necessary that you help with what is needed, and it is that you fill the place with medicated poultices soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the bursting abscess is appeased, and be assured of a flow of blood; Then begins the operation on the bone, and it is done according to two manners of work.
One manner is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and it is the shape.
And then I use another, larger taillement than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed.
and work lightly, so that you do not injure the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce through gently, so that you do not make too deep incisions with tareres, nor pierce further into the bone beyond the test, and should have a margin or circle above the point, which does not allow the point to pass out of the bone.
and you need to have more, if each one returns to its place of the thickness of the bone, so that you have tareres for every test.
and it is the form of three manners of tariffs:
The quality to perceive around the broken bone is that you put the tariff on the bone, and turn to your fingers as much as you know that the bone is perceived;
then put the tariff in another part a little afterwards, and thus do everything around, then cut into the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you have if you have tenaculum, pincers;
and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the vital organs.
And when you have perceived the bone and extracted it, it is fitting that you take the aperteur which is delayed from the bone to all the other instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tender and more subtle than the other incisors;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no useless shells, if they set lightly on one of the instruments; then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have mentioned.
And another manner of surgery is that which Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it greatly, and it is his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so when you have discovered that part, then put beneath the head of this curved incision the shape:
And do not cut on one side, and the affected part is in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently shape the entire bone around, and beware well of the membrane that is beneath;
if it is close to the bone, shape it lightly, for one shapes it with good sense without harm, and without fear.
And if the break of the bone does not pass just to the membrane, and the bone is covered so softly above, and there are small pieces, if it behooves to reassemble that roughness, and to remove the scales with a subtle rasp that you must have diverse quantities, in order to prepare each place as conveniently as possible, according to the work and shape of the break.
If you use large rasps first, and then more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, you must adjust the cause according to its direction.
and it is a thing which is not properly responded to by one who has placed his study in this art.
And if the swelling is discovered, it is necessary that you take the bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled bandage in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first bandage; and make it as light as possible, so you do not irritate the swelling, then administer from above another ligature, and do not constrict it more than necessary to hold the wound sufficiently;
and let it be thus for a day or two, until the aposteme's heat is appeased, then remove it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of vegetables, and powder of incense, and aristology, and similar things;
and of these things make powder, and apply it to the wound, and administer then mild medicines without sharp biting.
and beware that the wound be then clean, so you do not leave any swelling, nor leave it to assemble a bubble, for when a bubble assembles on the surface of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great evil to the patient.
for when one applies to the affected area a biting thing, it increases by degrees above. Take care then, lest some bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if it does not flow forth for the medicine that one has applied, which virtue it has, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue it into a plaster, and apply it to the affected area. then heal in many ways of cures that are necessary, so that it be healthy.
Know that sometimes the two broken parts above the nail are injured, or one of them by the joint, because they are two bones.
and that below is cartilaginous, and does not break, if it does not make a swelling or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you apply your little finger or thumb to the nail, and match this break equally with your index finger, and in the pouch by default, until the nail regains its natural shape. and do it lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
And if the break is in the upper part near the nail, and cannot be reduced to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a straight finger, a little thick.
And if the break is of two parts, you make it alike, and hasten to restore it to its original state on the first day, if you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swollen abscess is appeased, then apply to the head of the nail, stretched with linen threads, if the break is in one part.
Where you set a broken bone back in place, hold it steady; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the openings of the nose.
And they say that one must soften the tents in butter, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it requires that they be moistened with the concoction of egg white and powder of mill. then let the tendon, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages are hardened.
And at no time set an owl's pen or wingbone in place of tendons, and if the drapery is wrapped around, and hold the breakage, and soothe the patient within; or do what you saw.
And if abscesses come to the nose as you operate, then put cerotate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a pouch of dyakulon.
And if apostemes (abscesses) come, apply an emplaster made with flour of sisament, and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the veins.
and if the break is not small, and it breaks into many pieces, if there are suitable instruments available to him, then cauterize the fracture, and treat things that cause bitter pain, and suddenly, as with suitable plasters and ointments available to him.
and if he has no denseness in the new wound, so that the treatment of tents, and I put bandages of linen, until he is healthy.
When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no sign of wound above, and the break is above only slightly, and it is not broken in two, because of the corrugations within, if one recognizes it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jawbone, put your right index finger, and gently adjust the break, and hold it with the other hand by force, and make it even.
And if the break of the jaw is dislocated in two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that they are even.
And if the teeth are moved, or dislocated, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jawbone a waxed cerote, and put on a double bandage. and place on the drape a well-made large staple, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and attach it to the muscles that you can, and instruct the patient to relax, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure is changing, then dislocate it again on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed. and apply a plaster, made from powder of soft mill flour with abundant egg white or flour of sediment, after that which you have removed the crust.
and apply a light plaster again, and if the plasters stick, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy. many times one is healthy in three weeks.
And if abscesses arise, so administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, reset the bare bone that has been removed. if subtlety of the ostrum makes equal fragile things to this.
And if the wound is constricted, so enlarge it with flame according to the necessity.
And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
The fracture breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners:
where it is broken and disarticulated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore;
where there is a break with a wound.
And the work is when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, if one of them holds the shoulder that feels the broken fracture; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part;
then put the break in balance with your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
And if you have the skill to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your need. and hold steady the forceps, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you set even the fracture, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot manage the head of the fracture at the forefront, because it comes in deeply, then it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and push the ministres down below, so that the bone of the fracture is lifted.
And then reduce the fracture to your fingers, and if you find the broken pieces, it is necessary that you split apart;
and draw out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then take it to one of the incision makers that you have; but you put beneath the forceps this instrument, to prevent the blood from flowing:
and it resembles a spoon, and is not at all curved, and let it be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the screw;
and it has two arms, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, according to the routing of the wound that you have made when you drew out the bones;
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, if it softens, put a dressing in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and apply it.
The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fracturing, is that you put on the bone the plaster of powder from a soft mill and egg white, and put light staples on, and put a splint underneath, if you have mastered it; then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then put a double layer of dressing on the staples, and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage stays in place; and set the staple on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and below the healthy joint, and below the affected joint; and the reduction of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture firmly, and you see clearly that the staple does not move above the broken bone, if you rewind it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if you restrain it;
and make the patient sit on their back, and place it when he sleeps with a small pillow under the joint, to lift the shoulder high; if you align the fracture of the forearm by aligning the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it until bad accidents do not happen, for up to twenty days;
then reapply the plaster, if you see that it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it thus, until it is restored;
and it is restored to the best within 28 days, and in less than some men.
of the break of the shoulder
Because the spine breaks or dislocates easily, and one cannot know if it is out of place except by touching.
if the joint appears according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
then put on the limb powdered with millet flour and abundant egg white, and gentle bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth. then put on a large and subtle splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and so adjust the splint that it is not crooked in any part of the shoulder, if you use the wrapping of linen bandages, so that the splint is evenly straight.
and then bind it all with a strong bandage firmly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the dressing every day.
and every time he anoints, if he holds back, and puts equal the handle while it is far from its place, and places the patient on his side;
and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number is accomplished, if you dislocate it, and be careful, for it's not the bone that sets easily.
And if a piece of bone protrudes beforehand, and does not below the heart, if it swells up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the strong force to calm an abscess down.
of the breaking of the strong push
The foot is not often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the toes.
And when it is broken within, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks agility, and walks with difficulty, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the wounds in the broken bone, and feels poorly.
And the restoration is that the patient puts himself on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the sides of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to put equal in all the ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
Then set upon emplaustres and estoupes above the subtle thread of salt, or another lighter material, and envelop it in a drapil, and lay it on the broken bone, so that it does not move. and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and rewind each hour the bandage, and if it becomes relaxed, then hold it fast.
and if it loosens because of corrosion or pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and loosen, and raze the emplaustre, and address what has come in ways of cures.
Then reset the emplaustre, and hold it steady until it is healthy.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the fracture of the ribs does not come forth unless in the large ones behind the back, and within the head, and they do not feel unless because they are slippery. and he feels well at the inquisition of the two.
And the restoration is that you make the break even, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery of it.
And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain, and puncturing, just as in pleurisy, because the bone touches the membrane; and he has spotty pain, and coughs and vomits greatly, shedding much blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great ingenuity.
And if there are those who say that they need to administer food that swells the belly, in order to cure the fracture by blowing.
We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived. And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
And they say that some of those whose veins are opened on the body, to suck out the bad humor, and it is similar to reason; However, there is doubt whether the veins attract the excess humors on the body due to the weakness of its disposition.
And they direct that one should cover the limb with a warm ointment in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the interlining equal, then let it be cured of the treatment for pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone touching the membrane, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to open into the body of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to separate the skin;
and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then cauterize the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and apply ointments, until it is healthy.
And if abscesses come, put a warm dressing soaked in rose oil on them, and apply it to the affected area.
and treat meanwhile the area of those who are prone to abscesses, and apply poultices on the affected side where it is needed, until they are healthy.
and also to the spine of the back.
And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed for you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when they are held firmly and straight, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so put a cure on it.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take heed if the feet are numb, and if the accidents that are in the hands, and on the back there is a lack of vitality and involuntary excretion.
and when one has swooned onto their belly, if they have a sudden involuntary emission. And when he is swooning on his back and wants to sit up, it cannot be. Know that it is mortal: if he does not labor in his care.
And if this accident does not come to them, then it is the thing most lightweight.
And the cure is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of roses or oil of monk's rue, until it be appeased;
then apply to one of the comforting and drying plaisters, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until it be healthy.
And if any bone becomes dislocated, it is necessary to cover over the short crust. and reset the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then heal the joining with a poultice, until it be healthy;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you should put your pouchet in your left hand, and place it equally with your other hand at your power, then put the emplastrum and the staple on top, so you have mastery;
then hold it in place, and if there is a broken bone, sew it up, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
It happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, then there isn't much diminishment at the head; and make a long splint, and decline to the affected part, and comes to the patient's pain at the joint, and punctures, and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand on top, as long as you are on the breakage; and he knows what the break and the shape of it;
and if the break is at the top only, set that break even, so that it may be in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is of the long part, or it declines inward, then place the patient on their stomach, as long as the restoration of that fracture may be apparent. And when you have set it even, put it on the splint, then put it on a straight stick or pole, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move.
and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the binding is even. And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if a warm abscess comes, do not touch it, until the warm abscess is softened, and put on what we have mentioned before. and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, so that there is no bad accident.
of the breakage of the shoulder joint
The joint is what is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two methods.
where one is to take a full plain of moon grosser, according to this form:
And lay the chains on the loins, and they are raised high, and thus the patient is seated;
then he throws a broken arm on the stake, until it comes to the axle, and has in the middle a curve of stake, then hangs on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards;
then put the mirrors to the broken arm equal with his hands together, until the break returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his shoulder, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one should hold what is on the breakage with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the threads, and each extends to its own part.
And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold the ligature below the breakage, and on the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, it should be that you put the molar hinge beneath the axle, and another towards the cot, beneath the break.
and also if the break is towards the cot, it should be to put the hinge lightly, without effort, until the break is even on the limb, and on the cot.
Then set an equal fracture, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that abscesses do not form.
And if abscesses form, do not hold steady for less than seven days, and put on a soft linen cloth soaked in rose oil, until the abscesses are calmed.
Then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
and put on the bandage, and hold steady to the shoulder, and to the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, so nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a straight line, and put on the fracture a stick larger and stronger than the others, and have two inches of space between each stick, and let each stick be so large that it surpasses the fracture by three inches on each side.
then hold steady on the stiles, thus as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less in aligning.
And if you see the positioning of the stiles and the constriction, as we have said, in the process that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, if you let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said.
then look for three days at the bond, which you should not inflame in life, lest the nerves cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you approach, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then do not loosen the bond until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put his hands on his stomach.
and put beneath the shoulder a cushion flat of woolen cloth, and look every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, nor are the bonds loosened.
If you proceed by the virtue of medicine, and give the patient the food that we have presented beforehand, in such a manner that the food be at first subtle; and when it begins to take hold, then it should be abundant.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg joints are restored in 40 days of complete rest; and then one must disarticulate and administer baths and medicines of ointments to the joints to restore them.
And if the joint is lazy and numb, it takes 10 days or 2 months to disentangle.
of the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two" "foscile", one of which is small, and it is this one that joins the wrist;
and the other is large, and it is this one that is below, towards the little finger;
perhaps the large "foscile" breaks solely, or the small one, and perhaps both break together.
When the small fractures are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings;
and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and worse than when they are broken and assembled together.
If it's a small fracture that is only slightly broken, then you must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
And if it's a large fracture, then it needs to be stretched more strongly;
and stretch it on the cushion, and tie the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so the patient does not suffer any strain;
then stretch out the ministers like arms to the part below his hand, or to the vein, and another minister to the other above.
And then he puts his mirrors equal, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that grips the heart, you cannot restore it to its place, do so according to the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; If you take the treatment.
And at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses and wounds occur, if you apply a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and you apply the dressing subtly above, so that the abscesses and wounds are appeased.
And then remove the wax, and apply the plaster of millet powder with a lot of egg white, then put on the staves, and let the stave of the fracture be a bit stronger and a little larger than the others;
and know that it should have six staves or arms in several positions: so let the fracture be in one of the bones, or in two;
and hold more firmly on the fracture than other parts, and tighten less as you go farther away, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages be those that are on the soft and moist bruise, and not hard or dry;
and let the bandages be those that are on the soft and moist bruise, and not hard or dry; and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said.
And look after the limb and the ligament after some days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, as if a pruritus comes to the limb, it is necessary that you warm the limb with hot water, until the pruritus is alleviated;
and let the limb not be tightly restrained.
And then resume the bandaging, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, adjust it accordingly.
And if you take precautions that the nourishments cannot come to the limb, because it is too narrow, then it is necessary that you soften them a little, and let them thus for some days, until the nourishments are corrected, and then hold steady.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not undo the dressing for 20 days.
where he turns inward, then he puts his hands to his neck, and let his neck be equal, and beware of movement and jerking, and sleep on his back;
and know that this bruise is restored in 30 days or in 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers having a little fracture, and it does not come but to bend many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient's arm be crossed, and it should be straightened out directly in front of him evenly.
then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and set the mirrors equal, until they are well-jointed;
and apply the plaster and the bandages, so that abscesses do not come, then I put a stick according to the quantity of the humor; and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is on the outer side of the belly of the sole, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken sole; and then bind with a long bandage, and let the stick be of a gentle strength also as large as the plant of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
And if the breakage is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the hand, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and tighten the ligament between the two.
And if the fracture comes to one of our fingers, it's the swelling, set it even, as it needs. and hold with the sole, and if you see that you put a small straight stake to lift the fracture, and do not move.
and if the fracture is in another finger, like in the index or one of the others, set it even, and bind it with the healthy finger that is next to it. where you bind them together in holding, what is worth, or you put on a stake, like a swelling.
and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and suck out what comes from it, as I have said.
The bone of the hip is often fractured, and one sees it well when it twists in front and behind.
and the restoration is done by binding above the fracture, and another beneath. The patient puts his face upwards, then each minister extends his bandage to its equal part;
and it is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments will be towards the finger, and the other ligaments below the break.
And thus when it is near the knee, and then the bandages are below the knee, and then the extension is downwards;
then place the mirrors to the bone equally with his two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if abscesses come there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down, then return to your work and your treatment; The bandage is made in such a manner.
It is necessary that you envelop the fracture with a doubled bandage in two or three layers, and remove the superfluity, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and attach the head of the thread above;
Then turn around the leg and around the thigh the bandage, then put around the break these, and put a star-shaped thing on the bone of the leg;
then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make equal the constriction, then start to bind firmly three or four turns around the break; and when you go further up from the break, and constrict less;
then take the two heads of thread that you had placed between the leg and the thigh, and bind three of these things that are above, then return to the underside at the head of the thread, until you come to the bottom of the foot;
and constrict, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling or other similar thing comes. And if it happens, if he dislocates, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times;
and if there are fragments of bone that prick, one must extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, one must break the bone, and make a fracture; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
And sometimes the hip joint is broken in this way, as in the shoulder and arm;
always, in the restoration made thus, it does not shut in the patient.
And it is known that the pulse is restored in a day, or almost less or almost more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
Know that in the groove of the knee joint there is little breakage, but it often folds.
And if it breaks, it's not just a crack, or it pierces, and has an open wound, and feels wounded, and this feels very bad.
And the restoration is done by setting equally what is rounded at its joints, until it is assembled as much as one can.
then apply the plaster, and put a round stave, if you are a master of it, and hold it as it should be held, then reward all the arrangements that we have said in other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar things; here is applied to each accident that it suits him, so that he may be healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "muscle", and the other is called "fibula";
and there is a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the equal arm, and the work is all here. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely askew.
And if the subtle bone is fractured, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it is seen clearly; and it turns awry.
Then administer extension, and set it equal, and place the splints equally;
but always, it suits that the fracture is laid, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is shorter and lighter; and apply the ointment according to its power.
And when you have completed your work, take two straight sticks of fir wood that surround the leg from one side and the other, and be about the length of the leg from the knee joint downwards.
then wrap it in two layers of bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle also, and at this ligation do not allow the leg to decline to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
and anyone who administers the stick of equal length to the leg, and it is of fir wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the fracture or where there is a wound.
and examine each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or another accident. if he cures until he is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes come with a break and two poisons, and there are only four dispositions for this.
And if he has a broken bone in his foot, and you see the bones rubbing against each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and now place your foot on the joint where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their place.
Then put the plaster and bandages on, and place under the belly of the foot a small tablet at the two flat joints, then hold the foot firmly, then you have enveloped the dressing around, and other things that you need.
And when ten or twelve days will have passed, you should loosen the bandage, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
And if there are some of the toes broken, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand. Then put on the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little larger, then place under the foot that tablet that I mentioned, and hold it firmly.
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, set a splint on each joint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the table steady under the foot; and let it be standing on the edge of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken. and attend to each accident as it requires.
of the break of the bone of the thumb
When the bone of the thigh in a woman is broken, make her sit enlarged, then incline it towards the back of the spine, and hold it from behind;
then fill in the bag with the nature of the patient's cotton, and put therein as large as I stand.
then undress the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jumps the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stake.
and when she wants to urinate, if you lift the cloth, and when she has urinated, set it back in place, and do this for seven days or thereabouts: it will restore the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of birch, and tie it to the perforation with a string, and put all the bladder in the wound; then blow into the string forcefully, until the bladder is inflated inside: the wound will restore the fracture;
then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for several days, until it is healthy.
And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said for the bone of the thigh;
and these nearby breaks are not hidden from one who applies his study and practice, and heeds my book.
For the fracture, it indicates in several positions the correct way of restoration: Then give instructions.
On the fracture, when it is broken, take a mouthful of oil and anoint the fracture; then wrap drapels around, and leave it three days or thereabouts, and it will be quickly healed.
of breakage with wound
It is fitting for him who has breakage with wound, especially if it is great, such as the bone of the thigh or of the shoulder or similar, that he be healthy now, so that the healings that we have said testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, if the vein of glass, if you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the bruise in the same hour, or that day, so abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, until the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered heart, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with a small extension.
And if the extensions are not available to put equal in your hands, then reset with this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary in the mirror that he takes three or four, according to what he needs in each cure of fracture;
and let it be rounded and a little thick, so that it does not bend under the compression on the member in your work, and let it be smooth in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palsy", because it is necessary that the curved head of the bone be placed on top of the apparent os; and the joint is once again, so that it regains, and one is equal to the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, it requires that you grasp the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then take the handle of an instrument suitable for this, whether it be an incisor or a saw, to your power;
then remove what is stuck in the bone of roughness and of small scars.
And when the bone is rearranged, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
If it does so that it is in its place, then moisten it with wine of a black styptic, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put anything on the wound that has oil, lest it cause rot and corruption;
then administer these as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture;
and many times they have done this foolishness, and they have brought it upon the patient to death or corruption many a time; and let the strappings be more gentle and softer than the other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident has not occurred, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, then it does not need to be placed on those; but envelop entirely, in place of these, thick dressings, and bind them.
And when you see afterwards I or II inflaming the wound, if you remove what you had put on at all cost, and you apply gentle dressings to soothing wounds, as one applies tetrafarmación and similar things.
And it is necessary that you anoint the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limbs are wrapped in such a way that the bandage does not press too tightly.
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but rather becomes worse, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with a probe, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the joint, or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it, according to what is stated in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken, and opens into the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it, for many times death ensues, but let it be until it suppurates;
perhaps it will fall out by itself after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound, if you can.
and if you cannot, let it be.
We often come across this after the health of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a difficult thing to see the shape of the limb; and sometimes cannot make the limbs perform their natural functions.
Take heed therefore when it is fresh: if you administer stippling medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and conflate them with wine stippling or with abundant water or with oil; and put them on the affected area in a poultice, and hold it well, and do not dislodge it for many hours;
and put them on the affected area in a poultice, and hold it well, and do not dislodge it for many hours; and then remove it, and restart with another, until the swelling is gone;
where you hold onto a well-made wooden splint; for the property of wood is that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
and if the nodulation is already converted into hardness like a stone, and it needs to be removed, so scrape above it, and make the surplus apparent; where you take it to a skilled surgeon, until it is removed, and the treatment until it is healthy.
of a limb that is weak after the healing
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains afterwards with weak and subtle limbs, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and could not bring nourishment to the limb; where for a multitude of arrangements; where for too great movements, do not trouble him at his hour; where because he has little blood in his body, if it is weak.
And the treatment is that you should make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness;
then apply poultice on the limb, if the poultice attracts to the great nourishment, and the arrangement often draws out tedious water, until the nourishment runs to the limb; and restores it to its natural shape.
because of a twisted limb after the injury When the limb is twisted after the restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb entirely anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
and this practice is blamed, and great evils come from it, and sometimes death;
however, if the nodations and torments are fresh, it is necessary that they be raised with warm water, or mollifying herbs be applied, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and mellilot, and similar things;
and make a mollifying plaster, as one makes diachylon well, and take the mucilage of vismalve, and mix it with grease of goose or oil of sisamont, and apply the plaster thus;
or you take fat figs, and crush them with flour of Colonne, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And at no time is the node removed by constantly and continually rubbing with moist hands. And let the member be moved gently every hour.
And if the twistedness is enveloped and hardened, just like a stone, and it needs to be opened with the iron, so it should be covered just up to the bone, at the subtle incision site lightly. and apply cauterization and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary to now bring back into alignment.
For if we delay, the eyes will inflame, and perhaps by chance they will reset into their proper place;
because it is not suitable to move it at the hour when it is inflamed: many times it brings on spasms and other pains;
in any case, when this happens, make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the aposteme (abscess) becomes calm;
then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the treatment will come into its proper place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to foot.
Sometimes it happens that the jaws are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocation of the arms is in two ways: where they are a little out of their joints, and softened a little; where they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to its natural positions more easily.
And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his fingers like a pouch in one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two fingers of the hand be bent back, to make even;
and instruct the patient to soften them, their jaws, and move them from all sides. And the fingers put it even, until it returns to its place.
And if the reset is rough, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are washed with warm water and oil, so that they reset lightly;
do not delay the reset, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming soft, then place a moistened cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with many bands.
and let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor exert themselves too much, but take light food, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed.
and then advise him to eat lightly, and not struggle much to open his mouth to the morsel and to the drink, so that the jaw be well set and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be adjusted to a point at one hour, and are not converted to their proper places, then fever and excessive sweating come, and by chance a loose bowel, and by chance a vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a perilous condition; and many times dies the one who has it, in eight days.
The force cannot dislodge the rib from its continuity and from the breast, and it is often dislodged at the fracture, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies comfortably on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then put on the plaster and the bandage, and bind it tightly;
and the head which is towards the side cannot be dislocated; if it does not, and if it dislocates again, you should reset it to its place, as we have said;
Then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it steady, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy.
and thus the same is reset the head of the spine, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
because one of them is that it dislocates towards the back part at the joint; and the second is towards the front of the thigh; and sometimes it dislocates upwards, and that happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate backwards because of the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward because of the veins;
and often it dislocates downwards towards the joint, especially in those who have little flesh, because for them it happens suddenly;
For those who have enough flesh, it pierces at points, and re-enters at points.
And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder is inflamed with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary therefore that you test them, as long as you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocations occur when it falls towards the joint, and makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the joint, touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements;
and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the joint;
and this manner of dislocation is not forcing to recall, when it is new, or if the veins are diseased.
And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient upwards high, then put their fingers underneath the shoulder blade, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it upwards, then put it underneath; if it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister applies soothing and calming remedies, such as a decoction of lettuce and fenugreek and melilot in warm water, and it is soothed;
then the patient is laid on their back, and a strip of linen cloth, not too soft nor too hard, is placed underneath the shoulder blade, then the minister places their heel on the strip, and lifts the head of the shoulder strongly, and draws the hand of the patient;
and another minister touches the head of the patient, so that he does not move downwards; that shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see whether it is reset according to this method:
and it is that you make the bone which is more massive than the patient's; and be straight towards the ribcage, and push the shoulder down to the bone of the patient's, and lift the bone high up, so that the patient's arm hangs in the air; and another minister draws the patient's hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And it is reset in another way:
and it is as if one fixes a long pole on the ground, so that the head is also straight like a pestle, and neither too large nor too slender; then it should be placed under the patient, but so that it has soft drapery above, and the patient is standing straight from the long pole of the beam;
Then let his hand be extended downward from the other part in a straight line, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: Take a stick of two feet in length and four fingers in width, which has the top end rounded to enter obliquely into the hollow of the joint, according to this form:
then place the top end of the stick wrapped in cloths, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it under the joint of the patient;
and extend the arm along the length of the stick, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair, and let the hand be extended downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint returns to its place now
And when it is in, whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you place under the seat a layer of even linen, then put on top the plaster made from powder of soft millet, with incense and album of egg white, across the entire shoulder and around, then hold under the seat firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary to nourish a little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
and then nourish more afterwards 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is affected or stretched out or softened. and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the chest, and the breasts, or behind, if made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it needs another treatment.
and heal as long as he is healthy.
And after the healing comes numbness to the limb, and later on it has difficulty in movement, if the patient bathes many times, so that this numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation where it hurts
Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated to points, and at points returns;
and it is dislocated in all parts, and meanwhile before and behind, and the dislocation is not fully restored, for one sees well and feels well; and dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the injured limb with the healthy one, then it can be seen openly. For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus so that abscesses do not gather there, for if abscesses gather there, it would be grievous to reset;
and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is behind; if it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms should be expansive, and the hands soft in the mirror according to the count of the interior, above and below, and bent the jointure at his fingers assembled, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fixed from the root of the palm the bend that was dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold two ministers, so that it does not move at extension;
then turn the arm of each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide;
and when the mirror joins the jointure to his hand, if you anoint it with some oil to mollify the jointure, then bent the jointure forcibly, until it returns;
and when it is in its place, if you put a dry plaster on with egg white, and hold it firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then dislocate it.
And if the joint is fixed in its place, then disentangle the ligament, and let it go.
and if you see that the joint does not fix well, then reapply the poultice and the ligament, and let it go thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then disentangle it.
And if he feels grittiness after the reset of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is alleviated; where you put on the joint a fatty woolen cloth of sheep, then let it be for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the woolen cloth back on, and then enter into a bath; and thus do it two or three times until he is healthy;
and if you see that, put a warm poultice of soft butter on it, and hold it in place;
if it returns to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more so than the other joints. However, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess does not form there.
And the way to return it is that you put the injured hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers of the hand, and the doctor puts them in alignment, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns.
However, you go ahead, it is necessary to examine if it is well in its place; then put the patient's hand on a table at extension and at flexion. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the doctor places his hand on the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, then strain the emplasters calming abscesses and let them sense re-commence.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are injured, or the arteries;
if there is no other remedy except to strain by cauterization in this case, and by chance it will not be worth anything else.
And when the hand is on the spot, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it thus for a while, then remove it and leave it so.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no grinding, then soak the swollen area in warm water, and rub it so that it becomes healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Never are the fingers of the hand dislocated to any part, never to the back of the palm or to the belly;
then they are the fingers, and push the dislocation to your pouches as long as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed;
and let it go immediately, and then put it even with that joint;
and bind the limb, as we have said, and release the joint, and make it move, and rebind the limb;
and do it often, until it is straight, and do everything thus, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy;
and do everything thus, when it is dislocated from another part.
for the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are multiple dislocations, if there is no point of healing, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly burst forth with great force, cannot be held back, and often some member is softened, either the two hips or the two arms or one.
And often the shinbone changes to four parts;
that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez";
the treatment is that you should rewarm where the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the entire body.
And that which comes from falls or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures used big words, where there is no great profit in all.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gilbositez that comes at the worst front, there is no engineer who can heal it;
and thus it is that which comes straight to the II costal, and one cannot cure fevers except that which comes properly to the back, if I say so;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in a level place, and have support beneath him, so he does not slip;
then fix the cushion under the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage beneath the patient's hips, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two ministers should tighten the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two cushions;
and they should be well fastened, the cushion as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a tube of three feet in length, and place the tip beneath the patient's back, and let the patient be on their side, and insert the head of the tube beneath the patient's back, then put the middle of the tube on the spine; and place the mirrors at their feet on the other end of the tube, and press well, until it returns to its place;
and if you see, then make it so that the turnet turns towards the hand. And it is that you fix two tensors at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet two others, and between each tensor, above and below, a palm's width of space;
and have in each tensor a hole, where the turnet runs, and let the tensors be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move;
and between each II of them a torn ligament, for which the torn ligament turns, and has in II turners II small torn ligaments of a palm's length, to turn the turning handle;
and then the ligament that is among the bones to the turning handle towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turning handle, and each of the ministers turns their turning handle to all the ligaments, and the masters set the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then set on an emplaster of decumatif with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then the stellate of a tablet of three fingers' length, which grips the limb of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle remedies of nourishment, until it is sane;
and if some thing comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer soothing and softening medicines, with the steel that we have mentioned before; and sometimes I administer on a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back of the dorsal spine, and think that it is dislocations; and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have mistaken judgment: perhaps it may bring about death.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come to be dislocated solely, not so like the other joints;
and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to three parts: downwards and upwards, and forwards and backwards;
and more downwards than the haunches, and a little dislocated forwards and backwards.
And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the injured knee than the healthy one, and the injured one cannot bend its knee by fire. and it is the loosened flesh that is inflamed from a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of the one who is near death, if it is that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of the one who has it in front, it is that they stretch their leg according to its fulfillment; anyway, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make it move, it cannot go forward, and holds back its urine, and inflames the groin, and when it goes, it passes over the ankle.
And the signs of the one who is behind, if it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the level of the ribs beneath the costs.
The reminders of this kind of dislocation are that you should rewind if the dislocation is old, and it stays according to its disposition, so there is no cure. and it does not seem that he has a good prognosis.
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the three ways of dislocation, if you hurry to put the joint back in place, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will recover, and there is no need for another treatment.
And if it does not recover in this way, then you must prepare the limb strongly, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or tie it with a bandage around the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in this manner so that he presses his hands under his haunches, then tightens a soft bandage around the hip; and another pulls the head of the bandage;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If this does not occur, then one must apply treatment to its similarity.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder, then you must place the patient on their healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the hip, and the joint that is below the angle, then extend the bandage upwards towards the angle, and towards the strength.
then take another minister by his arms, and embrace the large joint of the hip that is diseased, and extend it to its former shape. if it returns to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is easier than the others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage on the two heels, and on the two knees, and so the diseased leg is extended two fingers more than the others.
then let it be hung on a wooden pole, and let it be two cubits above the ground in length.
then instruct the minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be hung with the patient, who firmly embraces the hip, because the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is in default, thus guide the patient, as we have said in the one who has a clubfoot, and straighten the ligament on the affected leg properly, and on the foot also.
then put two splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix the splint between the hips of the patient in the form. and have wet cloths applied around, so that they do not blister the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors place equally with their hand the dislocation.
If she returns, it is good.
If not, put him on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said. and put the fingers of one hand on the affected joint, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is backwards, it is not necessary to stretch the affected part downwards, nor to lift from the ground, but rather it should be as if the joint were dislocated backwards, just as we have said about the positioning on the two hips. and it should be on its face, and the bandage stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table. and it will be at a point when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal. then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move. and let it rest for three days or four, then dislodge it, and put the plaster on;
and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and let it be for three days;
then dislodge it, and make the patient walk gently, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: it is to know, inward and forward, and backward;
and do not dislocate at all in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg as they can, and place your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet;
Then take your knee in your palms, and draw it back between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee in a circular shape. and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has well aligned his leg with his hip lightly.
and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the hip, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then remove it.
and do not disturb the patient's pain further, until the limbs are comforted.
And if the limb is not at all, if administration is strongly extended, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it be healthy.
of the dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are sometimes sprained and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the swelling is reduced, and stretch beforehand to the part where it was dislocated.
The reminiscence is lighter, and one must extend it lightly with their hands when it is slightly swollen.
And when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and hold one minister firmly by the leg, above the swelling.
then prick the foot with your right hand, and then with the left twice, then hold it high, and push the foot up high;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pricking the foot;
if it returns, that's good;
if not, then restart the work, for it returns;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the pillow firmly on the ground between his thighs, and wrap the drapery around, so that the patient does not slip;
then hold the minister's thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot with his hands or with a strap, so that it lies on the neck of the foot; then each minister stretches out evenly, and the pillow should be placed between the thighs of the patient to retain the patient when one holds them;
Then set the mirrors equal to the dislocation with his hands, and another minister touches the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the point, set the plaster and bandages above, and hold firmly, and place the foot on the leg, and guard the veins that are on the back of the knee, so that the ligaments do not become too stretched.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments soften, hold it firmly.
Then loosen it on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient to move for four days. and if he goes beyond that term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses or wounds come, it is necessary that you touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of the two When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them nicely without strain, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the two toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
and when it is even, and there appears nothing, if you put under the foot a flat table to support the head, then you restrain strongly, and let it be for three days, then you release; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and be piteous and merciful and slow, not harsh;
and apply gentle remedies at the beginning of hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the hot abscesses will not return;
and when the limb is out of place, if you administer soothing remedies to the inflamed abscess, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with dry dressings.
and also with a fracture or breakage, and less severe dislocations, if you reduce the swelling, and do what we have said about simple illnesses.
and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will be of no value to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body.
