Here is the translation: And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish this with the treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fires except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed off and the science is estranged.
It seems to me that I want to vivify the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. and I will assemble the forms of the iron instruments of cautery, and of the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine extended. And it behooves him who undertakes to immerse himself in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and of moving veins and of resting ones, and where they issue from.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the names with the name are not much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, if he does not take care, he will fall into error and harm people.
Thus I have seen many of those who engage in this science, and then abandon it, lacking knowledge and experience.
For I see a foolish doctor who treats an abscess on the neck or throat of a woman, and treats the arteries of the neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of a man's kidney, and the stone was large; he took out with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called by the patient to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if one touched it, he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took in care Duke Henry of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage he had a wounded place;
and the doctors, out of ignorance, held the breakage steady over the wound with very strong force, and did not leave the wound any calmness, and left it thus in torment;
and he commanded that it not be touched at all;
and then it happens that the leg becomes completely swollen and the feet and comes to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and release the leg; and when I had it reset it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and could not be healed;
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was almost entirely lost.
And I saw another wound that burst open an abscess, and then it became inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
For cancer, when it is full of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: it is to know, namely where there is danger in many dispositions;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
For it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish mirrors cannot speak evil of you.
If you take your arms in a crossing, and you undertake your wounded limbs lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised.
and let the grievous diseases be alleviated of painful sanity;
and remove your arms from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may be able to come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says among some of his admonitions: Do not take a bad disease in hand, lest you be called foolish physician.
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterization and medicinal cautery, and these chapters are organized from the head to the feet.
and about the forms of instruments, and the iron tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping glasses and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;
and it is the chapters arranged in order and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and it is arranged according to the low head just as feet, and the forms of instruments.
Here is the translation:
I say that the qualities of aid, and of harm, are the longest discourse and subtle science and hidden responses;
and about this spoke the wisest of the wise men, and agreed with this;
and I suffered little for their words, because I reduced the length.
I say that cautery helps universally to every complexion where there is matter, before the complexions: it is to know cold temperament without material, and dry temperament without material.
In a cold and dry complexione together with material, they devised none and said that cautery is great aid; and the others said the opposite: that cautery is not suitable for a disease that comes from cold and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure a cold disease with cold, nor through dryness.
and he said that those who say the opposite, that cautery makes great aid to cold and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men. Because you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times through experimentation.
And in no way should one interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the outcomes and the space of time.
of other complexions we have no less fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the mirrors assembled and agreed with the cautery.
And know, son, that assembling fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medical cauterization.
For fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it is not named.
The burning remedies pass from one member to another by connecting, and bring to the affected limb grievous sanitation diseases; and sometimes it kills the patient.
The fire, due to its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I remove the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; For you receive in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and they select the suitable moments.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries are often alleviated by the aid of cautery; and meanwhile the cauteries are for necessary pains and sudden injuries that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think only of this, dear son, as foolish people customarily do; for the illness that is healthy through cautery has no relapse; and they say thus;
and they say thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are cause of the pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the hastiness of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its signory.
And it happens that the disease becomes worse at times according to the patient's temperament and the location of the disease and its severity.
and are gathered in him the excesses through the acquisition of food and similar things, so that it is not administered cauterization at the location where there is little excess and moisture, just as cauterization of denseness for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but it happens little.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is true;
but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauterization the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cures for any disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it is effective.
Then it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancient ones said that cauterizers of golden instruments are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and because of the height of its substance;
and they said that the handles of cauterizers do not make putrefaction, but this is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it is true in some homes;
and golden cauterizers are more valuable than those of iron, as they told us. And however when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know when it is heated by the color of gold, and it is quickly cooled;
and if one heats it too much; they make to the fire; and thus there is enough of impediment.
Now I have ordered this chapter according to the chief joints just below, because it is easier to find the way.
These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there is a remedy made by the cause of a disease called "soda", and by the cause of many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for multitude of noises and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine modifying the chief three or four times, according to whether the strength and the age and the habituation of the patient can suffer it; and then make the patient rest the injured head.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on your shoulder;
afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the gum, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", because that is its form: And put it on the marked spot of ink, and do it by descending and extracting your hand little by little while twisting; then lift your hand suddenly, and turn the spot so you see the bone I little hole; and if you do not see it, then recommence the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
afterwards take a little silk, and put in warm and soft cotton inside, and put on the spot, and leave it three days;
after putting a millstone on the buttocks; and let it be until the swelling is reduced; after healing the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And the old men said that when the wound stays open for a longer time, it purges more; and therefore it helps to move.
And they said that one should not leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And others say that one should cauterize so much to leave it thus, and strike strongly so that the bone is exposed as widely as the circle that women put on their thighs, because the humors issue forth.
and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and sew it up.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some cases where there is a risk of fear.
and it seems to me that I should let them grow;
for the head is weakened by the continuous natural solutions, as we demonstrate in other members;
and similarly when the head of a patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salubrious and mild for me, and I usually work in assembling a healthy condition.
When the entire head is afflicted with chronic pain, and it lasts a long time, then one should use the remedies of iris and pills that are called "cochie", and purging of the head and eyes and applying plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it is not worth it. Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize beneath this one a little bit, as we said above. After making fire cautery on some curved horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and make the cautery where it is called "vasselez". and it is the joints in which one puts ventouses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patients feel too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the moisture of the head, and this is the method:
For the fire of the head When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease has spread to the eye, and the head is purged by mundane medicines, and other treatments that I have said in the division of diseases are made, and all this does not profit at all: then you make cauteries according to two manners, that is to know of medicine by water and by fire.
The cauteries of medicine by water are that you prick a sweet deal of salt, and remove the crust and recover the poultice as the head, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can restore the deal of salt beneath the skin;
and when it will be restored, bind it and hold it well and let it thus for 12 hours; and then unbind it and pull out the deal of garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put on a cotton cloth soaked in butter until it makes a scab.
After the treatment of the wound, until it is healthy;
and if you see that I have written or described twelve treatments of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery to the form that it is in:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has little curvature, and in a small appearance;
and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that most of the thickness of the cauterizing fire is absorbed;
and lift your hand so that the artery does not become hardened, which is furthest, and runs with abundance of blood.
Afterwards put cotton on the wound, and place it on the spot for three days; then I put moist cotton in a poultice, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healthy;
and if you want to cauterize this emigrated wound with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and beware of cutting the artery in this emigrated wound which is not ancient.
of the migration
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries mentioned beforehand in medicine do not soothe it, then it is necessary to heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it becomes white.
and signify thus on the dull eye a line of half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and hold steady so you do not touch the artery and do not approach up to the bone;
and guard against the mandible that moves when one chews, and the nerves have no regard except for the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against the disorder of blood in the artery when it will be touched, or touching has great fear and mistrust to him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced; and let the vein grow in my way;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it flows.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy at the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healthy;
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of extracting the artery, with the cautery that has two cuticles; and these are better cauteries than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is the form:
After puncturing all around the ailing ear, or around the two where the pain holds in both, and slightly dislodge it beneath the root of the ear before you have signed the place of the incision; and let him have points touched behind each ear;
after healing, let the limb be sound.
from the torment of the mouth
Pain that must be healed by fire cautery is not fiercer than those that move with inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
and do not make a cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this type of pain that moves with inflammation and evacuations of the head and gagging, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third at the joint of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and have it cauterized at the top of the ear a little below the crown of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; and let the cautery iron stay on as long as it takes for the worst of the heat to subside;
and that is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the cutting instrument that we have mentioned before, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the cuts be a bit larger;
after healing the limb as I said before, until it is healthy.
When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you perform four cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the limb called "vassels" as we have said before, and the fourth cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be treated as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large pills and Mondifian powders to calm the brain;
afterwards take the entire head of the patient and place on the occiput a plaster of Sinapis, which is written or treated in the treatises of plasters;
and this is the manner of cauterization: if you do it as I have said.
If he is thus healthy, it is good. and if he is not, make three cauterizations on the skin of the head descending to the neck, and let there be a space between each cauterization of two fingers' width.
and treat it as the others, and if you see it is necessary, and the patient is suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if the mastery is, two others on the two horns, and treat until he is healthy.
and let the cauterers who are called "olivares" as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of that which we have said before.
afterward cleanse the head of the patient, then make a cauterization on the head and on each horn, and behind and thirdly on the spine of the neck.
and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back. and let it be until the worst of the heart is burned, and lift your hand. after the treatment until he is healthy, and let the cauterers who are called "olivares" as we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to purify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severely suffering and unable to take medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear the suffering, then make him gargle and chew mundifying food often with good meat.
after the king's head is in a mirror, and you make fire cautery according to what we said before, and you apply the cautery to the little vessel, and to each horn. and if the patient is strong and resilient, you make fire cauteries as I said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive-tree cautery be according to the manner that I said.
If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle fire cauterization according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt and gross moisture, then cauterize with such fire cauterizations as we said for one who has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will clear their brain, according to what was said before in the division.
After the king's head of the patient; after you make a well-made trephine, also like a circle, if you put it on the head;
and the patient is crossed, and may be well held from all parts;
after presenting the limb, and it is moved by the burst of old herbs; and the heat is tempered with fire, so that the fingers can be applied to suffer the pus; after viewing the circle inward within the head, and let it cool down;
and do this to the patient every week once with another good government, until he is healthy.
Where you want to cauterize, make points more often all along the cautery.
This manner of cauterization moisturizes the brain equally;
and then put on a cotton wool moistened in butter and in grease of goose.
of the warmth of the eyes When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing humecting the head, and ward off all moisture, and make sweat or bathe many times a day.
After he commands his head to be cooled, and have him cauterized within the head, and have two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the water is with both eyes together, or in one if the descent is in one.
and touch all the cauteries to all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stain it with a little powder as you have.
And I will teach you about extracting arteries and incising the cautery, how you will apply it.
and sometimes one performs cautery or hastening beneath the two hindmost bones.
and one sees that it is from the cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of the treatise, descending to the eyes. I perform cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hastening beneath the two bones. and if it is more affected, then one should cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give three cups of broth to the sick person. After the king's head, and make a cautery or a thousand gold cauteries; and make two cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavulis" on the two ulcers, a little below the eyebrows;
and beware of the artery that you do not puncture it.
And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the papier (pupil) of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivary". of that which is in the form:
And if you see that make two cauteries on the two ulcers as long as the eyelashes are;
and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that pricks the eye It sometimes happens that the hair of the eyes is converted into a pustule, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two methods: it's to know about fire, or ardent medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in good health; after marking on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as similar as the dead leaf, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs;
then put moist cotton in a gleam of egg and musk of pearl on the eye, then heat the cautery to the form that is there;
After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked little by little many times, so that the heat should be there at that place;
and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise to the tip of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then I put moist cotton in a blistering way until the inflammation is removed; after the treatment of the joint so that it becomes healthy.
And if after that the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then recommence the cautery on the same spot, just as you did previously;
and if the hairs are burned, then cauterize until the skin is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye with hairs.
The medical cauterizers are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
Then take French soap and lively chalk, of each one a Z., and crush well together; and make it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then sprinkle on the form that you have made like the leaf of a mirror, and put on the paper of eyes; and if the disease holds in one only solvent, then should one open in one, and if both are alike thus; and put beneath the oil cotton wadding in a egg white;
and let the head of the patient be in your health and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the poultice and the wadding all the times that the patient feels biting of the medicine, for it feels biting as from fire.
When you have made them grow long, then apply medicine to your finger. And when the biting is past, lift the skin of the wound, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if he is thus, it is well.
If this does not work, then put more medicine on the wound or the medicine has not worked, so that your operations are equal, and your eyes are in focus;
then put on a soft cloth moistened in a warm potion so that the bitter hearts are clear, after curing the wound of the joint which is called "dyafenis" and others, so that it may be healthy.
And if it is necessary for you to take good care of your work with great attention so that there is no lack in the medicine as eyes.
And if the parchment becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that wound which is softened by the proper parchment, just as you have done before. after the cure so that it may be healthy.
and this is the form of the leaf of dead myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constrictions accordingly.
and let him not stray from the straight path to whom it is the study of this art.
of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it nod.
then apply a moist cotton cloth to the affected eye or to the juice of persillation upon the eye;
then heat the cautery which is thus prepared:
and it is shaped to the head like the form of a hollow pen, so that it may be the cautery;
if you see, it should be pointed from one part of the head to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent;
but always, this which is shaped thus is suitable for your work.
After pressing on the fistula, it is uncovered, and one draws out the pus, and the dryness. and it is closed, if it opens, and one draws out the fluid from the bowl;
after placing the hot iron on the cautery site, and holding your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail next to the eye, so that your hand does not make a fool; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. If that does not work, then recommence the cautery once again, and another time you have mastery of it, and leave it three days;
after I place on a cotton pad in a poultice, and cure the disiccation of the ointment as long as it is healthy, and if 40 days pass without it being healthy, then I place on a medicine with corrosive acid so that the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what he would come into his chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then make a fistula, and close the wound. after putting it in the incision, I examine subtly what its shape is. and they make a quantity of an ounce of powder. and hold your hand firmly, and the patient does not move at all, so that the melted powder does not run to its eye.
and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a cotton cloth moistened with egg whites or in water.
the powder if it reaches the wound of the fistula, and the healthy part by marvelous sanitation.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then one must administer powder to the nail, and bring the fistula back to its own proper place according to what is suitable for it.
of cracks on the lips Many times, cracks on the lips occur that are called "poils", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks of the bone that we have discussed in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small cautery scalpel according to this form:
And put it hastily in those cracks until it comes just to the font.
after healing the wound of the scab, until it is healthy.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the joint, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after having made putrid matter and rot and is inflamed and becomes a fistula. and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all: then it is necessary that you apply the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron instrument comes to the front of it, and where behind it stays;
and do thus once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it be healthy;
and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine but it does not help, then put the patient's head in a healthy position; after heating the cautery whose form will come thus afterwards in such a way that you put a cane against the tooth;
and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lifting your hand and reapplying the cautery according to your will;
then fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and hold it for an hour and rinse forcefully.
And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or decay, and medical treatments are of no value, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways: and cauterization of blister and cauterization of fire.
Cauterization of blister is such that you take blister of a cow, and the end in a spoon of iron or copper; after taking cotton and wrapping it around the point of a tent, and moistening it in blister water, and placing it on the aching tooth quickly and holding it until it cools;
and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the moist cotton and blister water are cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and place in the hot iron so that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
The cauteries together with fire are such that you take a cane of iron or copper, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
After burning with fire cautery, because of this the wound will form crust afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled down.
Do this often, for the pain will be alleviated that same day or the next day.
And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good warm water in the impression of that cautery, and then he should spit it out forcefully.
and that is the form of a good cautery:
And make a good cautery on the part of the body that you want, and according to what you are able to do.
and that is the form of the burn:
of the scalps When the scrophules are of humid and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn with fire cautery, because afterwards it will form crust, and have two openings for the fumes to exit from the cautery on the other part.
and put the cautery iron on the abscess once, or where it is, until it reaches the root of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, then put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on a cotton molehill in a poultice so that the discharge is drained away;
after healing, anoint the limb with ointments and tents until it be sound.
When the humors collect on the channels of the arm, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be emptied first by soluble medicines;
after you do cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but only a little;
After the fire cautery, apply another cautery to the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" because we have the shape in front;
and heal the limb as we have said before, so that it may be healthy.
When all the diseases of the lung are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever nor cough, and it is a chronic disease, then apply two cauteries to the ribs in their corners; and another cautery between the nipples amidst the breasts;
and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" according to the shape mentioned before.
And if you see it, apply cautery by pricking to the entire cautery that is called "points" because the shape is thus before in the disease of the ears;
and let the skin be just to XXX, where they are inserted.
After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three places according to this form:
And because they are lighter cauteries, because you make three of them at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Then let the patient be rubbed on his back and on his sides; then lift the heart that is within the swollen area with the fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has two points where it is in the form:
and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces just to the side, and there would come the figure of the cautery along with three cauteries;
and because of this, cautery is done with the cautery that has three points, for which the figures of cauterization are six cauteries;
and they are the veins according to the subtlety of a thread and it is the form of the cautery that has three points;
And at no time is it joined to this .i. nerve because it has .viij. cauteries.
After applying fire cautery, they burn with a hot iron; after making the patient rest, and not moving their limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little things happen there, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauteries in pricking.
For the joint is restored, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach coldness and much moisture gather there until they distort his complexion, and multiply the catarrh to him, and are accustomed manners of cures that do not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be supported on his back, and stretches out his legs and hands. From that point on, I make three fire cauteries in the shape of a knife for the quantity of a finger, with each entire fire cautery, and two fire cauteries on the sides, so that the figure of the fire cauteries is at three angles, and has some space between one and another so they are not joined together when they are applied to the skin.
and let the fire cautery be so profound that it penetrates the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the fire cauteries be according to this form without adjustment.
And if you see a large fire cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this fire cautery, will burn in pricking and sign on the stomach at that point according to the quantity that you see of an inch. Then cauterize all of the cautery which is called "points".
After the treatment of the wound that we had before, until it be healthy.
When the liver suffers from cold and moisture and great windiness, so much that it is far removed from its natural complexion through the superfluities; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit them at all, if it is necessary that the patient be anointed on their thigh; and apply three cauteries according to this form and this shape and this quantity on the liver, below the hypochondries, where the humor or the seat of the pain comes;
and let there be a space between each cauterization the width of a finger; and let the cautery be two fingers' length from the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery;
And let it be scorched so much that the worst of the heart is sweet, and let the patient's right hand be on their feet.
and if he cannot, let him lean back, and stretch out his legs, and lift his arms;
And if your wound is, if you cauterize these cauteries of the cutellarium, be subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it not come near the bouillon, for the heart is very subtle there, and you should beware to see.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too extreme;
and if he is on the couch, he feels a wild pain.
And when this treatment touches the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be warned about his head;
and then point out the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reason, from which it takes its shape: And cauterize with the cautery as much as the vein is burnt, and approach just to the siphac, until the porreture is entirely purified;
after the treatment, according to the treatment of the wounds, until he is healthy;
and it is not suitable that anyone uses this cautery unless he who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and whose hands these diseases have corrected many times.
Then he can hardly work, and always it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
of fire cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one must make multiple cauteries at the roots of aristologe, and in such manner: Take a root of aristology as long as you can find it, the largest possible, and let it be dry, and also let it be as thick and as long as your fingers; and grind it into oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and apply small cauterizations a little downwards in the part that is beneath the beard;
and apply cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backwards a little; and apply cauterization in the thigh, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on both sides of the thigh opposite the cauterization that is between the shoulders;
and do not press with your hand, but rather open it widely as if smelling.
And some old man said that no one uses fire cauterization similarly to the razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess. and it hurts because we have said in the aposteme of the foolishness.
But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the worst
When you cure the disease of the worst of what we have said as divisions of cures, and it does not benefit at all, then they add three kinds of cautery that are good for everything.
In this manner it is necessary to make three or four incisions, in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the foolishness that we have said before.
and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be aware of it on his back;
and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the heart which is next to the mouse, or where the stitches of the patient come from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After they boil the inflamed nerves until the pain is perceived on the other side, and then they apply the fire cautery, and thus they will have four.
And if you see that the entire fire cautery is applied to three nerves.
After the treatment when it has obtained purification by long tension, and this is more than the other cures mentioned before.
Fire cautery is not suitable for hydropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
When you treat according to the methods that we have stated in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four fire cauteries around the bowel, and one below the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the thigh. and let the fire cauteries be very close to the width of a finger.
After that, leave the fire cautery open for a long time to purify, and do not discontinue the treatment of the patient after the cautery. and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have previously demonstrated. and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here before.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and the anular. and raise your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not insert it too deeply, lest you would push back the yellow watery fluid, and let the cauterizing iron be according to this form:
Afterwards, apply two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cutellaire. and let the cauteries be of a length, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
and leave the cauteries on for a long time without removing them, so that the water goes out.
after the treatment of other treatments that we have said.
When a stomach problem comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, if you do the great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery; and 4 cauteries within the subtle bowel to all, and 1 cautery subtly on the clavicle, and 2 cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them undergo cautery on the fingers, and apply cautery to each spot, and small cauteries on the stomach below the waist, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or several, and are ancient and are of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if you do cauteries: Here is the translation:
and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflating, then he puts a great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the clavicle cautery. and let the cautery be applied for a long time. After healing, let the limb be sound.
When you touch the bruise, heat up the cautery that seems to be the remedy, and then apply it all burned on the touched bruise. and let your hand stay there until the cautery reaches the origin of the vein, so that the blood flows freely.
do it once or twice, and if there is much bruising, cauterize each one as we have said. after the treatment of swollen eyes, profitable as long as they are healthy.
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the affected area, it will have greater aid.
When the patient cannot endure the pain of a high temperature, which we will describe in its place, then comes such an illness that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a fistula comes, and it is wrapped and casts putrid and corrupted moisture, if you want to prove all of a subtle tent, and beware that you know all of the tent how deep it has.
After heating the cautery that seems to be a remedy, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tenderness has entered, and recommence the cautery as long as the corrupt and rotten flesh is burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of their need.
and guard against irritating the nerves that are affected, and the large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, so guard against these evils, and do not make those false passages in the flesh, and think that it is not a permanent wound.
after healing the flesh until it is healthy, and if the wound is sealed, and the materials are removed long afterwards, then know that the wound is entirely healthy.
and if the materials are not removed, it means the joints are twisted, and the bones at the font are corrupted; and thus like one of those that we will direct to its place.
When pain from fracture comes with cracks, and great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization on the cracks on one side and on the other to the clavicle, which we have mentioned before.
and if we place the cauterizations in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and fragile from fracture and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then it is necessary to perform cauterization on the lower part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one on the right side and one on the left side, and each cautery should be as long as the width of a thumb.
and you make a fire cautery on the back, where it is swollen above.
and let the cauteries be shaped according to the form mentioned before.
When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, it feels great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and make the cautery on the back;
and let the cauteries be shaped, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends to the box of the thigh, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
and it is found that the looseness of the department is visible, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the box of the hip to a cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the joint within the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle.
and if the cauteries are such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of large olives, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the wounds.
and treat until he is healthy.
of the pain in the ankle When pain comes to the box of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment is not effective, and the disease is ancient: Then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick, foul humors with filthy pills or other good similar pills. After doing cautery;
and the manner of doing cautery is according to two methods: it is to know simultaneously burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is such:
that you cauterize on the surface of the thigh three triangular cauteries in this form, and make a good depth and large, and have between each cauterization the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on top of the thigh, because there are four according to this form:
And if you see, one should cauterize with a circular cauterization that we mentioned before in the case of dislocation of the thigh;
but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the skin are soothed by heat.
And it is the manner in which one does on the thigh, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach as far as the knee nor as far as the leg.
And if it reaches the thigh and leg, have them apply two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and three fingers above the ankle on the left side a little.
and let the cautery be gentle, and let the heat of the skin be soothing.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers from the foot or near the ankle, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points". And if it is necessary, have them do more.
and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, have them apply a cautery with a gentle or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery so much that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
And I have seen many who have performed fire cautery on the shin of the foot, and they let it be so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the feet also, and were pierced and corrupted all over the feet. After a flux of stomach from which he got death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, perform fire cautery on one and on the other, in this manner.
And the wise men teach about cautery of the thigh, that it is in this manner, make a iron like this and let it be at the top as big as a turnip seed, or a little less, and let it be between the skin and the muscle, and some of them are from one skin fold to another, measuring the quantity of a thumb's width.
and let the skin folds be above two fingers, and let them also be like knots, and have a well-made iron handle.
and that is the shape:
And let it be heated until it is completely red hot and gives off sparks, and then put it on the affected thigh, and turn it towards the healthy side.
and cauterize once with the cautery iron and let it be for three days. and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time. after the treatment of joint as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its consequences, and we see few who make use of it.
and however these are good cauteries, which can suffer, and there where they are beneficial.
The burning cauteries of medicine are such that you make the instrument at the crossing points where it descends to the edge of the door, and be it of iron or fire at a long perch, and in its height it has II among us, and each one has the quantity of the thickness of a finger. and be they open downwards and upwards, and join together in this form:
After putting on the box of the hip to the ailing person lying on his good side, and then you put your hand all on the box of the hip. After the hand is placed between the two circles of warm water which has been heated by fire, and let it stay there for an hour in the tension, and then the patient suffers from the heat and aridity.
For he finds numbness as if from fire;
and when the numbness has passed, he raises his hand with the instrument and lifts the warmth of sweet water, and lets it stay thus for three days, and puts on a poultice so that what is black from the burn should be ostended; and let it stay three days to purify in a strait;
and that would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds so that they are healthy.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make him an instrument that holds warmth according to what you did for the wound earlier.
and it is the manner of warm water, and I have written it in a treatise on the correction of medicine. Take equal parts of alkaline and living chalk, as much of one as the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small opening somewhere so that the tip of a razor can enter;
where there is a small opening somewhere so that the tip of a razor can enter; and put above that pot another well-plumbed pot, and put on alkaline and chalk and sweet warm water, until there is two fingers' depth of the powders that you will have well ground in your hand;
and let it stand thus until the water descends and becomes warm and clear, or the well-plumbed pot, then take all that water, and pour it on chalk and alkaline as before.
And then it will be very warm and is administered in many works of medicine and in cauteries of other members.
For it makes other works like fires, and if there are other medicines where one cauterizes well the hinge thus as thesis and honey and nut oil and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure where one man was cured of the pain in his ankle and sciatic vein, and he had suffered greatly, and said that there was no other cure, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he was bathed as it is instructed hereafter.
And you do in this manner that you take fresh and dry litargire, and crush it well with a little fat, and apply it to the ankle and thigh and leg where the pain is, and the binding.
and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the bitterness.
And then make him enter a warm bath so that his body is slightly relaxed, and make him enter his bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healthy.
And know that no one should use fire cautery for such medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fiery cautery, it helps much;
and it should be done, the cauteries in this manner. Take a linen cloth and the warmth of old oil, and place it on the fossa that is between the thumb of the foot and the other called the instep.
After taking dry fiery sparks, and heating them at the fire until they become charcoal, and putting them on the wool, and leaving them until they are extinguished;
and do it again thus, and do not cease from doing thus until you think by your sense that it comes just to the ankle, and that the pain has ceased;
and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of the shin".
from the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or by excessive evacuation, or by expansion of cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after that the patient is emptied of filthy pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer.
and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery that is called "points".
and if you see, make three or four cauteries on the cautious claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a constricted arm when they lift it, and fear. and you find in the posterior spine of the back and in the appearance that comes on the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the cautery of that according to this method. If the fire cautery penetrates any part of the spine equally.
And if you see that the cautery is applied around the spine with a piercing fire cautery on two or three lines, and the points are close to one another.
After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in a curved area which is in a spasm of a nerve.
from the pain of the joints
When pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the doctor calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner:
Make the mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is a need to prick on the surface of the foot, you should make a complete cautery at every point that one calls a "point". And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee, three cauteries or four of each part, with all olive-shaped cauteries.
and if you have a greater mastery, then make more, but do not hold your hand firm for longer than it takes for the warmth of the cauter to penetrate.
And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we mentioned in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the fingers, two lines;
and if there remains a point of pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come just as cuts or just as swellings, cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines.
For if you make good government for him and you purge bad blood, he will be healthy with the help of God.
When a rupture comes in the groin, and the bubbles descend to the loins and it is new, then you must cure the view when you look at it, so that it does not harm anyone on that day. and he uses things that loosen the belly, if his farts come down from his belly;
afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the bubble is repaired, and put them in your hands, and mark from below the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
then burn with fire cautery of the form that it is.
until he is pale and feels sensations. Then reset the bulbs to their place; and the ministers hold their hand on it so that they do not turn back;
and work well the thighs of the patient, and put the cushion under him and the sergeant on the thighs, and another under the foot that holds his hands;
then put the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommence again another time until you come up to the bone; and watch subtly that the bubble does not burst when you do the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and so that the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your operations are worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of their years, and of great people also great according to their measure.
after three days, heal the wound with a cautery of borax so that the ecchymosis may be removed;
after healing other wounds so that it may be healthy, and lay the patient forty days on their back so that the wound may be well suppurated;
and it is necessary that his bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he gets up to go to the chambers.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made poultice is applied to him, and it is left on for forty other days.
and he should have good rest, so that he may exert himself little and beware of too great repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high pride.
and when he makes this instruction, he will be entirely healthy.
And I will describe hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
When wounds come to other areas and are chronic, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make the fire cautery of the same quantity, and be careful with the third degree of burning. after the treatment according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with the fire at three angles according to this form:
but first mark the level of the notch and make a line according to the width above the root, and another below, and hold your hand in all the fire of the cauterizing instrument.
But the first cauteries are lighter and more moderate.
from ancient pain in any member (or limb) When pain comes to a member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no value, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torsions and of its pain.
if he is healthy from the first cautery, it is good;
by this name, recommend another cautery on that one, for such is the custom that it must be changed in the limb that is nearest to it, because it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
The messengers are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
You cannot see that it is cauterized, take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the chief. I place my head at the nave, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the veins; and it (the cautery) is on the two horns, and behind towards the hollow of the armpit;
and I leave it (the hand) so that the cautery comes just to the bone, and until the scabs fall off if the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth;
and cauterize on the worse according to what is before it.
And if the mixture is scattered throughout; and it appears manifestly, if it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries that we have said above, and one cautery on the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one on the chest and another on the flank, and two on the shoulders; and it is on the joints, and it is on the Dou Pis tendons, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the last ridge of the spine, so you do not burn them;
and never make a cautery on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more you do cautery, the more it does harm, and it doesn't profit;
and know that the patients do not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy and sense it, because the body is already totally corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the iron.
After healing the wound with flour paste mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
When swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines and oils and emplasters, and it is not completely healthy, then you should make cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member;
and let the cauteries be a little deep within the breadth of the skin; then heal the wounds so that they are healthy.
And often one makes a cautery at the hand and at the foot and at the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is stopped, the swelling disappears;
and never intervene unless one is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the engines of medicine are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the breadth of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
then heal with flour of fenugreek and of lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of the colon and blood of the almond tree, each a part. and let it be wholly together, and let it be tied with a bandage, and let it be elevated to the position until it is healthy.
The treatment of cancer by cautery.
When a cancer appears at its onset, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that forms a circle, entirely around the tumor.
And meanwhile the wise men say that one should also perform cautery at the milky white spot of the cancer;
and meanwhile this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to avoid it happening;
and more rightfully, it is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
When some have a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays from being cured or due to the superfluousness that it does or due to the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or due to the tension; and you hasten to amputate: then you cauterize around a lot of small cauterizations by pricking; after that, let it be so. For she hastens to heal.
And if you perceive the entire fire cautery, heat the cautery to the form it is.
And put your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" so that the cauteries penetrate to the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels them deeply in some manner that the course of the purification is alleviated.
After the treatment, until he is perfectly healthy.
Another kind of illness there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a mangling of a limb, for it eats away the members just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat the small and large clavicle cauterizations very much, according to what is suitable for the patient or where the disease is;
after you cauterize all parts as much as you can reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted may be destroyed.
And then let it be for three days, and apply to the limbs cauteries suffering from burning with oil until the burns of hot fire are eliminated, and all corruption.
After the treatment of swollen eyes producing flesh.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good;
and if not, then recommence the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted limbs.
And this mangy condition is often cured by medical treatment with fire cauterization in the patient's limb;
but every way fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of the medicine for the disease in the division: take the amount you have in hand.
of the pores that come to the feet Often it happens that our feet are affected by a disease called "clothes" according to our intention, and it is a big faulty thing which affects the foot.
And the cauteries of this disease are in two manners. It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is that you heat it, I heated cautery as if it were a pen of vaulted wood, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and that it has subtle margins;
afterwards, put it all hot upon the nail, and turn your hand totally around the nail until it reaches to the bottom of the nail; and let it stay thus for three days until it begins to discharge pus; then make a plaster of wild, savage, bruised mallows with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots.
Then heal the limb of inflammation by cleaning it so much that it becomes healthy.
And if they are turned away by bad ulcers on the body, and often occur on hands and feet, it is necessary that you apply warm water cautery. and it is in such a manner: take a iron rod or a hollow tube, and place it on the nail and the joint, that is to know if there are varicose veins; and place the rod on it so that it penetrates all around, then I put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the rod reaches to the root of the nail, and thus finds the warm water way down to the root;
and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will remove everything to its roots.
Here is the translation:
When some shiver with cold or nerve weakness, or from quartan fever or another, if it is necessary that you apply three or four fire cauterizes on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra. and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach for an olive-shaped cautery;
if you leave the shivering, and hasten the santifying of the cold disease.
Never appear by default through the body's baths, or pus-filled pustules, that come from gross corrupt materials.
if it is necessary at first when they appear that one should apply fire cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle fire cautery of myrtle wood, so that the pointed end is heated by the fire, or from the root of a long aristology, or with a lentiform cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow worse from then on, but are freed from the superfluities that come with them, and are healthy.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great flowings of blood from the artery that is cut into the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And always when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold very tightly so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue forth anymore;
then apply to the fire the olive oil cauterizers, more small and large as they may be, until they are all red.
then take I, or large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and apply the cauterizer to that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterizer there until the blood is stanched.
And if it happens to burst forth when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease from doing one after another until the wound is completely cleansed.
and beware that you do not irritate the nerve that is weakened, and that another evil does not come onto the patient;
and know that when the wound does not close over the artery, one cannot well restore it in the meantime while the artery is large, if it is not by one of the three methods that we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to restore blood; and be tied and held firmly in place.
Whoever administers the stanching of the blood in a narrow place, either by wrapping tightly with cloths or by putting things firmly on, or similar things, does not profit unless it is done promptly.
And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then one must put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly bind until it is restored above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but the mill of cold water often so that it be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and rested;
and make an inquiry beforehand about those things which he has need of cauterizations and of medications.
We have said in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire, or with burning medications, and the instruments and causes and materials and forms of cauterizations;
and I have placed that chapter of the loin just below the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method by which one finds more easily what one wants to cure.
And thus I begin it, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you that you do not undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for cures. if they come from such who are wounded by their illness so that they die easily because of the weakness that they find in their disease, and the greatness of their evil. and of these things one should have fear.
And of these there is one who gives his judgment, and says: Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is despised.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but rather put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of those things of which you are certain, and of which you can take and lose.
and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your diseases so that health may be converted.
and this will help you to acquire good renown, glory, and long memory.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and direction, and may you be willing to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Here is the translation:
You know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the womb holds the child's head too tightly;
and sometimes it happens because of a response given by one who does not know.
And I never saw this illness except in children, and nearly all those that I have seen hastened death; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in certain treatments.
And I saw the child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not be sustained;
and the moisture was so great that it became mortal, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the forehead, between the heart and the bone;
and the operations are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head.
and let it be as long as two of us, so that the moisture flows;
and see there the form of a spatula:
If moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make four incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head overturned on each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: if it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after cutting, remove all moisture completely. After holding the incisions with drapings and powders, and I put in wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day;
then dislocate it, and treat the wound with tents and with ointments, and leave the head steady thus, and give to the patient dry meat of little moisture so that the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incising is to look at or open up the head of the abscess, and assemble the point.
for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Cut then there where the abscess opens, and the filling of the point, and do according to what you have the power;
and take care that you do not cut the artery; and let flow a little blood, so that the patient dies from the depletion of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not benefit at all, then the last resort cure is the cautery with fire that one uses to cauterize the .ij. arteries.
It is necessary then, when you cut the veins, that the patient makes his head fall back; after you rub the spot with a rough cloth as much as the arteries appear, then stretch out the patient's neck under the cloth; Then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and are a little bent.
Then mark the veins of the ankle, then cut one and the other with a sharp instrument in two places, so that the vein reaches just to the bone, and let it be done by the width of the top of the head.
And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as .ij. fingers deep across.
And when the vein is cut, then the blood constantly flows out above.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark the ankle and cut just to the bone.
and it is necessary to put blood flow there if it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery.
Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone a point of syphac, if you cut what abscesses burst out from the vein, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
of the migrating (or wandering) When the migrating pain comes, and catarrh agitates, due to the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by ways of cures of medicine and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauteries, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs on their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well with its beating, and is hardly responsive unless in some homes that are too cold;
and when it is responsive, the patient stretches out their neck from some cloth wrappings, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and raises the area with warm water as much as the artery opens manifestly; then take the spatula-like instrument of which this is the form: then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with pincers, and separate well the tissues that are beneath each part;
and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the anvil, then cut according to the quantity of the two joints. Because she is not cupped, thus she does not jump the blood entirely.
And let blood flow from six lines, just up to three;
and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two loops of a strong double silk thread, which prevents bleeding from coming before the sewing of the wound, and prevents blood from flowing;
then remove the surplus that is between the two ligatures at that hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a cutting cautery up to the bone as long as the head is coped;
and it is a moderate work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion. For the cauterizations are helpful in ending the moisture: because it is of great help against moisture.
Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the cavity with much cotton and places well-made tents;
and when they are dislocated, if they are treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with tinctures, until they are healthy;
and without cutting into the artery as much as you observe, if you hasten to do it by cautery, or you apply the virtue of vitriol and hold steady with your hand so the blood is staunched; and if you don't have it at hand, put your finger on the spot so the blood is congaled, and raise the spot with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold steady as it is necessary;
And you should have between the two cuts a space of a large finger's width, and then when you have signed off on both sides, and you pass the burning iron over them until it reaches the bone, and cauterize the vein in both places; and let it be separated between the two heads because it is not fully understood from this cautery from start to finish;
and that's the form of the cautery:
and that which is more dead and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cautery the vein with this sharp cautery of two edges, but the edge should be well protected to avoid longer delay for the pain. For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less their warmth.
of the tears When the tears of the eyes are flowing down into the veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not profit from the cure of medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and feel the forehead throbbing as if with tremors; and the eyes are tired and moist as if the hair of the papers is fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, so it needs this cure. And the ancients called it "contused cure", and it is that you make for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you make three equal incisions on the forehead according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "contused cure", and it is that you make for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you make three equal incisions on the forehead according to the length of the forehead; and it be one of the incisions thus as he does all in the front downward to the knee, and the others he has against the ribs, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are against the ribs.
and withdraw your hand from the continuation of the jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers in traversing joints;
and prepare a piece of sponge and much of cloth to suck up the blood, then apply the spatula bent to conform to the shape:
of the incision that is to be made at the temple as far as the second incision; and scrape out all the cartilage that is between the two wounds to the entire siphac which is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision as far as the other second, and then extract with this spatula. if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is dull, not very sharp, and this is its form:
And place the scalpel cutting towards the airy flesh at the heart, and the gentle cut towards the bone, and the cut as far as it reaches the middle seam.
And you will cut the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision continues until it reaches what opens in the heart, and then afterwards make a cut in the middle of the fontanelle until the other side.
and then extract the blood equally, and press the limb for the blood taken;
then put in each fontanelle a tent of old cotton, and put on draped cloths moistened with wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that apostemes do not burst out;
and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and I will minister great abundance of warm water, then the treatment of anointing with basilicon oil, and other treatments that one uses to cure wounds, until it be healthy.
When a vein comes to a customary catharsis, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and the vision is obscured, and the parchments are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in the front it gives pain and anguish, and the patient is exhausted; then you know through these accidents that those matters and this cathartic do not come from many veins, and the mother cure that it is, if it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another just as wide nearby. And begin from the fracture of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be just up to the bone; and stretch out your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain;
and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two lips of the fracture and put much cotton, and tighten with linen; then lay on top moistened cloths in wine and oil, and beware of a hot abscess;
when it is put back, it is necessary that you rub the bone so that flesh begins to grow, then treat with excitant things that make flesh grow.
In such a manner: Take two parts of flour of wheat, and of colofonia four parts, and make an emplaster; and administer it to these wounds to heal quickly everywhere.
of the swelling of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: either grains, or beast, or rock from a mine or similar thing, just like iron; or seeds, as in vetches, beans, peas; or flowing things, such as water and oil and similar things.
When the bone grows in the pierced ear or another manner of thing that does not join to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, then distill no drop of violet oil or oil of sisament, then administer extraction; and make the condition stern, and stop up the nostrils when the sternum comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear above.
Many times relief comes through this treatment;
and if it does not come, then one should try extracting with subtle pincers, because that is the method:
If it comes out with the pincers, that's good;
if not, then one should try extracting with a subtle hook of small double curvature;
and if it does not come out by that, then make a cane of iron and insert the tip of the cane into the perforation of the ear strongly, and block what is around the cane with wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then one draws out in a regular form, because many times relief comes if we have said;
and if it does not come out in that manner, then take glue from where one takes the bones, and put some instrument that is pointed for doing that, and put a little cotton around; Then press the gut against the stone or whatever it is, and pull strongly.
And if it does not burst forth from all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear thus, and abscess will flow out, and spasm;
and the manner of the opening is that you first make the patient with a head wound healthy, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small opening at the root of the ear at the fat or depending on it; and let the opening be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape according to your power, and suck hastily into your mouth;
and treat until it is healthy.
And if there are grains that are inside and they swell, then administer extraction;
and if he cannot issue, if you handle the spatula subtly according to this form: and make an incision into that grain.
But do not do it when you think that the grains are moist because of the moisture in the ear, so much that you have made many parts;
then extract it with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
In the case where it falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses the discharge of condenser first, and fills the ear with much cotton. And let it be placed on that same ear where the pain is. If it gets worse from that point, it's bad.
if not, take many pairs according to the length of your fingers, and hold them lightly, and warm them a little at the fire; and put the patient's one or pierced ear on it, and elevate it above his feet from another side, and make a hole of another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to make this from stone to stone as long as the water issues forth completely, and thus it will flow completely forth;
and if you see, if you take the joint, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head takes fire until the most tender joint is burnt;
then redo another part of the joints until the water issue is all out, as we have said about the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as it is a pimple and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division;
but if it is of large body that one can feel it, then prepare an extraction of forceps; and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat the distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: If it opens into void spaces, if they draw them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the candle of what is its form.
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the sufferer's pain, then suck formally throughout the candle. Do it often so that all the veins appear.
And if they do not obey to issue out, stop up the candle with cotton as I have said in the stone.
and if they do not issue forth as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the operation of the veins, and you will find them or treat with distillations.
and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear through this entire instrument, from which is its form as you see. And let it be of silver or of copper, spread underneath to the small openings, and above spread out to distill.
and to press within the distillation the copper instrument well-made for that, and if you see take the receiver and envelop it around the tip of the cotton-covered point. then you pour your oil or your juice, and that which you take from your medicines in the reed, and let the reed be in the ear.
then thrust into the receiver all the cotton, and press your hand temporarily so that the oil is distilled or flows out of the ear. and the patient feels it within, and let the distillations be a little warm from the fire in this way so that it is distilled into the ear. and beware that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be good if it were.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born who does not have some hole in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men through swelling of wounds, or a born-in abscess within the ear, and these swellings sometimes come in deeply into the ear, if one cannot see it well;
and sometimes it happens that the small hole is closed, and one sees it very well.
That which comes in deeply, if one cannot see it, is a grievous sore in many conditions, and in that which one sees, it is necessary that you put the ear of the patient in the sunlight; and look within: if you see the opacity appearing, so that the work has all this spatula-like material from which it is formed:
And let it be sharp and cutting both in front and behind, all smooth, so that it does not blister the ear;
If the operation is on a new or raw flesh of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers and cover lightly, so that all the flesh is fully opened.
And if the operations are deep in the ear, take a subtle, light razor and heat it slightly by fire, then place it in the course of the ear.
If you feel the operation where the patient feels great pain at the ear, touch lightly and be careful not to disturb the nerves of the ear.
then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and apply it with Egyptian ointment. Do nothing for several days until the wound is suppurated, or take a tent and apply it with rose water, and powder with pulverized vitriol.
and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and apply another tent coated with a mixture of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is gone. then heal him until he is healthy.
And if a flow of blood comes, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the flow of blood which are treating with distillations.
These are the ulcers that come in papers of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you treat them with tongs and tweezers, and cover with a spatula of their roots; then put on the place a vitriol ointment.
And if it does not peel off, then the subtle lenticular fire cautery, and the cautery man is worth more after the incision.
and many times they repair, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
of the scab Many times there come in papers of eyes some things that seem fat in their shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below. The works are such:
The works are such: take warning that the joint moves from one side to another, and it's a light thing to know;
make the wound somewhat large, then scrape the skin of each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cover it.
if you cannot cover it without piercing a little the paper, do not harm anything to the patient;
and if the fracture is large, assemble it with a bandage, and care for it until it is healthy;
and if it is small, do not use force, for the joints restore themselves quickly and do harm.
And if the joint is deep inside the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and stretch the joint with pincers, and cover and press from one side to another;
and if the skin is separated by incision, it does not hurt at all;
and when the artery is cut, if you lift the eye of salt water, and heal the limb of those who are injured in such a way that the patient may be healthy.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fatness that is inflamed in the membranes of the skin above, and this happens more to infants than to old people, and hurts much their eyes, and they come to have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes;
and because of this they lay their faces down again, and sleep on them, and their skin is beneath their eyebrows moist which the inflammation and appearance have covered with the exinach that opens in the eye. And when you press your hand against your arm and feel the numbness entering within.
And the manner of the surgery is such that the patient puts their head in a healthy position;
and then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that each part contains, then place it on him; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the skin is gathered together within the circle;
then make a milestone of the moisture at the cutting edge, making a cut as large, and not more than the wound that one makes in the vein's sinew;
and make the skin deep enough so that you reach the skin; and in many arrangements comes the skin from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then pull away a piece of cloth firmly between your fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out;
and beware that you do not push into the crack, that you do not come to the entire spatula just up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
And if the extremity does not open at the beginning of the crack, then increase it a little more lightly so that it opens.
then extract it as we have said, then wrap in oil and in water, and put on the limb, and hold with bandages.
And if there are such men who break their own arm and put it back to correct the moisture that has gone bad.
Then treat it until it is healthy.
And if a hot abscess comes to the arm, then treat it with soothing ointments until it is healthy.
of the hairs of the papers When in papers hairs are wrongly aligned other than naturally, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring on ways of illnesses such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so that it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes.
and it is the treatment according to three manners: where by fire cautery, or by medicinal agua according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I shall say.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head on your healthy side, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand.
if it is converted, it is good; see that not, if you push a needle to the thread above; and let it be along the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and draw the thread above to the entire paper, and turn it to the razor;
then make in the part below the paper, below the aligned hairs, to the entire spatula coping, from the large lantern up to the small;
then extract the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, like the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into toes.
And if you have a part that is master of the craft, take a large quantity of paper according to how much the paper is softened.
then make all spatula-shaped on the two lines that you have signed, and begin with a large lantern just up to small. and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the heel, then scrape everything.
then assemble the two lips to a stitch of a needle with all the subtle thread of flax, and suck out the blood, and make straight the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows at all gluey things, if you want to do this.
and if it does not work, then abandon the treatment, and leave the stitches and threads until three or four days.
Then cure the wound without tight constricting things, because the skin revives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the constricting is muted (as the ancient said), and it's work without fear; and if in another manner:
and if in another manner: and it is that you shape the skin into a figure that is as if the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, at three ounces of scarification according to the form that is here:
Then apply to those who have small equal forces in harmony with the form that is here:
And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or it has one thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread from the large lantern, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally;
then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have related, then assemble the two lips of the wound by constricting, and cure until it is healthy;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm the angry swelling with similar gentle touches.
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted:
if it is necessary, you should use what we have said about incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make them inside according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two subtle links as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and cut as two heads of two parts or you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly above what overflows from the parchment of the eye, and stretch out the two wounds of the two parts fully; and let it thus for some days, and the skin that is constrained will become numb and weak, and porous, until it falls apart by itself.
If it delays, if it resists to some forces, then cure it until it is healthy;
and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and they will not prick the hairs anymore;
and it is the form of the two canals that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and you thread a soft and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's length;
then arrange in the chase another subtle thread of silk briefly, and tie the two heads of the thread;
Then put the patient's head in a healthy position;
and let it be exposed to the sun so that the operations may be clarified, for this is a subtle and minor operation, then insert the needle at the root of the hair being treated, and make it pierce the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair;
then extract the hair up to the root, and put into the root that hair, if there is one or two or three or more;
then extract your hand so that the hairs come forth from the root in the paper along with the natural hair.
And if the root is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull the root downwards along the entire thread that you had ordained, so that the root comes forth from the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye;
Then you should thread the bow and the filament, and close the eye and let it stay closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh begins to form.
and if the hairs are small, accompany the long hair of the natural whiskers, and be elevated with that or you leave it, until it is elongated and then set free.
of the purification of the eye When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the porridge comes into the eye, if there are two manners of it:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a blow, or from a cautery, and from similar things.
And the manner of operating on it is that you sew up the wound, and separate the lips of it, and put in threads of linen, and leave it until it be healthy;
and it is not suitable that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. Because if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
but I observe things that soothe, as in fenugrec; and the rose water or alta and linseed oil should be heated, and ointments of dyaquilon melted into one of the oils, and I enveloped a tent, and the cure of this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take heed that it does not sink according to the form it was in beforehand;
and this work that we have said is not stronger than the symptoms of this disease, so that it does not relapse according to the form it was in beforehand.
This disease which is disfigured, truly named "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cauterization and similar things;
and the way of the work in this is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the thread comes out at the head of the flesh;
then the flesh is above all the spine, and the coping to the spatula is wide. And if the shape of the skin returns according to what it needs, that's good;
if not, then take the rasp and put it in the fissure, and turn the skin, and make two fissures or sew within the skin;
and be the heads of the two fissures at the two angles of the incision that you have coped, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is just like the shape of a letter which is not "I griesche";
then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are agreed upon below, from what follows the skin, then adjust the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool;
then apply the treatment with those softening medications that we have mentioned, and tents, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from a crack or a stitch or a burn, then it is necessary that you make a plain crack beneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what is here before. then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to be ingenious in every way so that they can make the figure return to its natural shape;
and the same patients, according to what is necessary for the work and instruments in various dispositions.
When this join has to be made in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural work, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it high;
and hold the pincers, as long as you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too pointed nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula is too pointed and does not bleed the eye;
and make your incision, where you scrape off the assembled one lightly, so that the skin regains its natural shape;
and it is healthy throughout the assembled one, and they never make salty aqueous humor in the eye, and they raise sweet watery discharge, and from the collar bone;
then put between the skin and eye a linen bandage, and place on the eye a wet linen cloth in abundance of egg whites; and after the third day, use sweet collar bone and things that follow, until it is healthy.
Know that the nail is according to two manners: It is nervous and resembles the hardness of a firm, dry cord, and another which is not nervous, but resembles the softness of a moist, congealed blain, that when touched with iron and cut with pinces, it cannot be removed;
and one and the other resemblance begins towards the large artery, and grows little by little until it covers all vision and all light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then bend the finger into small doubles, and stretch it out above; then take a needle, and insert the hair of a horse, or of a cow, or of an ox, and pull it strongly; and double the point of the needle a little and stick it in the ankle, and pierce all the way through the needle, and tie the ankle with a thread and hold it from above, and scrape off all the hair on the side of the ankle that connects the prune and the skin to the hair just at the head, then cut the remaining part into the root of the arm at all subtle and small forces, and let the natural flesh or arm, so that by incision do not disturb the course of the tears accustomed.
and sometimes it happens that the ankle is held back by the oncine alone, and with a thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the subtle skin where it is the form:
And beware that the subtle skin does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the prune does not perforate;
and after the incision, pour a little of warm broth into the oil, and make a poultice with it from litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat what is necessary so that it may be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the veins cannot enter, often this type of nail is cured by medications;
and it grows thus as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the oil of the patient, and take the spatula lightly a little gently according to this form; And raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes to a point and the reason presses on, then distill from your mouth into the oil made with litharge and red copper and warm broth, and stop up the oil until the next day;
If nothing is contrary to the eye, then as an aposteme heats up, then milk it, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healthy, then restart the treatment as before, until it is healthy.
Then resume the other work according to this same method, so that it is all ordered.
And if the appearance of the flesh wounds at night with great annoyance, if it suspects in the ankle, and cuts into one part and not entirely, that course of tears does not come;
Then distill in the eye a red collar which is made from litharge.
It is the eyes of some men that never saw red flesh, and covers the prunella and holds back on the papers and turns to the deceiver, and resembles a rose of baluster.
and the works are such that the patient puts his head in your healthy tone, then he opens his eyes, and gathers all that flesh as convenient joints to that, and holds it with force;
Then cut the first flesh, and go all cutting to the raspier until the end, and beware that you do not blind the eye at the work;
and it is the incision of a spatula-like tool that we have mentioned in the incision of the ankle and with small forces, because one should loosen the swelling as the form shows after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of a broiet seed or you distill coliere rouge and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil a layer of cotton with a stream of egg white, so that it be assured against a hot abscess.
and if it remains nothing, and the blood flows excessively, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing things that calm a hot abscess.
then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make sure that the flesh is adjusted in the oil by this similarity.
However it is necessary that you adjust the treatment according to the natural weakness of each oil. and of the accidental way, in the work of iron;
and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
There are veins that are red and covered on the eye, and take away its function and obscure the eye every day.
It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the oil, in which the patient is afflicted, it is outside, and there is no other disease except the outer one. then the coil in such a manner:
instruct the patient to put his head in your healthy one, then suspend those veins all around according to his wisdom, and let the subtle double onions be according to this form:
And let there be an eleven-inch incision by degrees in this form:
then you should coil the veins subtly with force, and suck out the blood hourly after another, until you see that you are removing those outer veins from the oil.
and beware that you do not blind the eye at the points of the spatula, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not seize except those veins;
and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collirium to corrupt what is dormant due to the evil of the belly.
And if you are not able to collect all this at that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and assured of hot abscess, then resume according to this manner which is before until it be healthy;
and that is the form of the fractures:
The mirror, thus named "arissati", a fistula:
when you treat with fire cautery and with ardently burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not without health, if there is an abscess within which you make an incision, there where it should be drained, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take away all the instruments of which it is the form;
and it is called "rough head", and let it be made into an iron instrument at the rough head, and let it be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the rough bone of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed;
and do this several times, then restore the rough bone with excitatory medicines.
If the eyes are inflamed, and there is a burning sensation, and the body of the bowel is inflamed, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not improve and is not apostematous, and bad accidents come to pass, showing that it is unhealthy.
If this does not work, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the hole of the nostril according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone for the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it has been discovered, take the forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and the fistula should be attenuated up to the head as you see here:
then place it on the bone of the injured arm, and separate your hand from the eye of the hole, then turn all the forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by this means that the veins come into being if he holds his hand against his nose;
and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the limbs, thus goes the material to the nail; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open everywhere, and it does not come to disturb the nail, nor diminish, thus it is necessary that you read the patient;
then the vein, then apply ventouses or a hot iron without piercing to suck, then put on the eye a linen cloth made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye, and bind it with strips and drapery;
and the way of the strips is that you take strips quite soft, and fold each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need.
Then hold it back above a hardened bandage, forming a shape, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck out the infected matter without piercing the skin.
Then remove the cupping glasses and hold the eye steady day and night, and if the veins are swollen, it is necessary that you extract a lot.
Then remove the vein after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it's good.
If not; If you reapply the plaster and the bandages and the vein and the cupping glasses until he is healthy.
because of the tearing of a woven fabric When cracks appear in the web-like membrane, then open, and issue forth fragments like grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
Then if you see the web-like membrane, the operations are such that you insert a needle at the root of the affected part below, then insert another needle where it has a double thread from the part of the arm. and have them pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition;
then thread the eye of the double file, and tie one part of the tube around it, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place it on the same moistened spot in abundance of egg whites;
and let it be until the thread absorbs with the egg whites, then heal the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy;
and often the wound is held in place by a piece of cloth in a circle, until it is healed.
And if the eyes have great appearance, then pierce with a subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and correct the moist albuginous and descends the eyes, and enters in between;
then remove it until it is healthy.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a swelling that is assembled in the eye, appearing as if it were dripping, and this is not really dripping;
and the manner of the appearance of the disease is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and upright, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the swelling come up to your eyes; then be fixed, and do not bend down and be disordered in the light, and see the patient's things as if he were alone;
and if it does not descend below, know that it is dripping, and the descents of the swelling are not apparent as we have said.
make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and touch the corner of the horn-like tissue by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horn-like tissue and the crown, until the swelling subsides;
and when it is dislocated, if you distill into the hot oil mixed with honey, or hot oil or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment until it is healthy.
from the corners of the eye We have the similarities of the hot oils in the division, and this is what is necessary to pierce; if it operates according to health.
It is necessary that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and bind the healthy oil strongly and tightly;
then put the paper of the oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right;
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right;
Then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a rope in that whitish part of the eye at the minor tear-let, then apply the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand until it penetrates into the whitish part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing.
and it is necessary that the measurement of the way of almagda be at the forefront of the measurement of the spaces which are from the prunelle just up to the end of the blackness; and it is the crown of the eye;
if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the horny tissue, and then place the instrument just where the water is, then press it down one way after another.
Here is the translation:
After resting a little, and if the water rises by the second way, place the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not mount, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little.
and then put back in water a small gemstone, and lift from it the eye within. Then puts by default the eyes stupefied or clouded with rose oil and in abundance of egg whites, and mixes it with healthy eye.
We, and those who are of our time, put on common broth with an abundance of egg whites.
And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which is the form.
And then prick the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deeply in fear of piercing, but make a subtle incision, then apply alum, as we have said;
and at the completion of the operation appear to the patient in a darkened room, where he sleeps on his back in a gloomy light;
and be deprived of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day;
then disengage him in the same darkened room, and test his vision, and make him see no things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day;
and it is not suitable that you do this in the hour of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate it, because the water mounts quickly.
Here is the translation:
and when it is alleviated, if he dislocates the view and puts his face in the mirror to cover any flaw, and so then it is in that dark house.
And then he leaves the small house little by little, and turns into his cases;
and know that no disciples should intervene in this case. And one came to us who was from the Iraq, who told us that in his country they made a certain alumgaude powder, which attracts the water, but meanwhile I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of alumgaude, because those who do not know them see them.
and they should be prepared properly: And the head of the bone in this subtle precision, and the last one at three angles aigu.
Never grow or produce various diverse char marks, from which there are some that resemble scorptions on the foot.
and if there is such a mark or a char with an enhanced fixed color, and if it has a soft char of a bone color. In that case of those chars which are soft and not enhanced, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sun.
In that case of those chars which are soft and not enhanced, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sun. and open his nostrils, and throw the onion at those chars, and remove the fierce fires. then take that which you have in your hand to sustain on the subtle spatula skillfully from one side, until you know that this char is entirely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it completely with the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains. and if you find no swelling, or a warm abscess, if you touch it as it suits;
and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned away, then apply either oil or water or wine. If the wound does not open, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy;
and if moisture does not pass as it suits, know that there is new flesh growing in the bone above, for which the instruments do not come to cut;
then it is necessary that you put a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and sew with our hands, and have between each stitch of space a doit or less; and put the patient's head in the noose of the thread at his nose as it suits, and pull gently until it comes through the nose into the mouth;
and many times they act like a child in school, it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it.
then hold the head that comes by the nose to one hand, and the other head that comes by the mouth to the other hand, and let them follow each other in being sound as we who are or were.
Do this as much as you know that the nodes have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian oil, and put it back in place as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh.
and then put on the nose a plaster of lead for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of dry medications, use them.
and it is the shape of the instrument for purging the head, where they distill oils and medicines or not:
Whether of silver or copper, resembling an overturned lamp, like a chain, and the conduits thus;
and if you see, make a closed chain, and let the instruments be flat for purging the head;
and hold the handle to the head to keep it still when one heats the oil or some liquid.
from the flesh above the nose
Many times a tumor grows on the head which is called "telul", and it increases and becomes large again, until it is a visible thing to behold;
and for this reason you must cut into the tumor at the beginning, and clear out everything, then put on top the cautery or the burning medicine;
and if you delay cutting until it is large, take care if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sense:
do not touch the iron with your hand because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you touch it sometimes, great evil comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can cover it completely, if you examine the patient and touch it without fear, and heal the place with dry and restraining things.
Know that when continuous solutions come into one of these cartilaginous openings, it profits little, because in some homes.
It is necessary therefore to see if it has reached none, if you look at the wound to see if it is fresh in all its blood. and then bring the two lips of the wound together with a suture, then heal it until it is healthy;
and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a suture, and hold them in place, and sprinkle powder made from dragon's blood, and incense broiet; and place on the poultices a piece of plaster of strong or another plaster suddenly, and let it stick to him, then heal the joint so that it is healthy.
The manner of the fracture is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the fracture of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
At times men have within their lips hard abscesses, similar to grains of peas, and smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and split on each nut, and take them as pincers and cut into each part;
then apply the remedy afterwards, after the incision of vitriol broth, until the wound is stained;
and then apply the oil of iris, and heal the wound with dry things until it is healthy.
Often it happens beneath the gums where it is pressed, which the ancient ones call "albulus";
it is necessary that you hold it as in tongs, and cut at its root, and let the blood or sap flow;
then apply on the affected place a glassy powder, or other drying and constricting powders;
and if it returns after the incision, and often happens, then cut a second time, and cauterize; if it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are laid and pressed; and sometimes they are black, yellow, and green teeth, as long as the decay reaches the gum, and the teeth are putrid;
it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and their head be in your holy, and take the teeth or the scars appearing, until there remains nothing. and thus make of the blackness and the greenness, and of the yellowness and the other stains, until they are wiped away.
and if one removes that which is at the first rash, it is good. if not, then recommence to re-treat on the second day and the third, until you have everything ready.
and know that the teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one extracts from the teeth have other forms than those that one extracts between the teeth. and these forms and others be with you equipped.
It is necessary when you treat a tooth with its pain that you delay to handle it as much as you can, for this must not be done hastily. for it is a very high substance just up to then so that one has no excuse to delay.
Then when the patient is constrained to receive treatment, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth that hurts. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a sound tooth, and makes them handle the good tooth; and always the pain does not depart from that, as much as the bad one is extracted, for we have already wanted to do it to these healthy ones;
and when you are very certain of the tooth that is hurting, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides, strongly plying the gum with a spatula to ward off from all parts;
then move it with your fingers or subtle nails at the first little by little, until it is well loosened, then firmly affix the nails. and let the head of the patient be in your holy hand between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part lightly, and you remove it just like you did at first.
And if the teeth are pierced and gnawed, it is necessary that you fill them with cloth, there where the holes are. and if you hold it subtly in the tendons, so that it does not break while holding.
and it is necessary to operate very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And you do well to beware that you do not break it, and leave a part remaining, and reveal to the patient by the wickedness of the root more great pains than the first.
And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeon, who through their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have recounted.
but they often come through the examination of this great illness for the roots that remain, or for the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is extracted, you wash the jaw with wine or vinegar and salt;
and we stop the bleeding that comes, which often happens, by applying the juice of bruised vitriol;
and if it does not heal, you should cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, which you should blunt first, so they are at long points and thick handles, so they do not slip when you extract the tooth;
and these are the forms: And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed to hold firmly.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the socket, it is necessary that you place on the jaw a cotton cloth soaked in borax or butter I day or II, as long as the gums are softened, then you apply the tongs called "algefri", from which the head seems to be a beak of a sign.
and they should be made thus, like a file, and that is the form:
And if the roots do not want to issue from all these pincers, then it is necessary that you discover the flesh entirely surrounding the root, and he puts on the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a palate scraper, from which this is their form:
And let it be strong and thick so it does not break, and if its roots spring forth from that, it is good.
If that's not so, help with all the instruments, because of which the forms come hereafter:
And if one helps with this instrument that has several grooves, from which the form is: and other iron instruments that are in front of the dens' ratio, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which the form is:
And let these instruments be strong so they cannot break, and know that many of these dense instruments are. and also other instruments, which are not counted;
and the wise masters subtly find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the diseases show them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach about instruments due to the diversity of wounds; and one breaks a part of the cartilage or other bones, or it becomes porous, if they seek those instruments that they need, which I have told you, and help with gestures, from which this form is:
And let it be thick and holding well to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but it can hold and ostend.
and then restore the limb with suitable medications for this, and if it has porous bone, and it is small, so take into account all of this instrument:
When the tooth appears not in accordance with the natural body, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, so it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot solder or file:
then the root; and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument which has the shape, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be of iron sharp in the end:
And the coping is little by little in the morning hours for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a similar file as its shape:
and it is also like the file with which one makes the needles;
and in a gentle manner, little by little, he puts his teeth together gradually, so that it does not move until it settles.
then the flat surface at the end of everything without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, it is necessary to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the front tooth falls out, either by shock or by decay, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you treat them with constricting medications, but it is of no value.
it is necessary to hold them back with a thread of gold, because the silver thread turns green and decays, but the gold does not move at all.
and let the threads be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth.
And if you want to realign the teeth, take the thread and double cord between the healthy teeth, then put the heads between the crooked teeth, even if there is one or more, until you straighten them right up to the healthy tooth on the other side; Then reestablish the covering right up to the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so that it does not move at all;
And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the heads of the thread at a small nail, and assemble them, and put them back between the healthy tooth, and set it so that it does not touch the tongue;
And then leave it tightly in place as long as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the threads break, hold it with another thread;
if it delays and serves thus all its tension, and it is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the two healthy teeth, and of the two muscles, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if you replace it in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said;
and do not intervene with those who are not wise and suffer, and never make the form of a tooth from an ivory tusk, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it steady as we have said, and delay and serve thus long tension.
Never is this bond that comes from under the tongue or naturally, which one is born with; or by accidental wound suddenly;
and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue;
Then cut the nervous thread as long, until the tongue is dislocated from its hold, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it's a sudden wound, if you cut the uncleanness and cut as long that binds.
and beware that the fissure is not too deep in the front, because of the artery which is underneath;
and when you have done it, lift up the level of warm water and of hazel, or of cold water, then place underneath the tongue a tent of linen;
and touch the patient's gum each night, so that the levels cannot become swollen.
And if a flow of blood comes, then place on the level a vitriol poultice; and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize it with a slow-burning cauter, which is good for that; Then the treatment of another treatment as long as he is healthy.
and if you see that the abscess is of a foul color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer.
and if it declines to a whitish color, and there is moisture, so he throws in the onion, and makes an ointment of a subtle spatulum, and delivers from one part and another. and if the blood does not come to your work, so put on a glassy broth as long as it is stained, then return to your work as much as you treat everything fully.
Then raise the level of vinegar and of oil, and the treatment of other treatments as long as he is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes there come within the throat ulcers that are called "godath", and they are properly called the II abscesses, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, take heed.
If it is abscesses hard of little sense and of fused color, do not touch them with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, also for the deterioration of blood; but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will divide it, where it would break by itself;
and if it is of white color returning, and the root is subtle, then have the instrument ready to cut, but first see that the abscesses are calm and appeased.
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be in your hand, and open their mouth and take the scissors between their hands, and press the tongue beneath all the instrument, so that it is in the form;
and let it be of silver or of subtle iron also as a kind of knife:
When you press the tongue against this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and place it in the amulet, and make the trajectory flow above more than you can;
and draw nothing from the tiles with it, then cover the instrument, because it is the shape, which seems like a force; and all ways the head is curved, and one end to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel;
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a candle with tongs, because it is its form: And it is cutting on one side, and named on the other side;
And when you have covered one of the amulets, if you cover the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and hot and dry, and if there is evacuation of blood, then gargle the patient with hot water, or scorching of green pomegranates which are cooked, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is stanched; then let the wound heal until it is healthy;
and another time abscesses do not grow in the throat besides the two mandibles, if they are treated thus like the two mandibles are treated.
And I medically treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, it is to know the small abscess of little sense;
and it had almost closed off her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for a day or two.
And the abscess was so high up that it had pushed through two openings of the nose.
I hastened then, and made an incision in one of the tonsils, then the flow of pus was abundant, and a large portion of it poured out.
then I made another incision in the other perforation of the nose, and I opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue;
After making an incision in these abscesses, and cutting into a part, only a little blood comes out. And then the woman's throat constricted, and now she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting into that abscess for a long time.
And the abscesses grew back again, and filled the void that I had emptied, so much that it became very large.
Then I deceived him and cauterized inside his throat: Then he waited without growing worse;
And I left those regions, and knew only that God did it afterwards.
of the grape
When the humors descend to the womb, and it is inflamed and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is swollen and round, then it is called "womb".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, and you see that the ulcerous abscess is alleviated, and it is subtle, so it is necessary that you cauterize it.
and the one that is rounded and gathered, and is not lengthy; and it is blood-red or of a dark color or black, so it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger to the patient.
It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before. then prick the onion in the urine, and extract it from beneath, and cauterize with one of the two instruments that I have said for incising the two veins.
And it is necessary that you do not operate more fiercely than the surplus which is beyond the natural limit;
for if you operate more, it harms the voice, and the speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two handles, and cure it until it is healthy.
And if the patient has fear about operating, it is necessary that you use gentleness in the cautery of the senses for fear.
And the manner of burning by cautery is sharp and bitter. And it is that the patient puts their head in your healthy hand, and then presses their tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confirms with living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using the handling of this instrument, from which there is the shape:
And have on the head a hair or where one puts the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument to apply all the medicine onto the wound;
And the patient should be leaning on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth to the medicine inside, so that it does not descend into the throat, and the blister.
Then put your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the eye, for a quarter of an hour, until you see the inflammation and the bites of the medicine are alleviated.
And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around an instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and apply the instrument to all the affected area above, until the cotton adheres onto the eye.
And do this frequently, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and expect to see results after three or five days.
And if you have need to restart the cauterization of the medicine, then restart it, and after cauterizing, clean around the eye with cotton dipped in boric acid, and clarify what is around the medicine.
and let there be risen from cold water, and let there be cured of garglings as long as it is healthy.
This cure is safer than incision, not that the cautery;
it is cured of fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it in a gentle heat, and make it boil;
and the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and in the pot has an instrument prepared in this manner: And let it be of silver or of copper, and let one of the heads be thrust into the patient's mouth as long as the vapors rise to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified;
after the remedy is repeated often, until the eye dries out, and be careful that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of the hot abscess, for many things happen there; and do not make a bigger wound than at the decline of an abscess's fall.
And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and place a thread of egg white in the chief's head, so that the patient's mouth does not burn too much; for the egg white thread does not let the bad vapor hurt the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether for salvation.
Many times it happens to have an obstruction in the throat or spine of a fish, or some other thing;
so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing clearly;
and what does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit thus, so that the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if he vomits the bitter thing
where the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and there is a thread on the sponge, and then it passes through; and when it comes to the place, if it sticks, and then you will draw out strongly;
and if it does not come out from what we have said, take the instrument of a probe according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high and lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all comes out, and do not push the bone within;
and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows when the thing is bitter; If you apply heat below, or if you pull it out completely with the instrument evenly, so that it is straight.
of the sensitivity of the throat
No medicine is effective, as I said in the section, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not benefit, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument as I told you.
And if you see the bruise, take it all to the small inch, or with subtle tendons that come to this.
And if that does not work, take a curled hair, and put it in the patient's throat, then put or make the curl of the hair into a hot iron, and make it sweat. And tease the patient with water all day.
then take full sight of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it glide in sensibly, and move it with its own hand often; and if the patient soon feels the water, he recovers.
And if he does not recover as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asphalt, to the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the womb;
Do this many times, for it will fall more gently.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible charcoal bits, and it should be covered with a perforated sheet in the middle, and in this pierced one should be the head of the instrument;
Then you throw in the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to the sanies;
and the sanies will now purge, and if they do not purge, then recommence the fumigation many times;
and let the patient sweat, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water;
and then the liver will be cleansed by this governance.
And the shape of the instrument through which one draws the sanies is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved tongs for drawing mucus into the throat; and it has resemblance to a healthy nose, and it has roughness of lime, so that what she takes, she cannot let go;
Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and in size;
and it is in two manners, of which one is in its own resemblance, and because of what it holds moisture.
And the second method is by means of the eyes or where they are in the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the body are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one must not pierce, as long as the bowel is ripe according to its completion;
and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are on the joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves them until they are ripe on the outside, perhaps because the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member.
Where the abscess is on a principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will injure the principal limb;
where it is of the foundation, if one pierces thus so that it dies;
and it is not suitable that you pierce an abscess without complete digestion, unless it is of the foundation, so that it does not putrefy within, and is lengthened, and a fistula forms; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which dies according to completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departures from the fever, and the diminishing of the pain and of the redness, and the debating and adjusting of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and it is necessary that you make a hole for the perforation or more depending on the abscess, and where it opens badly;
and it is the perforation of a long wound in the body, and if the abscesses are in his hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equal places where there is no putrefaction. In these cases, they complain, according to the affected member.
And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is better that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce before that, so the body is poisoned by his own venom, and it is full of much filth; and perhaps they harden the lips and the depths of him.
And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members need.
And it is necessary that you diminish small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many fissures according to the appearance of the greatness of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the skin, and cover; when it has become so like a drape, and is mortified, if it is necessary to do as one does with pimples;
and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are those that one covers thus like the foil of myrtle, thus as abscesses of the loins;
and if there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Those who have no head, thus as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected great pus, and you pierce them, so do not drain all the pus at that hour, but drain a part of it; then staunch the abscess until another day, then drain nothing further there; do this many times, little by little, until all the pus has been drained;
meanwhile the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old and decrepit men. For the surgeon operates too hastily with the flow of pus, which by chance kills the patient, and you do not perceive it.
Here is the translation: and if it is a flat wound, you should apply tinctures of flax or cotton wool; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, you should put a tent in each one so that they meet each other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of soft skin, and you have shaved around it, you should fill it with old cotton or a dressing of linen threads without moisture, and leave it just to the third day;
then anoint it, and treat it with ointment until it is healthy.
And if you remove blood that has come to the surface during your work, if you calm down the agitated and anxious, and soothe the inflamed area, and put a dressing on the wound that is healing many times.
And if the blood deterioration persists, you should apply government and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in my book, and if it is a winter condition, and the joints or abscess are very nervous, you should put on tents and moist drapes soaked in warm wine and oil;
and if it is in this state, and the limbs are numb, then it is necessary that you apply warm drapels to the affected area with water and oil, or with wine and oil mixture, until the third day, as we have said;
and then open up the abscess and the wound and the treatment, as it is necessary, until he is healthy.
And it is necessary to thoroughly know how to treat abscesses:
as I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
Where there are small abscesses coming from the head, and they are ways of ours that are in veils, just like the juice of a hazelnut, and much has been seen with similar things.
There are some that are fatty and such as those where there is moisture, just like pus;
and if there are some that are hard and stony at the cutting, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
And the operations of the cutter are such that you experience with every instrument that is called "incision", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
For if it contains moisture, it flows out above the length.
And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off everything without leaving the skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when you leave nothing.
Then thrust a cotton swab into an Egyptian injection, if it is present; But this not, in a pointed instrument and in silk, and fill the wound, and let it until the next day; and they run through that which is hardened by night.
And then reinsert the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not harden by night.
Then heal the wound of injection with this convenient method, until it be healthy.
And if the abscesses hold in a thick knot, then cut according to this form, from afar. and you scrape the onions, and remove the scab from all parts, and put all your treatment of drawing forth for the quotidian fever where it lies.
And if the artery does the opposite, then do what I have told you afterwards.
And thus do for the abscess if it is pierced, and on cutting and on curing as I have told you.
And cut into the pierced abscess and the moist, it is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and it was one of the abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess was like a stone, rough and whitish, and could not be broken; and if one had touched any of it, one would have done as much harm as to a stone.
In other abscesses coming on the head, because those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, one must open so that it may be most dependent on the location, in order to issue forth the pus;
and the treatment should be as it is necessary.
Many times the abscess forms on the neck, and beneath the shoulders, and in the loins, and sometimes it comes to another part of the body, and they are numerous, and are entangled one with another.
And each scrofula is properly within its side, just like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these ulcerations are many.
and the similarities of these ulcerations are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
in that then you see of good disposition in the touching, and it is similar to the color of the flesh, and changes from each part and is not at all airy as near the neck nor in the artery, and is not deep;
if it is necessary that you cut through above, and scrape the skin from each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart as oncines, if you are a master, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and pull gently and little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and do not let the spatula slip, lest the hand fail, and do not push too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not stop bleeding, then put on the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound fast. and let it be until the abscesses are softened, and the wound is soothed, and begin to make it putrefy.
And when the blood is stagnant, return to your work, until you complete it;
then seek with your finger if there remain small scrophulae, if they gather and multiply.
And if there is in the root of the vein a large scrophula, it does not behoove that you cut that scrophula at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm.
then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian oil, then treat.
And if you cut out the entire abscess, it is necessary that you reassemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no more superfluity due to the greatness of the abscess. it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of it, and draw out fiercely, and sew as we have said.
it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of it, and draw out fiercely, and sew as we have said. Those scrophulae that hold a surplus, pierce them there where they appear most tender.
and pierce them thus as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then I will treat them with oil and similar things, so that they corrupt what remains of the corruption. and when the wound is well cleaned, if the treatment of anointing is done skillfully, so that it may be healthy.
They used to say and talk about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and it's the writing of their words.
For those who have a hoarse voice, it is necessary that the partition of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cleared; and one should not help by that alone, because all the veins and the breathing of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels.
When the disease is in the channel of the purging, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from the strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it beneath three circles or four a small cut across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the syphac, not in the cartilage;
and they must be careful at the section of the epiglottis that there is no spot of flesh, and the vessels are long of inquiry.
And if the masters are afraid, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat all around the tonsils, then cut through the cartilage as far as it reaches the uvula; and clear the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the syphac, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the tube of the uvula which is forced out by the broken voice, and by the defect of the voice;
and leave the wound open a little.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound at the neck, and sew it entirely without the cartilage;
Then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
One must not do this just as long as the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to death, and the default gives up the wing. Then operate on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and by this command the old man left the wound open so that the evil of the disease would pass, and it passed in three days or four; And then he commanded to cauterize the wound and cure, so that it was cured.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took the knife, and she placed it in her throat, and cut part of the sinews of her arm;
and I was called to cure her, and I found her almost dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that it had not been properly covered, neither vein nor artery, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured her so that she was healthy;
and he did not have at the young woman's fever when she was hoarse of voice, and recovered afterwards to her condition;
because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jasmine, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental;
where naturalness has no point of obstruction.
And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which resembles a fatty tumor to us, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is no fear, and it does not want to open a false flow except in the one that is small, and it proves and searches throughout the entire introgression; If you find it thus, as I grasp nothing, and do not find in any vein, if it is covered, if as we cover the nuts, and draw to its entire coffin, if there is no point; and investigate well everywhere, and heal it as it is fitting, until it is perfectly healthy.
There are many ways of wounds, which I will describe all the similarities;
and now it is fitting that I tell all the difference that is between wound and injury.
I say that injury is heat and fever holding, until the inflammation has passed, and it is accompanied by putridity. then set aside the fever and the heat.
With the wound there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus as a boil, and becomes large.
and they are according to the second similarities, whether grayish, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or chapter which follows.
And the manner of inspecting the abscesses of the nails is that you press or make the skin more moist than you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the strumens have perceived the heart, then it is according to the greatness of the abscess.
then extract the suppuration, and take heed in this, that it bursts forth.
If the moisture flows out, whatever its color may be, thus it is done as I have said about the other abscesses.
and if after the suppuration no moisture comes, know that it is fat, thus do it in a cross, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and turn the skin where it lies, so that you draw it out whole with the knot.
and if you cannot pull it straight, pull it by pieces so that there remains nothing.
For if it remains nothing, then it returns to us many times;
and if it remains a little, and the wound does not grieve you, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing abscess treatments hot, and treat with other treatments until it is healthy;
and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat what is injuring flesh.
and if the vein is throbbing against you or otherwise, then hasten and apply the liquid of broken vitriol, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood. then return to cauterizing what has remained of the tumor.
Here are the forms of inward-turned instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, moderate, and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, moderate, and small, for enclosing the abscesses of a fistula;
and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the sorcels, and they are of citrus iron, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more proven for enclosing the abscesses of a fistula;
and they are of three kinds: large, moderate, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here:
and if there are eleven which have three deformities in three ways thus;
and if there are eleven which have three deformities, and they are also of three kinds;
and if there are eleven which have two deformities, and eleven with only one deformity, and they are of three kinds;
and all this is necessary in their place.
The head of these is sharp to the point where they are cut, and there are those that do not cut except for one part, from which the nails are scraped, because one does not touch the vein nor the nerve;
and of these introjections are the humors collected in the hands, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and gentle, as you see;
and do not use more force than in the gentle flesh, as in legs, and arms, and hands, and fingers, and similar places;
and at no time does one make another instrument small, resembling the scoops of fists, according to this form, for which one staunches blood: and put it nowhere near the place that joins the veins, and the arteries, and nowhere near according to this great form:
At no time do they swell the hands of any men when their corruption begins, as much as they seem like women's hands;
and they remain lame and swollen, and who want to cure them, thus it is necessary to soothe according to this form of this line, up to G. then scoop out the fat, and apply the medicinal plaster to the raw flesh, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and cure until it is healthy;
and you press the slender limb down, and it is relaxed by its greatness just like they do with women, if they are in the second rib, through similar fissures; because one is held by the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B to the line G; then scrape the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and prepare what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, so that it be healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the corruption of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil; and let it heal as much as it absorbs the residue and fat, then cure it so it becomes healthy.
These abscesses that come from beneath the seats are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors which have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Those who hold moisture must be treated according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment to bring healing to those who are wounded.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, do it as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound becomes swollen, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is broken, and the skin is swollen which is above, then many abscesses come from it, and also it happens that the inflamed vein becomes an abscess.
and if one feels it thus, as it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the strangulation.
and when it is due to the vein, then it appears as a defective rupture.
and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and likewise when it is under the arms and angles and in the collar bone and many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and he who is in charge should also avoid it, and for he who has inflammation of the artery, make a incision above the skin from afar.
Then operate on the waist with onions, and beautifully separate the artery from the membranes, so that it is exposed;
Then insert a needle beneath it, and make it pierce up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two eyes, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then puncture the place that is between the two ligaments of an intermuscular area until the blood flows out which is there, and be freed from the abscess;
Then bring together the treatment that injures not, so that the ligament heals; Then heal what is wounded, approaching it, so that it may be healthy;
and if the abscess is on the waist of the vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle beneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; Then burst the abscess, as I have told you, or bind one of the two parts as the head of the vein.
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then insert another needle under all the threads beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads steady in four places.
then cut into the abscess until the superfluid comes out, then cut away the superfluid from the heart and let what is tied loose.
then put on a warm dressing with wine and oil, then apply gentle treatments of tents and bandages until he is healthy.
Also, how abscesses come into the artery and vein, they come into the nostrils when they are inflamed, or from too much hard work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in joints and toes where there are articulations, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many painful conditions without pain.
and when one holds it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not at all in its proper alignment, but beneath the heart.
and it must be adjusted from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, neither above nor below, and the one that is in joints cannot be held by iron: by chance it will contract; and those that are on the head or forehead, make the skin on the spatula-shaped.
and those that are on the head or forehead, make the skin on the spatula-shaped. If the abscesses are small, hold them with a grasp, and cut into their root;
and if it is large, hold it with a clamp, and scrape, then bone and assemble the wound to the sutures, and treat until it is healthy.
It never happens in the belly and not another similar part, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by the resemblance of them, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps.
and there are small and very large ones;
and I saw some that had II or belly wounds that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were already split, and immediately corroded from moisture.
I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces heavy, and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you examine if the patient's moisture is moist, and the color of the joint is pale and moist and with subtle root; if you touch the spatula to the large one, and thus are in your presence the fire cautery.
if you touch the spatula to the large one, and thus are in your presence the fire cautery. For when cutting, there often come too great flows of blood, and if the senses fail you, then hasten to give a hot cautery.
and if you see the patient is frightened and afraid of the incision with iron, take the well-made thread of a thorn, and place the artery as we have said, and let it be for two days;
and then hold back, and do not stop constricting the thread of a thorn until it touches the artery, and ease through it without struggle;
and if the roots are large, you should be afraid to cut them in the middle of the belly, but you can easily cut most of it, then cauterize so they do not regrow;
then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cut the tendon which is of a fixed color and of poor sensation and of lazy regard;
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre hereafter.
when the swelling is ripe If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or incision of the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowls, as it happens in other wounds, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of windiness;
and it is by the routing of the skin's surface and by the issuing of the bowel, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to diverse issues. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it resonates, and then returns, and sometimes it is constricted, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand, it does not constrain at all.
and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity. and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are such that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are such that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be stretched out straight, then sign from below around the navel. Then command to place it between your hands, then go into the limb that you have signed to the entire spatula, then examine the majority of the abscess above the entire great groin. Then tie it with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let us give the joint a solid hold.
Then open the majority of the abscess extended over the joint, and you push your index finger, and seek the intestine. If you find the true joint, if it dislocates, and pushes the intestine to the defect of the belly.
And if you find the bowel, if it takes to the groin, and covers the superfluity.
And if the artery does you harm contrary, or the vein, if it goes badly in, then return to your work and take two needles, and push two strong threads, and push the two needles into what you have done in a cross that you make pierce.
Then strain the abscess in three places under the skin, and if you see it, remove the skin, and let the pus drain out until it disperses, and separate the dead flesh by itself. where you cut when it is subtle and porous, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave the abscess as we have said;
where you cut when it is subtle and porous, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb of what needs to be treated, and sew the limb.
because of an ulcer We have spoken in the division about the similarities of cancer, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment with iron.
and say that cancer grows in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in the limb or where it can be rooted like a cancer that is in the breasts, and in the hips, and in similar places, and one must remove everything when it is at the beginning.
I never saw anyone heal it before me.
And the treatments, when it is in its place or where you can open it, as we have said, is that you should purge the patient of black bile several times;
then make him healthier if he has shown repletion, then prepare the patient for a good place to perform the treatment;
then cut your ulcers or tumors, and shave all parts, and remove all decay without leaving anything.
and let the blood flow freely, and press well with your hand or anything, and if the blood spurts out against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding stops. then the treatment of another treatment as long as he is healthy.
of dropsy We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
and one must not touch with iron in these two similarities: it is to know, tympanitis and hypochondria, for it is mortal things;
then when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "inflamed" by medicines, and the treatment does not profit, if you see that the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as a tumor and solution of stomach and similar things; if you do not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient is very virtuous, and he has no other disease than dropsy only, and it is not too young nor too old, then so should you operate: raise the patient's right hand on your hands, and the assistants press the belly in bulging out the water at the lowest part of the thigh, then take the spine of the back according to this form: And let there be cutting of two parts. to a point, and in no way should it not be so entered that it can come just up to the intestine when one fixes it in, and it cannot be blocked;
then look if the dropsy is inclined towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision thus of the belly, you must straighten up above the navel; and if the dropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then make your incision on the left side of the belly;
and if it is due to weakness, let it be on the right side, and it is not suitable that the patient leans on the crack that the surplus flows do not run to the weak spot;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and cut, and lift your hand to the entire spatula between the skin and the siphac as if scraping out the quantity of an ounce or so much therein;
then pierce the siphac as much as the spatula reaches the empty spot, and it is the level of the water, then pull it back, and you will cut with this instrument in the shape that is there; And it is similar to a subtle silver tube, and it is of a lightweight material or alloy, and has a small hole at the lower part; and where it is narrowed on one side, it has three holes; and one from another part, and one from another;
and the head is cut like a pen, and it's the shape of the incision where the writers cut the pen:
at the top is the scalpel, so that when the instruments come to the water, they descend now onto the instrument;
empty the quarter or third part, for if you empty more than it is necessary at that hour, perhaps the patient may die from the loss of his spirit's arm, or he falls into a swoon, or approaches death;
but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses;
then draw the instrument and hold the water, and it is held back now by the cord which stops up the passage that is on the syphac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
Then recommend the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and remove a small quantity of water.
Do it no day, and keep from flowing as long as it does not remain but a little water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the tomb or gravel heats up, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and you should refrain from drinking. and the treatment with drying medicines so that it be healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
There never grows a child who has no hairs on the penis, or the hairs are small, or it is not in its place.
If you want to pierce as soon as possible without making a large wound, make a very subtle incision according to this form.
then put or thrust I into the subtle closure of the bladder, and tie it thus for three days or four, and when it wants to make urine, so be it opened, and let it urinate, and then put it back.
and by chance they do not cover it, for the urine that comes out does not allow them to keep it closed.
Here is the translation:
Those who do not have the passage in their back are afflicted, for none are born with the passage at the head of the penis, because they cannot urinate until they lift their penis high. and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come to the marrow, and it's a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patients lie thus on their back, then they stretch out the head of the penis and the skin as well as the length of a pen, so that the passage takes in the middle, just as it should.
and beware of the flow of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then staunch what is bleeding blood, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
the pimples of the penis Many times they come to this bath, and it is a show of bad flesh.
and there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
you must take them to the subtle onion, and cut and bind all of them, then put on cotton wool in Egyptian ointment; then heal with diafinicon ointment until it is healthy.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you must apply fire cautery to it.
When you have cut it, and the bath is in a similar state to the edge, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the bath that is inside first; and when it is cleansed, then heal what is outside.
For when you cure them together, it is not assured that the flesh of the edge will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come into his edge and in his groin;
Here is the translation:
And if a flow of blood comes, then one must apply the lunar cautery according to this method:
The cautery helps with these two combined dispositions: it is to know, at the decay of blood, and at the corruption;
and if the head of the stick is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary that you apply or conduct a vein's channel of lead, and urinate the patient amidst;
and when the skin is dry at the head of the stick which has to do with those who have not been circumcised, or it has to do with a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a sharp instrument, so much that the ligaments are disentangled, and the head of the stick is freed from all parts;
and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a spatula or some pointed instrument at the head of the stick and of the skin;
Then remove the bandage gently between two, and I place the subtle layer of the millstone in cold water, so that it does not dry up again.
Surgery is not a matter of continuing as with other wounds; In every way when we do this work of our will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for their health.
I say that the ancient ones did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of my masters and healthy men who performed circumcision around the thigh, with force, and at every new occasion;
if the course was altered because there were two tunics, and by chance it happened that one was cut above and the other below. Now the wound is covered, and the pain is double, and at the mundification which is in the thigh, it is not assured of the point of the limb;
and at the Mundification of the ankle by chance it happens that the vein is pierced, and they run the abscess, and many times they are born thus that they have no need of mundification and I wanted it.
From the purification which is done with forces at all the thread of the wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in all souls tension; but that the thread should be well stretched around the skin;
and the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him suffer more than to tie the thread around the penis so gently, and then you make it slide in all the ways that you can;
then you make it stand straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then put your hand on the penis and blow or make a sign, and pull it up high so that the head of the penis is inside; Then well-cleanse the ordure that is assembled there, then tie the sign with a double thread, then tie it underneath I push to another lien.
Then well-cleanse the ordure that is assembled there, then tie the sign with a double thread, then tie it underneath I push to another lien. and hold it as you ought to by the second ligature at the pouch and at the index finger, and copulate between the two ligatures, then lift the cord above hastily and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the remedy. and put powder on and on the powder I drizzle glue from a moth-eaten egg cooked at the same time as rose water, mixed with rose oil good and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat with another treatment as long as he is not healthy.
The form of the remedies for the purification is this:
the two heads should be opposite and should be cutting, and should be the heads also as big as the equal measurement:
The error of mundification is when the heart within was opened at the incision;
then it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, thus that the liquids make an abscess;
and the equal alignment, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, so hold it with bandages, and then the cope.
And if it surpasses three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, so let it be until the abscessed place is appeased, and the crust scales lightly;
if you cover it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm it at all.
Heal then the wound of things suddenly wounded by powder, which we have said to treat with powders, and if you cover it beyond measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm at all.
Cure the wounds, as we have said, until they are healthy.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or congealed blood, or bubble, or new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division.
and if the urine does not flow, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is there or in the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent over their knees; and they place their feet on the back, and stretch out their belly from the upper part of the back, and restrain the patient's arm as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the stone above, because of which the urine flows;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you administer an extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
and be of subtle silver threads, like the feather of a bird; and let it be the length of a palm and a half, and be subtle at the head.
And the method of releasing the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the head with a piece of wool or cotton, and push the head of the thread into the syringe;
and cut the excess of the wool and push it just to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and wolf's cub's urine, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod of moist oil and olive oil and water TED;
then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod downwards towards the bowel;
Then apply the syringe before reaching the bladder, and the patient feels it going up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order because of that which conducts or guides it when it twists.
Then stretch the thread throughout the little lane little by little, and the urine follows the lane, then it is straightened out, and makes the urine flow.
And continue with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relieved.
When scorching or blood comes into the vein, where putridity is assembled, and you have seen distilled waters and medicines, if made on all the instrument called "clyster", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if there are three perforations: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see.
and the veins are sought by which the short medicine is such that it stops well the sensual movement without addition, if one can then draw out the moisture, and apply as needed.
and when you see your medications in the bladder, place the head of the cauterizing iron in the moisture, and pull towards the drawing force that is within.
if you draw the moisture to the cauterizing iron, and then strongly pull back the drawing force within. if the moisture enters there, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and it is the subtle form of the syringe through which one injects the bladder.
And it is of silver or of copper, and it has a head that is higher.
and below is the seat or the chain's end.
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it that you want to inject into the bladder, then tie it between the two seats in the form of a double twisted thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
Then put the head of the cauterizing iron on the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture collected there, until the patient feels that the moisture has been drawn into the bladder.
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly all around; then put the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a buckle, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument;
and do as if you had done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the previous section the ways of piercing and the extraction of assembled medicines;
and we have said the difference between the piercing for painful wounds, and all the signs, and in which piercing one should operate with skill; and in the bladder, and in the rod;
And I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is generated in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similarly to water in its subtlety;
and it appears suddenly, and scratches the patient's rod, and it bites many times, and then becomes swollen; and at most of these jumps the foundations;
and it is easy to heal children until they are 4 years old, and it is very grievous in the old, and it is like a weak moan, to those who are between youth and old age;
and it is easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient through cleansing, in order to remove all the bad humors that are within the intestines. For it often hinders the healing of the wound.
Then take the patient by the feet, and lift them up and move them downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and jumps out many times from the top high;
Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the vessel is entirely sloping downward.
then the scalpel and touch within;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall to the toucher of the whole, then anoint your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is weak, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and thrust it into its foundation, and cut into the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then anoint the neck of the vessel;
then press on with your finger, and thrust into the defect where you saw to cut.
And instruct the minister to press the vessel with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand lift the skin which is beneath the loins in the part where the cutting is done.
Then I apply the spatula-shaped instrument, because this is the form: And make an incision between that which is between the groin and the perineum, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
and be straight on the stone, and the two should be thus or at the perineum, and the cut should traverse so that it is wide enough by default, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
perhaps the pressure if the two which are at the perineum, so that it may sense the labor;
and know that there is a piece of stone where it has angles and margins: if it is difficult to come out;
and if there is a piece that is underneath, similar to a pebble, and rounded, whose exit is easy.
Where there are angles and margins, make the cutting larger;
and it does not jump, so it is necessary that you stretch on the tendons which are like a thread at the head, in order to stretch the stone so it does not escape; where you apply beneath the subtle, curved instrument at the head;
and if you cannot engineer it thus, so enlarge the small hole, and if the sense is deceived, so extract the glassy [substance];
and if there are more than one stone, so apply the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then extract forcefully, and the small ones afterwards if there are many.
And if it is very large, it must be treated with caution, and made to cause less harm. For these things happen to the patient: where he dies, or the urine comes back through the tube that the veins cannot hold;
but however you exert yourself to treat, or to remove the bandages, so that you treat it by sections;
and when you have completed your work, then apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on top a dressing moistened with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then restore the patient to their bed, and do not dislodge the bandage until just a day later.
And when you remove it, stir well the oil and water, then apply the ointment of diafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until he is healthy.
And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and there is congealment of blood in the bladder, and so it retains the urine, which is known in such a way that without a sound with the urine: put your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy;
Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of wax, and aid it in all ways that you know, so that it may be healthy.
and it is necessary that all the openings that you treat, that you tie the two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the wound.
And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; if the treatment of what I say thus, that you cut often, is to excuse oneself from cutting by this treatment. I have already experienced this thus.
Here is the translation:
then take the thread and tie it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
then push the iron into the rod gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can break the stone from another side;
If you come so soon to the urine, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone that is within the penis. It is thus broken, and jumps out with the urine, and heals the patient;
and if you cannot do this because of any thing that deflects it, then put the thread beneath the stone and another above, then make the penis in place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract it out, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat until he is healthy.
of the stone of women
It rarely happens that a stone is in the genitals of women, and if it happens at all, the treatment is grievous, and is defended against by three things:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well who uncovers herself as mirrors, especially when she is cast.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of hands;
and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more profound than the stone of the man, because it requires making a deeper cut, and great fear there is. And if you need to ascend to this, then it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and touch the true vein on, and if you do not find it, nevertheless seek I cast a subtle mirror;
and it presents a wise woman in the life of women, where a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she does what you command her to do from the inquiry of the stone; and look well if the woman is a virgin:
and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to push his finger or foundation and seek the stone;
and if he finds it, if it presses beneath his finger, and he recommends that she pushes her finger or with the patient, and seeks and presses his left hand on the bladder strongly.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gently from the entrance of the bladder down to beneath, until it comes to the root of the thigh;
then feel upon the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft flesh, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his finger upon the stone or beneath, and let it be cut at the first small size;
and do not move his finger upon the stone or beneath, and let it be cut at the first small size; then put the razor in the incision, if you feel the stone if it grows into the wound as much as the stone can issue forth, and know that many kinds of stones are:
it is to know, small and large and thick and thin, long and round, and those that have roots.
if you know the similarities to recognize the issue.
And if the saneness (health) fails, then apply to the liver a vitroil broth, and hold for an hour as long as the saneness is established;
then return to your work, until the stone is broken, and use the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone as men do for you to help in your operation;
and if the saneness (health) fails, and it is of the artery that is cut, then apply the powder to the liver and hold with tentes and bendelz, and do not recommence more than this, and leave the stone and do not handle it again, lest by chance the patient may die; then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the spots are purified, then return to your work, so that the stone can come out forcibly.
Armice water is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white foam, which is beneath the skin of the loins, that contains the egg.
and it is called "syfac", and never is properly on the fabric of the eyelid, if one thinks that it is another eyelid; and it's the skin of the conjunctiva between the white "syfac" that we have mentioned;
and they do not have a small pouch. And the generation of this hernia is from the weakness that comes to the intestines, and it spreads out that matter.
And never does it come from percussion on the conjunctiva, and this moisture if it has many colors: where it is declining in color to yellowish, or it is without red, or black, or whitish blue, and this happens more;
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is or white "syfac" that we have mentioned, then it is the red abscesses, a little long as the figure of an eye, and does not open the conjunctiva, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then are the abscesses formed with part of the vein, and for this reason one thinks that it is another vein.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white sifac, then it feels very good;
then when you want to know the color of the moisture, it is tested at all the internal quartering, from which the form is thus presented. According to what comes after the examination, judge from what is inside.
And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
then he leans on his back, on something a little high, and places beneath him many towels;
then he sits on his left, and instructs the minister to sit on the right, and stretches out the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart of the joints;
Then take the scalpel lightly, and cut the skin of the joints within the length of a hand up to the point where it pricks, and let your incision be entirely straight in dividing the skin of the joints up to the white spot, and carefully scrape off subtly as you can.
Then pierce the white spot fully with a large perforator, and extract all the water, and then put in your anointed fingers, and the white spot is above.
And do not touch the core of the joints, but only the white spot should be scraped. Cut all or in pieces the membrane of it subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return.
And if the egg-shaped fluid flows out for a long time, then you will reset it in its place when you have accomplished the work of the white spot.
Then assemble the two leaves of skin around the burn with a suture, then treat it like other wounds until it is healthy.
And if you find the ulcer corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood.
Then cut around the entire suspension, and extract the ulcer, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water is gathered in two assembled parts, know that these are two branches. Cut the other part similarly as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a moistened oil rosate.
Cut the other part similarly as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a moistened oil rosate. and put another moistened linen in wine and oil, and put on the two burns, and put doubled drapels above, and tie it with all the bandages that are according to this form.
Then take II drapels, and the applications of laine charpie according to this resemblance and are assembled by stitching in the girdle of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold on the foundation just up to the back, and the others at the part where they prick.
and the other two heads on the II angles, and so is all assembled the restraint in the buckle of the arm;
and no time is medicine this remedy of cautery in the length of iron, and it is that you take I cautery cultellary subtle, and burn the skin of the thighs, and be scorched as we have said, so that the white vein that contains the water is discovered;
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that vein as onions, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery;
And hold the scalp in all the ways you can, as much as you stretch it.
and beware that the flames do not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more sacred; and beware of the deterioration of blood, and beware that the operations are timely;
and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or abscess bursts or deterioration of blood or something else, if you cure what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, if you promise perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs we have said that the aqueous humour is there, then make the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the part beneath all the spatula-like width, and put the perforation deep into the long body of the corpse;
and let the wounds be large, so that all the pus flows out;
then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it flow out to discharge the remaining pus, then treat it until the wound is healthy;
and if the white cloth does not allow the pus to exit through the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one extracts the pus of hydropic people, so that its shape is thus presented;
and enlarge the wound, and know that the pus returns, and it is assembled after six months or a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will spend their days thus.
Know that in the treatment of this disease there is fear in many dispositions, because it seems to me that many are worth more than those left behind.
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and likewise from bad humors; and it is in most cases.
It is to be known by the abundance of bitter and acidic humor, which is spread through bad humors, or from percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance it is a grievous abscess, greenish and piercing, and of a foul color, and sometimes it comes from a narrowing of the artery, or from an inflammation of the vein.
When it is from a narrowing of the artery, it is recognized by the disposition of the hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers; and do not touch him with your hand.
He who is made of inflamed vein is known by his expression at the touch of the fingers, and one can well judge the condition from this resemblance, and on other flesh. and it is that you cut the cord of the veins, then the vein is above, and the flow falls from the white surface, and releases the suspension from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already familiar with these new flesh, then it is necessary that you extract the vein, and cut it.
and if it is attached to the surface, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all of this tension, and cut around it circularly.
And if the birth of the flesh is at the back of the hand, then it is necessary to cauterize all of it, and hold the finger steady, as we have said.
And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of softening oil and rose oil, and afterwards treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
These are enclosed abscesses wrapped in a wrapping resembling a bundle, with the softening of the veins, and the patient suffers greatly when it bursts.
and the treatment of this disease is very similar to the previous one, and in every way we will tell you about its work, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high seat, then bind him with suspensory cords at the two hips, to all the vessels which are close to the vertebrae, and tighten them firmly, and stretch them out strongly;
then cut with a sharp spatula widely through the spot where the vessels are, until they are discovered, and then scrape away from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
then fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first vein where the vitellus is come, and then tie it again to the other vein; then they apply the cupping glass directly, according to the length of the body, and in drawing out the corrupted humors;
then heal the wound as with others or by applying a poultice, so that no vessel bursts which would nourish one of the intestines;
for through this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, it is necessary to extract the intestines from all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dry out, and cannot be helped.
The symptoms of this disorder are through the section that comes or goes out, or the extension onto the belly in the area of the intestines, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the intestines;
and this rupture is either from the softness of the intestine, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes:
from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from lifting of a heavy weight, and similar things;
and the signs when it is about the extension of the muscle, if it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and they are equal abscesses right up to the peritoneum, because the muscle presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the intestine, which causes sudden severe pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the issue with the intestine and the body's weakness against the swelling of the intestine.
And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments of fear, because they think they will escape.
And the manner of the surgery is that you instruct the patient to insert their intestine with their hand inside the wound, if they can reinsert it. then let him be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips;
then stretch out the heart upwards, and cover all the skin of the thighs from the length. then put inside the liver of the waist uncines according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth.
Then scrape the dead skin which is under the skin of the joints, so that the white skin underneath becomes uncovered on all sides;
Then put your finger index in the one that follows the joint, in the one that is between the white skin which is under the skin of the vein, and between the second skin, and separate what is behind the vein, and between the second skin;
and then move the vein to the right hand within the circle of the joints, and stretch the white skin upwards with your left hand, and lift the vein against all the skin towards the waist; and instruct the assistant to stretch the vein upwards, and separate what is behind the ligament;
and seek with your fingers if there is a point of the intestine enveloped or hard white skin, and if you do not find anything, put it to the belly below;
Then take a needle with a large thread made of X threads, and insert it into the rear part of the skin, which is after the skin of the kidneys. after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, so that there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the skin with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, lest an abscess forms there; and put the thread there again according to the first thread, as long as two fingers from that one, and after these two threads leave the skin which is under the skin of the kidneys the width of a finger; and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries;
then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the thighs, as far as the sinew and the bowel, as we have said before;
then mix the millstone in oil, and put it on wounds, and I will mix the lien that we have said. And at no time is the white finger cauterized which we have said, after the incision, due to fear of deterioration of blood. For this happens often, and let the lien stay until it dries by itself;
and if it delays in drying, so be aroused with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it dries;
then heal the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshy hernia
In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is done as with the twig that grows together with the vein, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting lightly underneath.
Then cauterize in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who are swollen, so that the veins heal.
and treat it as we have said, so that it becomes healthy.
No time is spent on rough remedies, as we have said, and open the abscesses.
and do not descend into the intestines with caustics, and if they descend, it is little, and repair all hours;
and always, if it stays too long in this point, the wound or syrup believes, so that the intestines descend;
and this happens through the extension of the syrup which is in the abscesses, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflates the abscesses and opens.
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously said.
and it is never cured by iron in this manner: and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then take the limb of the affected joint in a straight line according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the skin that is beneath the skin which is swollen, then take the razor and place it on the apparent limb beneath the skin;
and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two apparent limbs beneath the skin on the head of the razor, and cut one and the other;
then extract the head of the razor, and do not touch the skin in any way that would stretch one finger to another, as I have made you aware of in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines; then heal by the healing of wounds.
then heal by the healing of wounds. And when you cut the fibers, if it is disfigured and cures the wound, so that it may be healthy.
The surface is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are muted in this place, and closer to health.
from the softening of the skin of the thighs
Many times are softened the skins of the joints in some men, because the flesh that is within is softened, and it is easy to see;
and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, that one makes the patient sit up straight and covers the skin which is softened on the natural skin;
then bring together the two lips of a wound, and if you see, first remove the excess of softened skin at three stitches or four firmly;
then cover between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healthy, and cut the thread.
of punishment
Know that cauteries are condemned in our law, and therefore I please that I do not speak of them in this book;
and it is not necessary to use them for two reasons:
one of which is that the masters know how to respond when one asks them, and about the cure;
and the other, because we often have need of cautery on certain beasts to aid us, such as goat and sheep and cattle and other beasts.
I say then that cauteries are made according to two manners: or by attraction, or by incision.
In that which we make by attraction, let us sit in warm water, as long as the joint becomes softened and relaxed; then take them with your hand, until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Of the cautery of incision: it is necessary that you hold the best, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the suspensor, and cover each hole with a cup, when you have well scarified them;
and let no pus accumulate under the skin and the subtle skin that is above the veins;
and this manner of cautery is more deadly than that which is made by attraction, because in attraction sometimes something of the joints remains, which prevents the joint from being luxated;
Then heal the wound until it is healthy.
Here is the translation:
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men: One is when between the two testicles appears as if it were the figure of a woman's nature, where it has hair, and sometimes the urine flows in a short distance.
And another manner is in women, and it has on the little finger as a rod and they bind.
And the treatment of the man and woman is that you treat the adjacent flesh entirely, and you heal as for other wounds;
In the second way, of men whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
A tumor is an adjacent flesh on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to behold; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
It is necessary that you remove the excess of the tumor with your hand or with onions, and treat it lightly.
and do not go too deeply into the fontanelle, because the running of blood will not come, then the treatment of another treatment until it is healthy;
and at another time it rises to the mouth of the marrow, and the impediment, and by chance it bursts forth, and is according to the resemblance of a cowe, and for this they called it in ancient times "cow disease". It is necessary to cauterize it, just as we have said for the tetanus, and to treat it until it is healthy.
Error occurs when the nature of the woman is not fully perceived, or the passage is small; and it is natural from birth, or happens by accident through disease that comes to it;
and it is natural from birth, or happens by accident through disease that comes to it; or it is from a stuck cartilage, or subtle and thick dou syfac, and it is made in the fontanelle of the marrow, or in the ribs, or below, or whatever;
and difficulty conceiving, and infertility, and by chance having flowers to have;
and the knowledge of this thing is by the observation of the pill.
If the swelling appears close, seek it in your fingers or in the vein.
If it is a subtle and dou syfac, and it is near the two lobes, if you hurry, and turn them thus:
put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
then extend the two lobes formally, so that the subtle dou syfac is round, and is above the protuberances;
then take a linen cloth, and anoint it with oil, and place it on the loins, and guide the woman to her husband every day, so that she cannot become pregnant.
And if the wound is hard and thick, it is necessary to wash the scalpel with a similar leaf of mint.
If the protuberances are of flesh born, then suspend them from the ninth rib and the cope;
and these bloody medicines are stagnating blood, if as an antidote, blood of dragon, incense, together with abundant dew;
Then apply a wide poultice of soft cloth, so that the wound cannot suppurate;
and let it be for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen;
Then be cured by other treatments until he is healthy.
And when flesh wounds become gangrenous, then they need to be covered according to this manner, so that they do not turn into abscesses. For the abscess that is gangrenous in the flesh, one should not touch it with iron.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are varices of veins that without sharp custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed;
and we have already said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will tell you here those that receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and the veins, when they are deeply embedded in the flesh, and they do not appear to sensation, if it is not the cure by iron.
Those that are at the mouth of the flesh, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then stop the flow as with tourniquets, and bind around its roots, then powder with medicines that restrain blood, such as açaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
then soak her feet in warm water for an hour, then put them in cold water;
and if blood flows out, then make him sit in a decoction of sumac and crust of pomegranate seeds and of gale and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster on his back.
And if it stagnates, it is good. If that does not work, make him apply warm poultices to the back and to the affected limbs without piercing;
then take wool, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of angelica with old wine, and apply warm to the location.
And when the abscess breaks, then clean the location of the swelling as much as it is healthy;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough head, then it should be covered as I have said before; and then heal him so that he may be healthy.
Many types of abscesses come in the marrow, such as cancer and piercing abscesses and herpes and isthmuses and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the division.
It is necessary therefore that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus.
and if you want to know the work of iron, look if the abscesses are gathered at the beginning of their coming, and full of bitterness and fever, and if it becomes red then you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but make me soften until the pain is appeased;
and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have small seats or where he leans back, and support himself on his back and gather his feet together in order to deflect the leg;
and let his hips be expanded, and put his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good ligament;
Then suck the bulb towards the right side, and I will handle the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the form.
and it is necessary that when you have handled this instrument, you fix the rule first to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and it does not harm the patient. and if the instruments are too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapels, so that the instruments do not harm them.
and it is necessary that he place the horn of the instrument above, and that he hold the instrument.
And when the abscesses open, and one feels them with the hand, it is necessary to cover at the head, with a spatula-like instrument.
and when the wound is empty, it is necessary that you put in the place tender mosses in oil rose, or in dry green oil;
and apply the tender flesh to the bottom of the wound, and put beneath the marrow and beneath the prickly vein clean moss in water or soft mallow being applied;
then the treatment after two days of anointing comes to that, so that it be healthy;
and often lift up the marrow and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and aristology being applied for a long time; then return to the anointing.
And if the wound is returned to the marrow, it is necessary that you beware of iron rust, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of the swelling It is necessary to be first at the childbirth that it knows the natural shape of the infant, and the signs are when you see the woman approaching from below, and desires to give birth to the arm;
then hasten the edges of the iron to issue; then consider that these instruments are according to natural figure, and it is the issue under its head, and the second one with it;
and when you see these signs, then you should press his belly lightly, so that the edges issue quickly;
for when it descends upon its head, then is the second one with it, and the marrow of its superfluities is purified by good mundification;
and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes against the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or swelling, and is converted by accident over its neck, and by other bad figures;
it is necessary for the practitioner to be wise and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one must aid them.
If the infant comes onto its head by natural means, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the child is weak, then make it sit on a cushion, or the women hold it;
and raise its natural oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then put the bath between its two small spatula-like fingers where it is formed: and anoint the umbilical cord, and cut to his nail as much as the moisture that is in there flows out;
and press the woman's belly as much as the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sesame;
then make her take and be comforted by condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if the infant is now astral.
And if the two hands are swollen, then it is necessary to reset them lightly little by little. and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet high; then remove the seat from the ground, and hold the woman, so she does not fall at the removal.
and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then grasp the hands at the cot which is placed before, and extract the child, and reset equally.
from the birth of the child on its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, it is necessary to push high up; and then turn it little by little, until it is equalized;
then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
When it jumps just to the hips, then instruct to take hold, and make it stretch with good condition; If the wound is deep, then God wants.
And if it does not straighten as we have said, if it turns a little and a little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is easier.
And if it does not heal as we have said, take a poultice of high quality, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in the mortar; and put it on the woman's nature within and drive out this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until beneath the ribs;
and when she is softened underneath, make her a girdle of myrrh, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a seat, then make her stretch out and hold her mouth and nose, and take her belly lightly, for the infant is coming out now.
from the birth of the child upon its knees When the infant comes out in this form, then I put the fontanel of its hands little by little; then let it be sewn onto its neck, and the feet depend below, and let it be leaning on the bed; and fold its hands a little at a time, and then place its hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from below, until it is arranged below; and if it does not sit well, take its feet and shape them comfortably, then shape the belly above, then you will place your hands; and rock the child a little at a time; and instruct the woman to take hold of it until the child is seated.
of the issue of the child who comes holding a large hand during it is necessary to skillfully bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then lift the woman, and go.
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and shape her legs comfortably.
then administer the poultice that I have prepared;
and if it does not take, let it sit on the seat, then study to bring back the hand; and look at the child according to its natural shape, and let it stretch out, and instruct it to take hold as much as the veins can be forced.
of the birth of the child on his neck, and has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back. I think that the vein should take its hand, then turn it little by little, and look at it lightly;
and when it is even, put on the natural poultice of altée and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
and when you have done this, let it sit on the seat, and instruct it to take hold; and let it stretch out. of this same manner to all the following
of this same manner to all the following When it comes to be in this manner entirely the second time, cut the second time at your finger, as much as the moisture is evacuated;
and he presses his face against his neck, if the cup of the womb, so it is not retained, and kills the infant;
then throw the child inside, as long as you have placed it so it fits, and instruct the woman that she should not take it out at any time:
of the dislocation of the twins (likely referring to a joint or a pair of bones) Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born; and it is not a strange thing, and it happens little. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they have little name;
Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they have little name; I know that, for they are multiplied, and are divided by the syphac who separates them, which is tied to the womb;
and sometimes they issue forth naturally as a single one, just like we have said.
And if it is grievous, so the treatment as we have said, and let the subtle baths, and make everything easy and light that it does. and do thus as it will bring health to him. of many children
None are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and all are formed in the form of an infant by the measurement of the glorious wisdom, and it is necessary that the baths know everything, for it seems that similar things have happened; do according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman with a dead or stillborn child, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to perform manual extraction; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and there is no accident or she has fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be bent over her back, and her hands be inclined downwards, and the legs be raised;
and the midwife holds the two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart during the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mother with oils made from leaves of wild tansy and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and musk;
then gently lay them in the mother's lap, then she wants the place where she laid the swaddling clothes to be comfortable for her, and take care that the infant is well wrapped so it descends onto its head;
if you fasten the swaddling clothes in her eyes or on her neck or in her mouth or in her palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs, and if the descent is onto the feet, hold it or prick it and touch the moistened sides;
and it is necessary to hold the onion in his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and hold his whole hand lightly, and fix the onion in none of these places that we have said, until it reaches the desired spot.
then fix an encounter with another onion, or the third where you have your mastery, so that the extractions are even;
and then they are evenly stretched by moving one way and another, to make them issue forth, and let the onions be held firm, as is their shape:
And if one part remains, anoint the vein with some of its oil, and apply it to that part, and pull out the other part;
and if there remains none, put this onion or higher up, and do it until everything issues forth completely.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be reduced by stretching, then it is necessary that you envelop it with a bandage, so long as it becomes straight. Then put a bandage on the joint of the sole or at the ankle, and thus it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and so for the feet.
And if the head of the infant is large and it is twisted in its exit, or if it has an aching assembled head, then it is necessary that you put the spinal instrument between your two, and make the head straight and extract the ach. or you will use the instrument called "almidach", which is made with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and thus the same make the infants have a naturally straight head.
and then treat the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and holds on to the malleolus, so be careful, as much as the moisture that is or worse issues;
and if it cannot come out, then cut into pieces at the joint where you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you puncture as much as the moisture flows.
And if the inflammation is on its feet, then it is light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the morrow are lighter.
And if it is stretched in the belly or in the thigh, then it is necessary that you extract it with the drapil enveloped on the hand; and open the belly or the thigh, as much as the moisture that flows from it;
and if the other members are numbed, and the head remains, then put the scalpel in the palm of your hand at the front of the marrow, and treat it just up to the mouth of the marrow; Then apply the ninth or tenth treatment, and burn the excess flesh.
and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by hot abscess that has come, if it does not need to be operated on, then it needs to be treated with moist and fatty things; and treat the ulcers, and apply ointments that are mild, softening, and moisturizing.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can place it evenly, then treat it as we have said regarding the living infant.
and do not have any power, if you burn the flesh in pieces, and leave nothing of the secondary (layer).
And when you have done this, treat them as we have said regarding hot abscesses that come into the marrow.
and if a flow of blood comes out, then apply astringent ointments, and treat with other remedies.
And I saw a woman whose belly an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that, and the other was stillborn. After a long time, there came abscesses in his stomach, and they grew so much that they burst open, and he began to have great pain.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I placed on it a strong plaster, and an bone came out, and after some days another one. I marvel greatly, because this wind has no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound and treated it with my hands, as much as the woman was at a better point; and I watched the woman for a long time afterwards, and it immediately improved a little bit around the joint;
and I did not record this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
Hereafter comes the method of pressing, where one finds the books;
and it is given to two attendants as it is given to the heads of the veins. However, the horns should be more subtle on the constrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the tube be of a large size, and the margin of the trees as it should be, and of one palm and a half; and in the two veins let there be adjustments of this same tube, which are closed at one and the other, by half a palm in length or a little more;
and this adjustment is pushed into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, in its more subtle and lighter resemblance, is made from ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tenons. and it has two heads two adjustments, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
and when you want to open the marrow with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and legs covered, then push the two adjustments adjusted together into the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs; then operate your hand on the entire instrument, as you have done with the tenons equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the marrow, until the handle does what it wants.
These instruments are all superior, and are multiplied for their similar appearances; and when the eyes have them aligned, so much more swift is the work, and higher are the homes for their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared to, for their necessities are not excusable.
When the second one is retained in infancy, then you must command the patient to retain his wing, and then make him stretch out with confidence, and hold your hands at the mouth and nostrils; and if he jumps through that, it is good.
If he does not, take the pot, and make a poultice or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the morrow, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, being cooked or boiled in water over the fire;
Then put a cane or tube down into the mouth of the patient, and the other end in the hole, and pull it tight so that the vapors come out from inside the patient.
then make it straighten, as we have said. If the secondary humor is hastening.
And if it remains after this treatment, and does not heal, instruct the patient to apply their left hand in oil of sesame or in a poultice of altaia, and then put it in a warm place, and seek the secondary remedy. and when they have found it, take it and stretch it little by little directly, so that the patient does not feel pain at the extraction.
but you must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then draw it out. if it comes and becomes disordered.
And if the mouth of the patient is constricted, we have said the treatment to straighten, and of fumigation with herbs.
and let it not be of all this that we have said, if you guard against falling into error;
but it happens that what is at the mouth of the mare, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then you anoint it with ointment of four drugs; if it will putrefy and decay, and will come to a crisis;
but always, when it putrefies thus, there comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. It is necessary then to make fumigations suitable for that:
none of the ancients have experienced fumigation with fresh watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this:
And it is to see something similar to a dog, and put the subtle head in nature, and the wide shoulders over the fire;
and let there be fumigations on the coals, and the tar until it is consumed, and recommence another.
Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus the subtle ones are stifled. it is necessary therefore to handle the one who perceives with his finger, and does not perceive it at all from the spatula's agitation, and beware of touching it with the ligature.
then put on the affected limb a mixture of wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that he will not recover, then put or insert a tube of lead, and leave it there for a long time, and be careful when the veins want to burst in chambers.
And often these stiflings come from a sudden wound or abscess. it is necessary to cover that suddenly. let it be cured, as we have said about the treatment of a piercing wound.
Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodation, and larger than those that come from beneath the foundation in default, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
and when that swelling is old, it is operated on, and beneath the moisture a white or subtle boil appears, and sometimes these fistulae persist;
and they are known by the fact that there is either indigestion or windiness when the patient makes evacuation, and sometimes by chance it jumps into the verse.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod; and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
And then one recognizes the persistent fistula at the foundation, and it does not go away. and it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horse hair, until you feel the probe or the hair at your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from excessive perspiration or wind, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate well; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is close to the bladder or close to the urinary tract, then the urine jumps, and cannot be soothed by medicines.
It is perceived just up to the joint of the thigh, if it is the tendon coming just to the loins; if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain within, it is that it is still swollen, and no medicine nor sudden relief by anointing;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through labor, and the foolish doctors who meddle with them.
In those that are not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patients place themselves in your hands on their back;
and he raises his legs up to his knees, and has his knees bent towards his belly; then put a straightening tent, or a splint if there is twistedness, until you know where the tent goes.
If the patient feels it at the bottom, then you should put your right index finger, and then it seems that the tent has penetrated;
and be discovered where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is pierced; if you do not work carefully, one cannot heal it.
One can almost always heal some, but this happens rarely;
and the aid that one makes, if it is that one heats the subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before; and burn all around the fistula, until it reaches the bottom. and do this two or three times, until you know that these burnt crusts are raised, which resemble a bird's feather.
and then treat the many soft ulcers with a poultice, until those crusts are removed, then treat with ointment, softening and soothing.
If he is thus healthy, it is good.
If this, nothing else can be healthy;
and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger which is at the bottom, and place between your finger and the holder a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that which follows the covering of the vein. if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and burn immediately before the holder, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the holder. and it will be delivered the tent, and fall;
then reject those withered branches that seem a bird's wing, and none of them remain.
And if the wound is swollen, and it forms a crust between the skin and the vein, then cauterize with fire or medicine water.
For the fire cautery assembles two bone things: it is to know, the dryness of those assembled branches, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the treatment of muddled tents in mud or in broken choz, until the joints throw forth, and it makes the withered branches dry in the mud;
then treat the wound of the fingers suddenly grown into hard skin, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes just to the edge of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent, and between two is the cloth or the syfac or branches, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways than the way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three manners:
where you apply cautery as we have said, or you cut just to the flesh, or if you can place and treat it as before.
and do not go too deep in the wound, lest you cut the tendon that holds the foundation, and bring on the evil discharges by the opposite sensation. then treat it, as we have said;
then treat it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healthy, or you separate that covering and the wound then as it is cut from the foundation, either by tension or by another pointed instrument; then define that empty space which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is deficient in the foundation;
then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is deficient in the foundation; if it is easier for the patient.
And often fistulas occur according to this method: and it is when you apply the tent to the fistula, and it is where the foundation of the lesion touches the skin above, if you take a precise tent according to this form at the head: And you push a twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is penetrating into the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, so that you apply your finger or foundation:
and draw the head of the thread, and assemble the two edges together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for a day or two:
and restrain it many times, until the threads grasp those flesh that are between them, and cicatrize;
then heal the wound until it is sewn and healthy.
If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside. For it does not suit to make a copper setting in the depth, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of the spinal spine where the fistula is made is very sharp and pointed, partly and cutting; and on the other hand not, because one should not grasp what one should not grasp, as you see here:
Emorrhoids are according to two manners: where they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and suddenly blood bursts out, and there is one or many, and they destroy the foundation and at the base of the foundation;
but those that are deep down have little moisture, and suddenly burst out with a little citrine water or a little blood, and have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them deep in the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to go to the latrine, until the foundations issue forth, and the threads appear; if you hurry, and hold it like a tendril, or you hold it on your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;
and if the uncle cannot hold them due to their moisture, take them with a drapil, or a cushion, or a piece of camlet; and hold them with your fingers, then burn them, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are in the fire of cautery; where you cauterize as it is said or chapter of cautery, then heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot issue, then cleanse the patient with a harsh and bitter cluster of medications to purify what is in the foundation, so that they can issue freely; when the patients can take it, and if the thread is outside the foundation, then the treatment is light;
when the patients can take it, and if the thread is outside the foundation, then the treatment is light; and it is that you take them with your nail or tongs, and burn them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron. It is necessary that you adjust the bandage in this manner:
It is necessary that you adjust the bandage in this manner: Take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread above and make a perforation through the needle from another side, and twist the two ends of the thread beneath the needle, and if it is of equal length.
and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do likewise for all the others, and leave it there to correct the excessive flow of blood.
then put on the dressing a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerote, and put it on the base, and instruct the patient that he should rest.
and then let it be until they scar, and when they will be fallen, if you treat with ointment and other treatments, until he is healthy.
of the dryness of the veins or base Here is the translation: You should reach the point of a spatula or of your nail above the scab, which does not allow it to become moist. then heal them as soon as they are numb so that it suits them;
and if he cannot be numbed, then recommence the rubbing stronger than before, so that it heals much, and is scarred; then heal them as soon as they are healthy.
you apply heat A formice is a small faulty appearance under the skin, and goes much deeper inside;
and sometimes it finds the frost, and one feels it just like death from shivering, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
And the cure is that you take a thread of a bird's feather, or a strong feather of a vulture, and put that thread on the shivering, so that the circles encircle the shivering entirely around; then turn your hand all around the thread so that you grasp everything around the shivering, and put it deep inside, and eradicate the shivering from its roots.
And if you see, make a cane of iron or steel in this form, and be subtle below and draw above. I do not perceive, for I must hold still, and I must press.
And if you see, if you cauterize the fremittance, as it is before or in front of the chapter on cauterization.
Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of tin foil or mail;
and never make those small and large instruments, according to those for which they are prepared. These therefore that one uses in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
These therefore that one uses in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small. The shape of the small and large cluster is above large, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and there should be a separation or the intestines are tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within;
and have on one of the sides two perforations, and on the other one;
and let the intestines or womb into which one puts medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and let it be perceived all around with small perforations, and have between each perforation one thread of space, then put in these perforations one strong thread twisted in X or however you twist, and assemble the belly as if it were a bag; and when the medicine is inside, if you hold the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cauterize;
and it's the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cautery with oil or egg white, or similar thing, then apply it lightly; then the minister should hold it with his two hands together, so that it is all visible, then remove the cautery, and lift the patient's legs to the bench, and if the medicine wants to exit, hold on as much as he can; and if he sleeps a night completely, it is a greater help.
And if you clusterize him in illness of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to issue, then recommend it as much as he be healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or an abscess, then let the cautery be as subtle as for a child;
and it's the subtle form of the cluster that holds the skin steady on the spot where the skin is held.
We have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds;
now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and of medicine, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the locations or places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and cut of sword and of knife, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things;
or which are made according to the laws of the body, as wounds that fall on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you about the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care whether it's from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess: If you make the head wound better by ceasing the bleeding from the injury, and let the healing be on the opposite side of the naval area;
and spare the patient from fullness of wine and coarse meats.
And if he does not want to recover, let his meat be diminished, and drink no wine, nor eat any flesh.
and put on the wound, suppurating matter that comes out, cotton soaked in rose oil remedy, or in wine steeped.
and if there is no suppurating matter, put on the wound, so it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little about later;
and if the wound has been moved, put on some ointments, until it is healthy.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by stretching, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
If the wound is discovered on the bone, and it is open, and does not hold but to a little, then it collapses. Then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin over the leather-like skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, as if they are eating stale and roasted meat, also like poultry, and similar things.
And if you find skin putridity, and it does not adhere to the bone, then collapse the entire putridity, and throw it away, then treat it.
and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without a crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, then seek to extract the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread. and if that does not benefit, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which sucks up likewise that the arsenic has moved.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense in part; blood of dragon, two parts; living talc, three parts, and powder subtly, and fill the wound, and hold firmly, until it dries well and joins to all its blood;
and then bind it well, and let it be without loosening, so it does not swell; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
And at no time does one make a poultice of chalk solely, when one has not the encense nor the blood of dragon, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the arsenic has moved to the wound, meanwhile in this state, if you do not put this powder;
but put on some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it discharges well; then the treatment of other treatments until he is healthy.
And if a fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then hold it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you about the fractures of the head afterwards.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerves, then there is no other technique than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the nerve substance is cold, and its connection is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the soothing medicine be, such as warming water in sweet water, and mixing it with rose oil, and cooking it thus in sweet water, and other types of minerals according to this manner, and applying moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, sew it up with bands, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then prick below or lower down;
and if the artery is cut, and as blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for this is a surgical task;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the ribs, and the conduits are guarded, because the flesh goes, then sew up the rib on the vein of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it firmly, and leave it for some days, then cure the wounds of ulcers as long as it becomes healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then excavate it; and if there are pieces of bone, then remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound purifies, and be careful and alleviate the discharge;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then the treatment should be as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a blow of a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if the wound has formed ventosity where the patient's ailment lies: know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not penetrate deeply, and it will revive the heart, and kill the patient; but I put on an attractive poultice, and apply it to him twice a day;
and if you do not have a poultice, then put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more; If there comes no spasm, neither bad trembling of the heart nor strange movements of the arm; and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed. Heal the then with applications and other treatments, until it be sound;
and if it cannot heal, and becomes an open sore, then know that there is a fistula;
if the treatment is as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front; if it is large, of stitching;
and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, then cauterize the wound, and treat the festering sores if they are swollen; and if they are not swollen, let the wound suppurate, if he alleviates the extractions;
and of other wounds in other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
Here is the translation:
The ruptures of the belly are great and mild and small;
from the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the ends of the intestines, because of the intromission of them;
and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one, because one puts the intestines back in place more easily, if one does not put them back in a hurry;
because the intestine swells so much that it feels cold, if it returns more to its place, and therefore it is better to have a smaller wound, because one can reset the intestine to its place better than the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
the two common stitches have to do with the stitch of the belly, and the stitch of other wounds of the body and the two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and however they are more proper with the stitch of the belly, and I will describe each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and a thing is to be put back, it is by one of the two manners: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is frozen, warm it up in such a way: soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in hot water only, or you cook in hot water squinancy and cypress and spike, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and often make these veins retract, and it is more likely to withdraw from swelling.
And when you see the swelling disappear, if you soften the intestine with water or oil and may be cooked, because by this the entry is alleviated to some extent;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound at the instrument where one gathers the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is more likely to be cutting, that we should not cut without great necessity there being;
and these are the instruments for making an incision:
if you cut deeply into the curve and do not dig further, and see there the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, you can then have power over it, for that is worth much.
When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient sit on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower abdominal part, place the head and the thigh higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, adjust accordingly so that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to manage what I say in large wounds and injuries.
For small wounds, use what is at hand, then hold it between your hands, I minister carefully so that you tighten the entire rupture with your hand, and bring the lips together.
and it is the common method of sutures, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound a space of two fingers, and fix a needle or have a strong thread. and pierce the two heads of skin with the two heads of the suture, which is beneath the skin inside, until you make them pierce that part, and bring together the two heads of the suture in four ways.
Then strain with a double thread around the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound together, and then leave the finger of space, and fix another needle.
Then weave two threads as you did with the first needle, and do not cease from doing so according to what you have mastery of needles, until the entire wound is restrained.
And let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse, for subtle needles grasp all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well. For it is necessary that they be moderate.
And do not push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin, lest they grasp and open the wound before the suture.
And then grasp the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put tents or drapery around the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn.
and this manner of treating with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it suffices to use a needle or two.
The second treatment is common, and it is that you assemble the two heads of leather and the two heads of silk together onto a needle or where there is one strong thread in the middle;
and when you have pierced these heads all four together, then reset the needle at the part where you began, in the manner that one sews the drapes;
and put a space between each stitch the width of a smaller thumb;
this stitch suits the man, and I sewed a wound that one of our men had in his belly, which was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and it was two palms deep into the intestines, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I brought back the intestine then when it had been dead for 24 hours, and the wound was sutured until the 15th day, and I cured him, and he was healthy.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not care for his condition, because I stood in the place where one found none, nor any medicines; and applied sense upon the wound cotton very often twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healthy.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle and sew up the part that is deficient just to the inner skin;
when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if you have sewn up with suture or stitched or you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce another part of the inner skin just to the deficient part;
and the intention of this stitching is that you sew thus as the pelletier makes pellets, and that you leave once the thread of one part, and take it up again from another, until the stitching is entirely complete.
The second way of stitching, which Galen described properly, is like some fountains that assemble the two parts naturally, and apply one head of the wound to the other head, in such a manner:
Stick a needle or the head of a mirror-like probe, and make it pierce that place thoroughly, and let the two heads of the wound; Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the defective part just up to that depth within, as the two heads of the wound;
Then pierce one and the other from the defective part just up to that depth within, in the two other heads of the mirror-like probe that are on the other side;
And it is the worst way of stitching and the most common.
Galen said this in his speech, and no one bears witness to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, or have a thread in each.
and one must push one needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
and it is known that when the rupture is within the belly, the stitching is more grievous than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of the other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound all its blood, likewise that the artery has moved, then reset the intestine, and the sewn area;
then put on the powder of burnt crust, and if the artery has moved, then put on no ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the thread, and sew up the skin flap, and the membrane; then treat the wound as with the others, until it is healthy;
and if you do not have medicine, put it on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, cotton much, and remove it twice a day until it is healthy.
For you do not have mastery of other medicines in many circumstances when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not make a bad community with the principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten a light linen cloth in oil of tempered heat, or in rose oil, and put it on the anguish, and beneath the spines;
and if it feels pain or bloating in the belly, and many times it happens, then they cleanse with red wine enema, and meanwhile the bloating reaches just up to the intestine;
and pierce deeply, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it is because of the abundance of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the kidneys.
And if he jumps from the wound, set it back as soon as the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and turns towards black, set that you lay the black place, which removes blood that does not come to life, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and place the two heads hanging from the part beneath the wound until it befalls to alleviate the extraction when the wounds heal, and the wounds close.
from the rupture of a broken bone
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some homes, because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by a spear in the belly.
and the wound was on the right of the stomach, and it became swollen and turned into a fistula, and thus obstructed the digestion and the ventilation;
I examined him for a cure according to what I could, and did not cease from subtling until he was healthy, and his eyes cleared.
And when I saw him clearing, I doubted that the patient had a bad humor in his belly; and there was no badness, but he remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a manner: take firm threads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has covered the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it draws its mouth shut;
and then he covers the head, and this holds so that it cannot dislodge, then put another thread afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and cut open the wound.
If the intestine becomes stuck together, and brings no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in such manner:
Take the head of this intestine thread that is very cleaned, and then tie it to the head of this subtle twisted thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it into place;
and this manner of stitching is not stronger than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, if there is no cleverness to heal it, except with subtlety.
of a fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it swells, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it is swollen and bursts open.
And a fistula is according to the true nodulation of a hard and white scar, where one does not feel pain, and it is also shaped like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in clear broth, and other times thick; and sometimes little, and other times enough;
and I have already spoken about the division of wounds, that every wound that is not clean, and there is no flesh, it is only caused by one of the 8 causes: it is to know, through the small passage of blood or flux; or through its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or where there is too much broth; or the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a kind of plague; or because the property in the region is slow to digest, and slow to heal, and is naturally inclined to putrefy; where there are veins or bones
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in this section.
Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation with hands.
Know that a fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar limbs.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not come near the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to recognize it, take a thin thread of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, seek its end;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle thread of probe, because the probes bend towards the twisting;
and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot explore it well by probes, then cleanse it through one of the perforations, because the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it becomes clear;
then you should examine it with your power, so that you recognize if there is a bone or nerve, and it is separated in the front, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the rotten flesh and the corrupt humors that are within;
And then the treatment so that it may be healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, it is necessary that you cut deeply, as much as you can, then I put tinctures of soft medicine, and the poultices just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluousness that remains at the bottom;
And then I put ointments in a healthy and clear manner, so that it may be completely healed;
And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut.
If a vein or nerve does not bother you in the principal members, as we have said;
And if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it as much as the corruption is entirely removed, then heal with things in a healthy and clear manner so that it may be completely healed;
and if it is not healthy, and returns to its natural state as before, know that you have not been misled until now.
if it uncovers and seeks as much as you are at the bottom, and removes all the corruption, then restores the joint;
and if it is thus healthy, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to an end; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tourniquets, if it is extracted with the suitable instrument for that, and if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave a single one;
and if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, if you cut and moisturize and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot dislodge them at one hour, then put on the wound a poultice which promotes suppuration, and let it be until the abscess is formed between the bones, and then they will have less difficulty in their bones.
and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or shin, then raise the corrupted area until the decay is completely removed, then restore the wound.
and if there is a large part of the decayed core, and it reaches close to the marrow of the bone; if you need to scrape and cut all the way to the corrupted area, and then treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you of a fistula that befell a man on his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
He was a young man around 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the matter came to the leg, and he was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no way to open it.
but the surgeon looks through their foolishness to work so much on the abscesses that open, and they corrupt many materials, and become fistulous, and they come from many passages that all git into the body and moisture of the course;
and many surgeons made a cure within two years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands, so much that I was called to it, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was cured, and what corrupted through the passages of the large body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a citrine color.
I thrust a probe into one of these holes, and then felt all around the holes, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the passages so much that I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
I suspected that it was the corrupted bone that appeared to me, and I thought that there would be no other corruption, except for that which I had seen.
and begin to restore the wound with medicines soothing by long tension, and cannot suppress;
and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found continued corruption in the bone, and the swelling, and then I staunched it, and thought to suppress the blood flow; but I could not do so much that I touched upon a part of the bone, and I treated it thoroughly to its entire mass, then I restored it with medicines; and it was quickly healed and suppressed at once, and did not need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I had of him. Because the bloody evacuations often happen, but it was entirely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the bone of the joint, and it was in good disposition and had no harm or hindrance at all, neither to the wing nor to come.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take the splint, and hold it at the top of the broken bone, and instruct him to stretch it upwards; and put another bandage on the larger one of the two, and bind it on the flesh that is above the bone, and hold the head, so that you treat the corrupted flesh below, and uncover the flesh on the joint where you see swelling, lest the swelling spread to the flesh;
and put a splint or a pad below the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
and it is necessary to sew thus that one can see and feel the corruption, and sew again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
then put a splint below, and then sew from one part to the other the corrupted area, and let the sewing be as long as the corruption, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut into the corrupted joint, and sew up the bone or where it connects to the other part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to amputate twice;
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or in a finger of the foot, then it is very difficult that thing, but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire into that corrosion, how it appears to you; and apply a dressing in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not cause opposition to you;
and know that the incision and the seams for cutting into these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the outlets, and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar tool for the operation;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you prepare the instrument that you will need according to what is necessary for it.
The heads protrude either because of internal swelling or because of external blows;
and when you have medicated that corrosion with the treatment of medicines, and it does not benefit, if it is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes by means of death, or by the malice, which is a greater fault, of the defect of the limb;
and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards the blackness spreads, since this corrosion of limb to limb goes, and takes over the whole body;
If you hasten to couple, and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, if it couples, and do not give it space to come just up to the hand.
And if it comes just up to the hand, if it couples at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach just up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if it couples at the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of its virtue;
and thus always do when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then it couples after another joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then it couples all the foot; and if it rises in the leg, then cut at the joint of the knee;
and if it comes from above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
and the way to cut or saw off the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister down from the upper ligament, and another minister up from the lower ligament, and you sever the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
then cut or saw, and place a piece of linen on each part, so that the saw does not touch the healthy flesh, and beware lest the patient suffers another wound and abscess therein.
And if a flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the flesh hastily, or apply some restraining powders.
Then return to your medicine as long as it is accomplished, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and heal until it is healthy.
and I will count on it having at home in its own time:
he had a blackness that seemed to burn with fire, and that corrosion came first in his toe of foot, so much that it took over the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to amputate the foot, and was healthy;
and long after that the corrosion returned to his hand, and it came to me, and I applied things rebounding after the purification of the body, but could not stop the corroding;
and he saw that I was going to amputate his hand, and I did not want it, because I had hope of recovering the matter; and I also doubt that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak;
and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and stopped trying to cure his hand, and was healthy;
and I did not count it a failure because of this, that one does another task, if one has mastery.
Never does an abscess come to the flesh of the nut, and it stays for so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then they break and burst, and the pus jumps out, and the veins are empty, just like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as subtle as I describe, and it does not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula";
but if it is so enlarged that it comes almost to the eye in the hollow, then it is called "fistula".
and the skin is so that you should cut it all around, and likewise when it is subtle, just like a thin cloth. and do not hesitate because of its corruption.
And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface, and the skin is thick with flesh, then you should clean it with aclyster thus:
look if the wounds are large, and the discharge that comes from them is of foul odor, then you should clysterize with Egyptian medicine made thus: take iris root and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
and then take of this according to need, and make it into aqua and honey, and in cleansing the wound, and hold the perforations; and let the medicine stay for two hours, then strain it by pressing;
do this many times, until the wound is made whole, and the pus is removed;
and no more is cleansing with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of vines, and pour water on top, then strain, and cleanse, until you know that the wound is well healed;
and if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then cleanse with water and honey, or where there is a little bit of litargire crushed; where you clarify with honey and mixed wine, that the honey has the property of softening and cleansing, and the wine makes the wound dry.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleansed, then clarify what makes flesh grow in it, and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine.
where you clarify with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned in the treatment of ointments.
and if the wound of the breast is small, and the cannula of the clarifier cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with an iron instrument, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or royal basilicon ointment, until it be enlarged.
and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave it so slightly open that the clarifier can enter, and if the wound that spills below is above, then cover or lower it to where it is.
and if you cannot cover the belly below as you see, it appears in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place that it is, for when the bowel is in front, if you do not let it grow in. and if you cannot cover the belly below as you see, it appears in such a way: that the bowel runs lightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowel;
that the bowel runs lightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and extend under the drapeuil of linen that covers the whole wound; then cover the forces in the right place of the deep wound as much larger than at first, then extend a soft ointment under the other drapeuil according to the quantity of the deep wound, and put it on the deep wound of the belly to alleviate the bowel, and do not remove the large drapeuil until after many days once;
and he who is on the tender part of the breast, often suffers from opening the belly, and knows that it corrodes from the belly, whether it's venom or a little or enough, or digests, or doesn't digest;
and take heed that the patient feels pain or not, and if there's an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that jumps upon the tender part of the healthy, if it knows that the breasts are affected already, and approach the health;
and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you open the wound, if you change into another dressing, and renew the binding.
And if you come subtly to a long stretch afterwards, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
For there are men who delay in their wounds, and of those that do the opposite;
and if the belly does not digest well after several days, it knows that the breasts are not affected;
and if the senses are slow to recover, and it is delayed, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as we have often applied diafinit, because there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
take Diafinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the aroma of old wine equal in substance;
then prepare the confection and use it;
and this same mixture makes honey cakes thickened, when Diafinit ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire;
and then I apply the plaster, and stick it to the breast, and many times I administer to a learned doctor, and celestial roots, which are also like flour of vieves and centory; and in use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I said, and in use;
and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the ligaments; if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that grows under the nail of the thumb or hand, or by chance grows in other fingers;
and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, then the abscess comes quickly, and corrodes and gnaws away so much that it corrodes the root of the nail, and by chance it corrodes everything;
and there come the ulcers up to the bone, as far as it comes to painful swelling, and is the head of two large fingers, and is the skin's dark color.
When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you remove all the superfluity which remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh, and it begins to swell, and becomes white, then you must put the razor underneath the nail so it doesn't press on the flesh, and raise it high, and cut the subtle and delicate flesh subtly and lightly, and apply the remaining medicines burning and corrosive to remove everything; then heal the wounds as far as they are healthy.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut around it, and remove the decayed part, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
and if you see the finger decay, if you cut into it as we said before, then cure it until it is healthy;
and if it is swollen, and bruised, and it feels great pain, if it is necessary that you heal it first;
then cut the finger at a spot near the joint, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh beneath the finger, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, put something on it to soothe.
The two adjacent fingers that grow into the hands of some men by chance are all cartilaginous, and by chance they have a part or they have bones, and sometimes they have a nail, and none of them grow from the root of the joint, where the growth is in no way from the two.
He who is born without a nail on the finger does not move, and he who is born with a joint in the finger, perhaps moves.
the cutting of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold two fingers.
In the one that grows into or onto the back of the toe, it is necessary that you cut first the rounded flesh just to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable joint for that, then cure until it be healthy.
The dislocations that come together in this way come from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
If it happens that you catch that sinew, if the finger must repair itself according to its natural forms; then put between two fresh tendons or moistened draplets in rose oil, so that they do not become dislocated; or you put between two subtle pieces of plantain, until the joint is joined, if it happens.
They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you cover that stickiness as it is suitable.
They are large, enveloped veins full of superfluous melancholic fluids, which come into many parts of the body;
and they occur more in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the colon, and then the sap of the basil.
The iron cure is according to two manners: one is that they catch and draw out the black blood; and another way is that you elevate the vein, and pull it out completely.
The incision is made in this manner: raise the first leg of warm water very strongly, so that the thick blood is subtled, then hold the leg of the patient from above the hip down to the part below the knee;
then cut the vein in I, II or III, with a large incision, then elevate and pull out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until much of the blood has been removed as the patient's strength can suffer;
and then let it go, and instruct him to abstain from eating meat and to take a black cole;
and resume the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not annoy the patient.
The elevations of the bones are according to this manner: Raise the leg of the patient, if it has much hair, then put it in a bath, and let the warm water flow over the leg until it turns red, and swells the veins;
and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein from the loin to the head of the knee, or in the part below the joint;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scratch the vein of this part, until it appears when one feels it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems thus like a white cord;
then thrust the vein downwards, until it is raised from the skin, and then bend it at the ankle lightly, then apply it to another place thus in three layers;
Then scrape the skin on the vein until it appears, then lift it to the root, just as you have done, and attach it to another ulcer, just as you had done previously.
Then cut another incision, or more if you are a master of it, then lift it, and cut to the nail of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second incision.
Then extract the incision from incision, until it is entirely free, then cut.
and if you cannot pull and lift it, if you put a needle everywhere with strong double thread, and lift and pull, and you put underneath the thread, and turn your hand from one side and the other, until it is freed. and be careful not to cut, for if you cut, you cannot pull or lift, and it causes harm to the patient.
and when you have treated it entirely, then place on the wound a mixture of wine and oil of roses; and treat until it is healthy.
And if the veins are constricted and twisted and entwined together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must bend them straight, but do not cut them; and treat it thus as we have previously stated.
The shape of the iron instrument with which one cuts the veins is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so as not to cut the vein;
and it is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
This vein is located in the legs, in warm regions where no herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it affects another part besides the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that arises beneath the skin, as it grows within the serpent-like and twisted body, injecting itself between skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the blood flow, and the vein begins to emerge, just like the root of a plant.
When the chest is open, it is necessary that you envelop around a piece of splint measuring one and a half inches up to two inches, and the nail, and leave the splint on the leg, and every time it is not in default, if you envelop around the splint, and the nail.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is entirely straight. for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction or swelling, and a bad disease.
For what he chooses it is necessary to treat little by little until the head, and do not leave anything there or in the body;
and it is sometimes this vein when it is treated with the palms of the hand, or with X, and a man came to me, who extracted it from X palms long, and when you cut, if you insert I fingers or perforate, and pierce until the bottom, so that everything issues forth;
and let the matter that is inside be evacuated, and administer to the body medicines in the form of powders for no day's delay, then heal as if it were abscesses.
And sometimes this vein is blocked, and especially when it opens into the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, and a lot of perforations come from it, and that's why it bursts.
Heal the wounds thus as we have said before.
of worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often has ox-like symptoms, and is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body ascending and descending, and one feels it well from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin or where it goes, and suddenly bursts forth;
and is generated from putridity of certain humors, just like worms and serpents and lumbrics and ascarids in the belly;
and doubt not of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance returns, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
When you see it cure and treat, one cannot be sure but when it goes:
Here is the translation:
and the greatest harm it does, if it is that they run to the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly in place, then cover over, and pull back;
and it is necessary to use the patient's moderation of body by medicines that dissolve bad humors, and beware of eating corrupted putrid foods.
of the pain that comes from windiness This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and can move from member to member;
and I see this which I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered a swollen arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
and I saw afterwards, it grew as swiftly as a vein on the shoulder, more quickly than anything, as swift as silver when it flows from one place to another;
The pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder, and then a little afterwards corrupts throughout the whole body, so much that it comes into the other arm;
Then I felt that it turned again within the body, as if I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved in this way from member to member, for I had never seen this illness behave in this manner. However, I had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as if I saw it in the woman.
and I thought to myself that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and therefore appeared constrained by that windiness.
and it did not appear to me according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and restored veins.
And when you wanted to cure this illness, and the patients felt that pain, it appeared to you as we have said, if you lifted up and down hastily, and then coped with it so much that the windiness constrained at the place of the issue. and cauterize the limb;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, if the treatment of those who dispel windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and serpent-like pills, and similar others.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
The diversity of their is that there are those which have large points, and small, and curly, and swoollen; and of those which have two edges, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are fragments;
and that which falls in no member if it falls according to two manners: where the principal member is affected, such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then into no limb of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear: it is necessary that you warn of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply implanted, so pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the signs of the brain when the arrow head is there and pierces the bone, and swoon strikes who is on the brain, are scotoma and numbness and dizziness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomittings of bile; and perhaps it is without force from the nostrils, or from the ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice; and swoon from the moist white wound resembling an abscess, and it swoons also as if bruised flesh;
and this sign appears, if you hold back from treatment, and extract the arrow so it is not inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not loose. and by chance the arrow moves as if it were a poultice, and in a short time black blood comes, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting. you will then be without doubt that death approaches.
And the sign of the arrow wound that never leaves the forearm is that without swelling of ecchymosis it bursts from the wound, and the throat inflates, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and quiets the cold sweat.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the thigh, it is between the small ribs. and it causes great anguish and great pain and sighing. and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow head sticks in the stomach, by chance it bursts from the wound with some undigested food.
And if the arrow head sticks in the belly, and bursts into the intestine through a perforation, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out in a flow, and the patient feels strong pain. know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joints and the spine of the back and the ribs and the hips and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several dispositional arrangements. When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because that's why you should do something else.
It happens to a man when an arrow or a lance wounds him in the root of the nail: I probed it, and drew it out from beneath the fat of the ear, and was without sensation.
And drew out a piece of an arrow that the wound had made in the fat of the eye beneath the skin, and the arrowhead was embedded, and could not be touched except for the point towards the hollow of the fist, and it was a large arrowhead from a Turkish bow, with the whole iron without touching the ears;
The game was successful, and no bad accidents happened to him.
And drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears;
I shaved the bristles, and subtly drew out as much as I could, and the Christian was without pain.
And he pulled out an arrow from the man, which was stuck in his belly, and thought that he would die.
and then when he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut around the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out strongly, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man with an arrow fallen in his back, and the wound is swollen above;
and the arrow remained within him, and did not change his natural disposition, nor was there harm in any of his natural functions.
And I saw another man, who had an arrow shot into his face, and the wound was swollen; and he remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many other similar things.
And he pulled out an arrow from the man of the prince's king, which was stuck in his nose, and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely removed.
I was called to the treatment after it had fallen for three days. I found the wound very constricted.
I sought a very subtle pulse, and did not feel it at all; and he felt numbness and pain beneath his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I applied a digestive plaster to the affected place, because the humors were not inflamed. and the humors of the arrow appeared to me.
and the humors of the arrow appeared to me. I applied the plaster for many days, and the wound healed afterwards, and the patient remained thus for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day within his nose.
and he told me so. I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for many days, until it was opened, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which adhered to the flesh.
Then I applied to the opening of the wound by that medicine water, so that the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it crossed well the limits for three months, and then I relaxed if the wound that I touched the tendons, and my hand on one side and the other, and could not issue;
then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously make instruments, until I took it the next day with well-made tendons, according to what its form would come in the end of this chapter, so that I treated it, and restored the wound.
And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything.
but the wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on what is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed except according to two manners: either by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which jumps forth by there where it enters, it is the arrow entering into their flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is purified around, and the exit is eased;
and thus if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be so for some days, and move it every day;
And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, you pierce everything around the entire subtle forest, so that the eyes around are enlarged, and then the treatment.
And if the arrow is embedded in the limb of the body so that one cannot see it, you should seek it out thoroughly; and if you feel it, if the sensation draws to no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve, if it is so that the wound is large;
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow a handle by which it holds, if you remove the flesh that is stuck to it from two parts to the muscles where you can, and then break or bend the handle of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
and carefully ensure that you do not break the arrow, so that you extract it more gently.
And if you cannot at one time, if you leave it until the surrounding tissue is purified, then remove it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood makes you act contrary, then amend what we have said about the treatment in this chapter.
and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and set in motion how you can extract the arrow without danger, whether swiftly or slowly, or firmly or gently.
and place the patient according to the form it was when the arrow fell in, for it is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears as nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it apparently.
cut then upwards, so much that the tongs can grasp, and then extract. if it jumps out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pulls it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out.
and if the remainder of the arrow is there, cut all around the remainder.
and if the remainder is small, and you want to administer cutting, if you administer the instrument carefully, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument.
and then apply force, and if the arrow is barbed, apply the instrument to a pointed entrance, in order to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it suits.
And if the arrow has struck the hand or foot or in the belly or in the bladder or in the ribcage, and it is near the surface, and you can reach it, then you can cut around it.
and beware of cutting into a vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your craft. and treat until it is healthy.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the pushing instrument is similar to the quill of a bird, for pushing at the point of the arrow, as it is the shape.
There are thirty-one veins from which one bleeds, of which sixteen are in the head, that is to say: Two veins that are behind the ears, called the two "herbech" veins; and the two arteries which are visible in the temples; and the two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two glands that are on the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and the lay people call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basiliac, and the lay people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilisk is on the right side, and they call it the "vein of the belly", and it's on the gullet, and it's the one that is operated on, which obviously opens into the pouch.
And the savatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and the angular, and if it has two roots;
and in the leg and where the feet are there are three veins: one is below the curvature of the pouch of the left side, and the second sopraine which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "ness", which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The wisdom of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient cataracts and migraine;
and the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the limb where the veins are of a rough fabric; then bind the patient's neck to a vice, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two dependent limbs of the head: search for the dots on your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above the whole vein, and cut and the skin and the vein together in two places of the traversal, and make the blood flow until you see;
then hold it and bind it, so that it will be healthy;
and I have already said about the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is to emigrate from an old and worn-out eye, and a habitual and accustomed optalmia, and in the course of the bitter tears, thus are the eyes.
and the quality of the health of the veins if it is as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly; and he feels the pulse beneath his finger, and then signs of an inflammation;
then raise the heart to the vein above your finger's index, and push the lancet beneath, and raise the vein above, and the cupping, just as you have done with the other veins, and make the blood flow according to your need;
then lower the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place on cotton; and then form the scar, and let it be until it is healthy;
we have already spoken of their coupling and their extraction, where the book begins.
The health of the vein at the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic nerve for ancient facial diseases, and for migraine, and for redness;
and the quality is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose shape is this:
And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and leave the vein until it is healthy, and no time will the abscess be opened with a large flame.
In no way, it does not suit that the flames are too sharp; and the sane of crossing, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
The health of the two veins that are in the two arms helps his eyes, and the tone, and the complexion, and the orientation in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is that the patient stretches his neck twisting in no direction, as before;
then the health, and so the healthy one of crossing, a bit of the long flame a bit large, because there is no spot of flesh. And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
then make a correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and place it well.
The health of the vein is not so valuable when it is affected by ague, and severely weakened, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is ancient;
and the quality of the health is that the patient tightens his neck, then tightens his nose with his left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and holds it in the lobe of the nose in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deeply in, and make the blood flow according to the necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is almost fully restored;
The health of the two gums helps with the straightening of the ankle, and at the beginning of messelry, and many diseases, and epilepsy, and corrosion, and herpes, and similar things;
and the quality of the health is such that the patient strains his neck now on one side then on the other, as we have said;
and let the master stand above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat, then healthy is the vein of the loin a little widely open, then draws out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary;
then do it again on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and hold the veins moderately tight, so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
of the health of the liver The health of the veins of the livers above, if they aid in the hole in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and cracks of the lips, and bad nests and interior.
And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the leaf, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right leaf and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins;
Here is the translation:
of the health from underneath the tongue The healing of veins that are under the tongue helps afterwards the healing of the head, and it's in the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the healer is such that the patient's blood is between your hands before the sun, and lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a dark vein:
Heal then one and the other, and do not insert too deeply, because underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly healed are healed in two ways:
where we prick at the flame making a large scar, or subtly olive-like as if cutting into the neck, and it is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins. The shape of the flame mirrin is very renowned, and it is wide as if you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins with a full flow of thick blood appearing, and that they contain thick blood and turmoil; and it's the form of the flame-like Olivier;
and it is more subtly pointed, and is for purifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the vein to bleed heavily, and that it be wary of the artery that is below. And if it cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes out, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one should not prick the flame, but rather cut as if with a needle.
And if the basilica vein does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; where you want no vein of it, where you feel in his hand the opening of the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cope to the flaming ankle, as we have said.
And if you want to recognize the hand of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the hand as much as you recognize the pulse; then signs of the hand of the wound, and then stretch out the arm, and cope with the vein of the flaming ankle; and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the hand swollen, for it is an artery: search there.
And if you see it rising high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery: Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
and let it be on paw, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the wound is not stanched, and it fails you, and the medicines are not present to you, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the treatments; and stop the bleeding.
And take a piece of tape, and tie it, and take one of the middle parts and bind it well just up to the other joint;
if the bleeding is stopped, that's good; if not, then make a cure, as we have said, with powders that stop blood;
and the stopping agents are not grievous in more positions for the small size of the wound, and the power of the tension of the arm.
The health of the vein in the middle is such that it helps to draw blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that lies beneath, and if he presses too much in the wrong place, and he touches the nerve, and he inflames and the healthiest part becomes grievous, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve is exposed many times, and if it does not expose itself in any home due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you sound the health of the instrument beforehand; and avoid touching the nerve with your thumb.
And if he has a vein between the muscles, then make it two fingers long.
The health of the head is aided, which attracts blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to heal by pricking at the flame olive or at the flame myrtle, for it is the safest of all the veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery. However, it is necessary to choose the lightest vein, and not to hurt anything if one fails the first time, and one starts again; and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, where one must not make a mistake at first, but it does not harm anything.
The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not maintained for the purpose of guarding health, and for avoiding future diseases.
and let the health be done in one of the three veins that are or are touched: that is to say, cephalic, devious, and basilic; and one should heal at the beginning of taking a cure in spring, and in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one should heal on the first day or the third, after two hours or three dozen hours.
The healing that is administered for the diseases has no determined hour, but only when need is felt, by day or by night, at all hours and in all tensions;
and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus less than seven months until the seventh. Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
And when anyone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that they empty their intestines with a gentle clyster, if they have much retained wind, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful matters from the principal members.
nor should one be cauterized who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, as long as it may be, nor those with dropsy.
and it is not wise to be cauterized after a passion of colic, and vomiting, and decay of the stomach, and multiplication of habit in a woman, and of labor, of watching and of fasting, and those who have lost all virtue, or by reason of the arm or the body.
Then you subtly purge the humors, if his blood is thick, through foods and through beverages and through medicines, so that you have little power over him.
Then you enter into a bath, so that nothing deflects him, to subtly purge the blood, and cleanse the vein of the worst that enters within the third, as we have said.
and beware of that day's work, and of puncture, and of excess, and of similar things;
and be gentle and joyful, and let the healers be higher than those whom one heals, and rub the arm two or three times, then extract the vein gently, for when it is too narrow or small, it cannot correct the blood.
and then rub the shoulder with your hands until the veins swell, and feel them.
then anoint the healers with a little oil of a small vial, then put their right hand on that vein under the shoulder a little where they want to heal, so that the vein does not flee and fails to be struck.
Because there are veins that flee as if they were cords to the healthy one, and if there are those that are full of windiness, so when you put the flame on them, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is among these. and if it opens the vein, so is the wound too narrow, because thus it is necessary that the healthy ones be advised in these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the hastening, if the veins are not inflamed.
And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a hurry, let them wait a day or two, and do not tie up the arm: perhaps they will come to a suppurating abscess;
Do not enter where it does not bathe, then recommences the health if it pleases him.
and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then insert the same flame directly into the entire flame right away;
and hold it a little hastily, so that the eyes are inflamed; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
If you see the eye inflamed, do not recommence the health, and put on a little of lyre oil, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is mixed in this lyre that the oil;
and then administer the lyre of oil to each health that you heal the veins, in order to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same makes a triangle and bulge of eyes, when one puts it on the limb; if you refine the sensation and separate it when it is too large.
And if a large abscess comes, which happens often, especially when it is not healthy enough except at the time when the opening of the vein is small, be quick, and put on the limb a moist sponge in water and a little warm, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood flows from the vein, and if it remains on the limb after several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm him; and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calendula, master, or similar.
And often there occurs abscess and appearance at the base of the basilic vein:
Put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the compression of the hand, then it is that bad appearance. Beware then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it may happen in short time without an artery;
but you make the plaster thick to harden the limb, then you heal with another healing, until it be sound.
And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it issue out until it be red; and if you see it thick, let it be until it be subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has need of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and so the flames be large;
and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits him better, and often, and you must do it in cutting obliquely, not in pricking;
and this manner of healing is free from decay of blood and gathering of nerve, and is worth more than the healing of a long or wide wound.
And to one whose body fails in healing, it suits to give a soft poultice made from the juice of green apples; if it is hot, draw out three or four times the blood; and if it is of cold complexion, mix beforehand a soft poultice in musky syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
And if he falls at the vein, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he has broth of meat, and subtle, fragrant syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
And if he wants to clear his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is afflicted by great bleeding, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And he who wants to clear his arm after the first bleeding, and it has hardened strongly, should be bled at the seventh hour after the first bleeding, or at the ninth hour.
And he who wants to bleed from another part, should be bled on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that is already hot, and it causes fever; if you need to treat a large quantity, and enlarge the perforation as much as it seems in the papyrus; then you re-examine all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the pulse when it is healthy, so death does not come into the papyrus, and this happens many times, when the healers are negligent;
and you should not be afraid when you dislocate the arm, and let blood flow out a second time, and the perforation is closed, so you press firmly on; if it is curved, he should extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad;
but let it go as long as it heals a second time; where you touch the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is congealed at the perforation of the vein issues forth, and put on the point of the seed removed from the water, and press on lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if a second bleeding is necessary, then open the same vein again, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the treatment is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the fistula becomes red.
then it is tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the treatment now passes through the middle, neither too wide nor too long;
and let the perforations be large, and let it be treated well near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot get it out, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in summer, do not put the hand in warm water again, for one puts it more into winter than in summer;
and the treatment of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The treatment of the little finger on the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
Restrain the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein is swollen, if one sees it. and if you cross it over, and if you touch it gently all around, so that it does not hurt;
and do not go too deep in the flesh, for the nerves are beneath, very close to the skin, and then put the hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot come out.
And when you have drawn out as much blood as is necessary for the task, then put oil on the vein and sew it up hastily, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
The health of the left hand is worth more than the disease of the right, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
The wisdom of the soporific is valuable for all the diseases that are beneath the body, like diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his blood is such that the patient puts his foot in warm water, and rubs against the vein until it bursts, and places it above the joint of the foot; and the veins are at the ankle, and above the foot many roots go out;
bleed where there is a larger vein, or at the ankle, which is more suitable.
And if you cauterize on the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and cauterize from above as when cutting in a circular motion.
and let the flames burn gently.
And if the blood cannot flow out, put the foot in warm water, and let the vein open well.
And if the wounds do not heal at first, restart a second time from above a little, because the lesions are salty.
Do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the swelling of the other foot equal.
The veins of the sciatic vein are at the level of the thigh, and their sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of his wound is that the patient will enter either in a bath, and stretches above the knee three fingers in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
and if it opens, then anoint it in all the ways that you can, and across. and it is better that you cut it, for the lesion is dry, and it is much more responded to by many hands at home.
and it is better that you cut it, for the lesion is dry, and it is much more responded to by many hands at home. And if you do not find it, so is there no king of those who open or shut with two feet, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
and make the blood flow as you wish, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and hold steady; It is now without pain.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or of brass, or of glass;
and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
And this cupping without striking is done in two ways: either with fire at all, or without fire;
and cupping done by striking and extracting blood is done in 14 places of the body, where one is entirely on top of the head; and the other is in the neck; and the others are in the hollows of the neck; and the bruises underneath the chin; and the bruises on the shoulders; and the bruises on the knees; and the bruises within the arms; and the bruises on the legs; and the bruises on the ankles;
and the bruising does not draw out blood, because of the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one cannot be afraid to do it, as is done with healthy veins; and it does not seem that it should be administered, nor with all fire nor sense of fire, in any illness that comes from fullness, as long as the whole body is evacuated.
And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to bruise, or through accustomed practices, we will administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and within and in every tension;
for there are those who, when they have mastery of breathing, then weigh heavily on their head;
and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who find a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit out blood; and there are those who sigh, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command to apply a poultice after three hours of the day.
The healthy state of the brain helps with the grief of the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it should be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this breathing is in the place of the health of the cephalic, and it is not suitable that he who is of frigid complexion uses it, or has a catarrh, for it causes them great harm;
and for this reason it is not suitable for the elderly who have chronic cold diseases.
And those who often feel dizzy, they become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower down due to the fear of obliviousness.
The ventilation in the hollow of the neck is in the place of the healthy head and of the basilica, and for this reason it is worth more to the straining of the foot, and to the splitting of the channel of the forearm, and to the touch, and to the repletion;
and it is not suitable for massage, because it holds too firmly, if it injures the spleen or stomach or heart.
The ventilations at the ribs of the neck are worth the pains of the head, and obstructions and migraines, and to the strangulation, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the healthy basilica.
and it is suitable that you instruct the healthy one to press his hand to put, so he does not touch the artery, and does not show signs of bleeding.
The treatments below the forehead are good for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. and it is on the healthy surface of the two lips.
Here is the translation:
The treatments on the sides are as good as those of the three large veins of the arm, for they attract blood from these large veins.
and instruct the surgeon to not make too many perforations, for the flesh is naked of skin, and knows beneath the nerves and arteries.
The cupping on the back is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of iron, so that it has mastery to draw well. and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break. and you make large wounds.
The cuppings on the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and restore the flowers;
and they are in the place of two soporifics, and of two stimulants, and always they weaken the body after long use, and cause putrid matter to come in many dispositions.
The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on initially void, and suck immediately, and place it hastily, and remove equally, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the red and inflamed spot, and feel the flow of blood;
then strike, and reapply the cuppings, and take heed of the disposition of the bodies, for there are those who have such a temperament, and clear pores: if it is necessary to make a single incision, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deeper. and to suck lightly.
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to make two incisions: the first time to subtly open the way for the large blood.
And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to make a third incision;
and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, then we suffice with a single incision. And if we want much blood, then we repeat often;
and if the wound is deep, then we make a deeper incision, and the terminations are such that the blood flow is suddenly perceived, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have obstructed pores, that you open the veins of oily and dissolutive apertures: If it is in this state, of violet oil, or of almond oil sweet, or of oil of cucumber seed;
and if it is in ivy, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar.
And if the surplus is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of anise, and the similar.
And if one heals a tender and large porous wound, it is not necessary to put any oil on it, but rather to wash it after the inflammation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And he who has much moisture, if he raises with vinegar, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have swollen superficies lift with old wine, or with elder water, or with a decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar.
and it is not suitable to apply a cupping glass before the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two.
and do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he warns himself, when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped.
And beware of those who are healthy but choleric, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed; It is necessary to take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuces in the basket, and similar things; and small peas, and meat of pigeon, and moist meats.
and small peas, and meat of pigeon, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and small peas, and small peas and little birds and pigeons;
and the day when he will be purging, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat beforehand or afterwards, to comfort the main members; and let the blood be subtly purified, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The cuppings that are placed without causing harm are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagre, and on the stomach and the bowels and the loins and the thigh, for these members do not suffer from being struck in this way, and one does not perform it except to attract blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when the infant is healthy;
To remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place ventouses on the belly and on the hip to diminish the limb;
and remove the pain, when there is opilation or stone, if remove by its attractive virtue by chance the opilation, or dislodge the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these ventouses are administered empty to suck up so much suffering; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain hot water is used, as in bad cases of pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the ventouse with hot water or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
The shape of the cupping glass administered to fire is thus:
And it has two large and half palm measures of depth, and it has or is next to the mileu a small perforation, just as if to push an aguille, and let it be of rainwater, soft in front so that it does not bother the patient when putting on the limb;
and have in hand a rod of across iron or steel, to put a handle attached, and they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the blisters of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin ones from the fat.
And one must thus put this blister on the limb:
take the handle of wax or linen, and put it in the blister across the rod that is in the blister, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the blister lest it burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and be careful that it is on the part that we have said, so that when one looks, if the vapour goes, and remove the blister;
and take the linen as before, and reapply it frequently, if you have mastery.
In the cupping that is administered in disease of the lungs, at every sharp point, there is no vein or perforation, and it is not administered except when it is full of sharp points, and is placed on the limb only slightly.
and it is the shape:
Without them being administered except on limbs where one cannot place cuppings due to their smallness, such as lips and cheeks, and similar places; and in naked parts of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar things;
and the quality of the use is that when you find cuppings that are in soft, gentle, and subtle places without roughness, take them;
and place a nut in a soft spot, until they become familiar, and have nothing in the way; and then be purified of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and place on the cuppings;
And when they are swollen, and redden, if it is the place where one can put a ventousa, one puts it, for it is very valuable afterwards.
If not, then lift the place of the axle, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and if the places are too sore afterwards along the course of the veins, if you soak the linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the vein is constricted;
and if the vein is multiple, then put on a broken vitriol ointment, or galena, and similar things, until it be constricted;
or you put on the place many small peeled beans, and let them until they adhere to the place, then it will staunch now;
and if you have more of this craft, take other veins.
And if the sinews do not want to take, then rub the vein of fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the sinew comes out, and then put them back, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden.
and when you see that they begin to heal, then sprinkle on a little of aloe and of powdered broom, or of cinder, so they will now adhere.
Here begins the book of fractures. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish wise men do not get caught up in this chapter, for they did not find anything in the old books, nor did they read any letter.
and for this reason is strange the science in our land, because I did not find anything good there.
and I knew nothing, except through the science of old books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and through experiment, and through the habituation of my life.
and I have described here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wisdom puts its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising occurs to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to heal the patient on one side and the other, so that nothing hinders you completely, just as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age. or if the tendon is not very strong, or too fragile;
and avoid eating cold foods, that is to say cold joints, and meat of goose and deer, and do not drink wine, nor eat too much fatty meat, and do not fill yourself too full of foods that fill the veins with blood, so you have no fear of hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb;
if the patient returns to their first government that they have used it.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or it has viscosity, just as fermenting in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and pork belly, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things. For a suitable nourishment represents marrow and more quickly heals the fracture.
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well restored or reunited according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, like the bones of small children;
but there is a cure, reset the broken bone on the large tendons that are hurt and join the limb together, so it strengthens as if it were before; and do not touch the entire extent of his work, and for this reason he must be nourished with thick broths, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Because there is a break that goes to the arvolt, and another in agitating, as the cutting of a quill for writing.
Because there is a break that goes to the arvolt, and another in agitating, as the cutting of a quill for writing. And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks all along a small crack.
And in each manner he has his own ingenuity, and his own proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory returns to its place;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and appears well by palpation, and sounds to the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no distortion in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
but it can well have distortion, or crack, or small breakage. If it does not suit you to move the hand, but put on medications that come hereafter, and then hold steady now subtly.
And know that the breakage which goes into crookedness, and are the two disjointed parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not come to life;
and if abscesses come to life, it does not matter a day, as long as the abscesses are calmed down;
then put it in a position where you can lift lightly and easily, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restorations of that which has pieces;
then hold it straight, as it should be afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is divided into two parts, whether it be hand or foot, or with your hand if it is small members, or with two cords, or with a cord and your hand;
and put the limb in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the limb are rejoined, you reassemble them by all means in their proper places, and take care that through your work no injury or pain is inflicted on the patient.
and adjust the bones well according to their best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
if you set it well, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come to make an abscessed and contracted limb through their work, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is in place, gently reprove the patient that they should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so well adjusted that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, if it is not at all, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain.
and take care that the limb is so well adjusted that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, if it is not at all, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain. and you ensure that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small limbs, like arm and finger and similar: if it is necessary to envelop the fragile and subtle parts with gentle and subtle bandages; and those that are large, like thigh and leg:
if it is necessary to envelop with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the entire large limb, and hold everything in place evenly, so that there is no slipping;
then light stoups are placed underneath, three or four according to the limb, and hold the hand a little at the end of the bandage, then go above the break and hold less, so that the break is slightly loosened;
and soften the ligament little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take the other ligament, and turn around again above the broken limb;
then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first lecture above;
then put between the stuffed ligaments of linen or cloths, until they are all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then place your well-made probes, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, then put on something that appeases the hot abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and let it be so for some days;
then hold with your probes, and let it be of a moderate size cane straightening, or of wood from which one makes the splints, or of palm branches, and let it be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the instrument one puts on the fracture be a little bigger and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large; then hold steady on the instruments just as you did at first treatment, then tie above with a thread similarly, just as at first treatment on the fracture; the more constricted it is, the less so;
and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of soft linen;
for if the threads are large, as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted linen cords, and it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that there is less than two fingers' width between each instrument.
And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after the tightening in their sound limbs, put beneath them a dressing of linen or a piece of cloth, so that it does not become black.
When the wound is with the breakage, and the course is broken, I will tell you the cure hereafter.
And know that it does not suit to tighten these stars all at once on the broken limbs the first day. For when the limb is large, it does not suit to put these fleams there for five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the aposteme that suddenly occurs;
and thus is the method of the ancientemplasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist;
and it is that you take flour that holds itself as walls of the mill, and mix it with a lot of egg, and put this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common method of the emplaster restoring fractures in many dispositions, and especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of emplaster restoring fracture and dislocation and twist: take absinthium and ladanium and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and mucus, in the name of X; mirror and balm, in the name of; Alexander VIII. and make powder, and mix with egg white; if the man's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is valuable to many men.
Another way of plaster that is useful for twisting: take mugwort and wismary, in the name of; mirror and balm, in the name of VIII. acacia VI. bol armenic X., and grind well, and conflate with water or egg white, and administer it.
Another way of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and alleviates the sudden pain, and reduces the swelling of the bone, and the fracture: Take a new linen, and the thumb in wax and oil cooked, and place it on the wound.
These plasters do not restore at all, but they are good for appeasing hot abscesses, and properly alleviating pains.
Another way to apply plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to apply a plaster for the restoration of bone fracture and to diminish the remainder of the abscess. Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of oats, each one part;
and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use.
Another way to treat more forcefully than the first, when a stubborn abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of violets, and seed of flax, balaustron, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all one part each; and crush, and mix with salty water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hypocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except for cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that one should apply to the broken member, to restore, things which are a little warm, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of applying it that is good for injury and pain: Take mugwort and chamomile of omes decapitate, or pens of bird's nest, and visnaga, and make them equal, and the broths, and make an application and lay it on.
And then lift it up a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved out of its place; if you do not lift it up by hand soon enough. And if pain comes to the place, or inflammation, without rest or swelling, hasten it, and lift it up, and remove the application now;
and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift up the place, until the inflammation ceases, and the pain is alleviated; Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on a dry linen cloth, wrapped in a warm or rose oil, and lay it on a nut, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle treatment, and a bit of emplaster, and do not strain it too much as before. and treat subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have mastered the poultice and the bandage, then resume it, as you did previously in equal measure.
And if it does not come to the limb nothing of what we have said, do not dislocate it further until after three days or four or five or seven. and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is revealed, and approach the adjustment of the flesh above.
then restrain it more than before, and let its flesh grow, as I have said before.
and if you see the dry limb more than the master is not, know that nourishments cannot come; raise the donor of warm water then, all the times that you dislocate, and it be each third day, and bathe a little the affected part;
by this work then the nourishments are cut off from the limb, and immediately it is seen that what the foolish doctor does, which twists the limb wrongly;
it is bad, and if it is painful work, and I do not see anything else but to soothe the pain and to open correctly.
There are many kinds of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone breaks all the bone up to the synovial fluid which is beneath the bone, just like a hedge or a beam; and for this reason it is called this type of fracture "breakage".
Where the spear point strikes the bone from above, and this type of breakage is called "absolute".
and it is the wound of these two great or small breakages.
And if there is a buried percussion, or fissure or break of the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a penetrating wound that approaches just below the skin which is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
And if the wound that is repelled into the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small crack, and for this reason it is called this breakage "capillary".
and if the wound that is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes the piece of bone go downwards, and it is like the joints are dislocated as when the blacksmiths strike on the anvils; if between the bones within.
And it happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, like the head of a child;
and there are all these ways of breaking which small pieces are dislodged if they are like this; and I will speak of it in its place.
And we recognize all ways of breaking by the withdrawal from them, and the inquiry into tendons, and by the corrupted flesh that is on.
The similarity of the hair-like [structure] is known by that when one has uncovered the bone, and one rubs against it, then the black breaking opens.
In the treatment of breaking, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and feverish ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, lest it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see an immediate accident, and you expect a cure, then begin the treatment.
And when the nave comes first to you, and it is in winter, then you must open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
And if the break of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you sew up the fractured part thus:
and it is that you take hold of the head of the wounded patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can, and if a stream of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess bursts, then it helps with what it needs, and it is that you fill the place with moist draplets soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the bursting abscess is appeased, and be assured of a stream of blood; Then begin to enter by the bone, and it is done according to two manners of work:
One manner is that you cut in a straight incision beforehand, and that's the form:
And then you make another stitching even larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse incisions, some straight and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed;
and in working lightly, so that you do not harm the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce through with a strong instrument, thus you should make incisions with caution, not too deep so that they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the outer layer, and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone.
and you must have more of them, if each one returns to its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have instruments for every test.
and it's the form of the three kinds of cauteries:
The quality to perceive through the broken bone is that you put the cautery on the bone, and turn it towards your fingers until you know that the bone is perforated;
then put the cautery elsewhere a little afterwards, and do it all around, then scrape with incision instruments the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you hold as if with tongs, pincers;
and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
And when you have perforated the bone, and drawn it out, it is fitting that you reassemble the aperture which was separated from the bone with another instrument similar to an incision instrument, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and more subtle than the other incision instruments;
and if it remains of small bones, no useless scales, if they lightly lean on one of the instruments; then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And another manner of surgery is that which Galien says, which is more wise; and he praises it highly, and that's his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, then put beneath the head of this lenticular incision the form:
And do not cut on one side, and the affected part is in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly tap the entire bone around, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath;
if it is close to the bone, lift it lightly, for one lifts it with good sense and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is covered only superficially above, and there are small pieces, so it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to extract the scales with a subtle rasping tool which you must have in various quantities, to prepare each place most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
If you rasp before with large rasping tools, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, you must adjust the cause according to its direction.
and it is a thing which is not readily responded to by one who has put their study into this art.
And if the wound is deep, it is necessary that you take a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and the balm in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and the balm in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first dressing; and make it lighter than you can, so you do not aggravate the wound, then administer from above another lien, and do not strain it further than until it holds the wound sufficiently;
and leave it thus for a day or two, until the aposteme heat is appeased, then disband, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of veal, and powder of incense, and aristology, and similar things;
and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and I administer medicines without sharpness.
and see that the wound is very clean, so you do not leave any swelling, nor do you permit it to gather pus, for when pus gathers on the fabric of the brain, it corrodes and festers, and brings great harm to the patient.
for when one puts on the wound a sharp application, it numbs by degrees above. Here is the translation:
And if no fever comes from the medicine that one has put on, which has such a virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue it into a plaster, and put it on the wound. then heal in many ways the cures that are necessary, so that it may be healthy.
Here is the translation:
and it is cartilaginous below, and does not break, if it does not make a wound or twist, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parties is broken, it is necessary that you apply your small finger or pointed tool to the nest of the bone, and make equal the breakage within your indexed finger, and at the pouch by default, until the bone regains its natural shape; and do it gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot come out at the joint, then it is necessary that you put it evenly on top of a straight rod a little thick.
And if the breakage is of two parts, you remake another, and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscessed wound is appeased, then apply to the head of the bone, which is swollen with drapings of linen, if the breakage is in one part.
Where you break one at another's part, then the fracture is there; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the holes of the nostrils.
And they say that one must moisten the tents in mud, and move each day. It does not seem to me that it is good, but it is necessary that they be softened in the making of an ointment with egg white and powder of mill. then let the tendon, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And never break an egg in the place of tendons, and if you have a soothing plaster above, and hold the fracture, and soothe the patient within; or do what you saw.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you meet cerotate or cotton mollified in rose oil, or in a little pouch of dyacolon.
And if apostemes (abscesses) do not come, then put an emplaster made with flour of sagum, and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then apply light poultices, and do not bind the nostrils.
and if the break is not small, and it breaks into many pieces, then hold the instrument steady for that, next cut the splint, and treat things that grow wrong in the flesh, and suddenly, as with plaster and suitable ointments for that.
and if he does not have within the break a naked wound, thus treat with tents, and I put canes of plank, so that it be healthy.
When the jaw is dislocated downwards, and there is no wound in front, and the break is downwards only slightly, and it is not broken in two, because of the corralling within, if one examines it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and put the break within lightly, and hold it with the other hand by force, and make equal.
And if the break of the jaw is dislocated upwards, then it is necessary that you apply extension to the upper part, so much that it is even.
And if the teeth are moved away, or loosened, then hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a wax coating, and put on a double dressing. and place on the drapeau a well-made large staple, or an equal-sized piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and lay it on the muscles that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, so dislocate it at the third joint, and then put back in place what is dislocated. and apply a plaster, made from the powder of soft mill with plenty of egg white or flour of psammite, after you have scraped off the crust.
and apply a light layer of plaster, and if the plasters adhere, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy. many times it heals in three weeks.
And if abscesses or wounds come, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken piece of bone that has been dislodged. if subtlety of the surgical instrument handles convenable to that.
And if the wound is constricted, then enlarge it with a flame according to the necessity.
And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not remain there, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to cauterize the flesh, so that it be healthy.
The fracture breaks many times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners:
where it is broken and disarticulated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore;
where there is a fracture with a wound.
And the operations are when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder where the force of the break is felt; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part;
then put the fracture in alignment with your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
And if you have need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity; and stand upright with strength, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put even the fracture, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot straighten the head of the fracture at the defect, because it comes in deeply, then it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and puts the espaulier behind, and pushes the ministers below the shoulder, so that the bone of the fracture is raised.
And then reduce the fracture to your fingers, and if you find scattered pieces, it is necessary that you sew on;
and draw the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then take it to one of the incision makers that you have; but that you put beneath the strength this instrument, to guard against the blood flow:
and it resembles a spoon, and is not a cheat, and let it be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the instrument;
and have two tools, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other be narrow, according to the routing of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones;
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, if you fill the wound with drainage and tents, according to its quantity.
And if abscesses come, thus much. It drizzles into rosated oil and in vinegar and in wine, and puts on.
The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster of millet powder and egg white, and put light staples on, and put a splint underneath, if you are a master of it; then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then put a double layer of drapery on the staples, and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of three fingers width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains hanging; and set the staple on the fracture, and twist the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy side, and beneath the affected side; and the resetting of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the staple does not move on the broken bone, if you reward it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if it is restrained;
and make the patient sit on his back, and place it when he sleeps in a small sling beneath the healthy side, to lift the shoulder high; if you align the fracture of the shoulder blade by aligning the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident occurs, until twenty days;
then recommence the plaster, if you see that it needs repair, and restrain it and leave it thus, until it is restored;
and it is restored to the best within 28 days, and less than none of them.
of the fracture of the shoulder
Because the shoulder breaks or enlarges not in a mile, and one does not know if it is dislocated unless by touching.
if the shoulder appears according to the shape of the break, and you reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can.
then put on the shoulder powdered millet with abundant egg white, and light poultices, and put on a double layer of cloth. then put on a large and subtle staple, a little larger than the shoulder, and adjust the staple so it is not bent in any part of the shoulder, if you employ that staple of poultices of linen, so that the staple is equalized.
and then bind it all with a strong band firmly, so that the staple does not move from its place, and examine the ligament every day.
and every time it is swollen, if he holds still, and puts the same level as it is far from its place, and directs the patient to his side;
and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number of days is accomplished, if he dislocates, and be careful, for it is not the bone that sets itself lightly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes beforehand, and not below the heart, if it befalls thus, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the force to appease the hot abscess.
of the breaking of the foot
The skin is not always broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the defect.
And when it is broken within, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks agility, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and then senses are well.
And the restoration is that the patient directs himself thus on his back, and puts the cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the sides of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly adjusts to put it evenly in all the ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
Then put on emplausters and stupes above the subtle star of salt, or another lighter fust, and envelop it in a drapil, and bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move. and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and rewind each hour the lure, and if it is dislocated, then hold it fast.
and if it is necessary to release, because of corrosion or pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and release, and scrape off the emplaster, and address what has come in ways of cures.
Then reset the emplaster, and hold it steady until it is healthy.
of the breakage of the ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs does not occur except in large ones after the back, and within the head, and they do not bend except because they are brittle. and he feels well in the inquiry of the two.
And the resettings are that you make equal the fracture, as it is fitting. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a stick, if you have mastery of it.
And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain, and a puncture, just like a fullness, because the bone touches the membrane; and he has sharp points, and he coughs and vomits a great deal of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old ones have put great skill.
And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to cure the rupture by filling the void.
We do not make this, for hot abscesses will not come, if it has not arrived. And if it has arrived, then bleed it.
And they say that some of these wounds that one treats with ventoses on the limb, to suck out the corrupt matter, and it is similar to reason; However, there is doubt whether the ventose attracts the superfluous humors on the limb because of the weakness of its disposition.
And they say that one must cover the limb of a injured thigh with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equalize the air inside, then one is cured of the treatment for pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone touching the membrane, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to open on the limb of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to ward off the siphac.
and then one must cut the bone, and draw gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat the putrefactions, until it be healthy.
And if abscesses come, place them on soft, moist cloths in rose oil, and apply to the affected area;
and treat meanwhile the area of those that are likely to form an abscess, and apply poultices on the affected side where it ought, until it be healthy.
and also to the spine of the back.
And when it happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortally wounded in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one touches them and presses, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so one has put a cure.
And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take care that the feet are softened, and see if the accidents are which are in the hands, and on the back there is ventilation and evacuation without willingness.
and when one has swooned upon their belly, if they have lost sensation without control. And when he is swooning on his back and wants to sit up, it cannot. Know that it is mortal: if he does not labor in his care.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightweight.
And the care is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of roses or oil of musk deer, so much that it be appeased;
then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until it be healthy.
And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover over the heart; and reset the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then apply the treatment of ointment, spreading on charcoal, until it be healthy;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the hip", you place your pouchet in your left hand, and put it equal to the other hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the steel above, so that you have mastery;
then hold it straight, and if there is a bone out of place, fix it above, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
It happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there is not a small amount of diminishment at the head; and make a long splint, and decline to the perpendiculars, and comes to the patient's pain at the joint, and points, and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are above the breakage; and know what the fracture and shape of it are;
and if the fracture is at the head of the wound, set it evenly so that it may be in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is very long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient sit on their belly, until the restoration of that fracture is apparent. And when you have set it evenly, put it on the plaster, then put it on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move.
and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the binding is even. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if a abscess occurs there, do not touch it, until the abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before. and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, so that there is no bad accident.
of the fracture of the shoulder
The joints are those which are between the rib and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
where one is to take a full plain of meoine gruel, according to this form;
And lay the straps on the shoulders, and place them high up, and seat the patient on a chair;
then he throws his broken arm on the stake, until it reaches the socket, and has in the middle of a curve of stake, then places on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downward;
then put the mirrors to the breakage equal to his hands together, until the breakage returns as it should.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his haughtiness, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one should hold what is on the fracture with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the ligaments, and each extends to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the bandage below the break, and on the break, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
And if the breakage is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put the mullien strap underneath the socket, and another towards the cot, underneath the breakage;
and also if the breakage is towards the cot, it is necessary to put the lighter strap, without effort, until the breakage is even on the limb, and on the cot;
Then apply equal pressure to the break, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that abscesses do not form.
And if abscesses form, do not hold it back for just seven days, and apply a warm poultice to the affected area with rose oil, until the abscesses are calmed down;
then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you place a dressing on the break, then assemble the arm with the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast;
and put on the bandage, and hold steady against the shoulder, and against the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, so nothing can dislodge it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, use a splint, and place on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have two fingers' space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the break by three fingers' width on each side.
Then hold steady on the staves, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter about breaking, more strongly and less in dislocating.
And if you see the alignment of the staves, and the straightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, if you leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said;
Then look for three days at the bond, that it does not become inflamed and does not come to the limb, or the numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too strained. If you add, as we have said.
And if no such accident occurs, then do not undo the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands on his stomach;
and put beneath the joint a cushion plain of equal thickness, and look every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, nor are the bonds loosened;
If you address it by the power of medicine, and give the meat that we have placed before, in such a way that the meat is first subtly affected; and when it begins to take hold, it should be thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg joints are restored in 40 days of complete rest; and then one must dislocate and administer baths and medicines of ointments to adjust the joint.
And if the stricture is lazy and swollen, it delays disengaging for 10 days or 2 months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "double" "foscile", one of which is small, and it is this one that joins the shoulder.
and the other is large, and it is this one that is below, towards the little finger.
perhaps break the large "foscile" slightly, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small fragments are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings.
and when the large ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and worse than when they are broken and gathered together.
If it's a small fracture that's only slightly broken, then you must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
And if it's a large fragment, then it must be stretched more strongly;
and stretch it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the small fingers be lower than the others, and thus the patient is crossed over himself, and the cushion is placed before him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor;
then stretch out the ministers like arms on the part beneath his hand, or at the wrist, and another minister above at the top.
And then he puts his eyes equal, according to their better shape.
And if in the breakage it falls to pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no disarrangement that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and bind with a bandage, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture of a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses and wounds occur, apply a plaster made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and apply the plaster subtly, until the abscesses and wounds are appeased.
And then remove the wax, and apply a plaster of millet powder with an abundance of egg whites, then put in the staves, and let the stave of the fracture be rather stronger, and a little larger than the others;
and know that it should have six staves or arms in more dispositions; so that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and hold more steady on the fracture than other parts, and touch less often when approaching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages be those that are on the bruised parts, soft and moist, and not hard or dry;
and let the bandages be those that are on the bruised parts, soft and moist, and not hard or dry; and let the thread, which it is strained from, be of linen, neither too large nor too small, as we have said.
And rewind the limb and the ligament after several days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as inflammation that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you bathe the limb with warm water, until the inflammation is appeased;
and let the limb not be tightly bound, but rather rested.
And then resume the strapping, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones disjointed, and similar things, adjust them.
And if you take a warm poultice that the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it stay there for some hours, until the numbness is corrected, and then hold it steady.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not undo the dressing for 20 days.
where he turns inward, then he puts his hands to his neck, and let his neck be equal, and beware of movement and degitation, and sleeps on his back;
and know that this bruise is restored in 30 days or in 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers, there have been few fractures, and it does not come but rather frequent dislocations.
And when the joint of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient should cross their arms, and stand straight in front of them equally.
then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and set them equal with the mirrors, as long as they are well joined;
and apply the poultice and the bandages, lest abscesses come, then I put a staple according to the quantity of the humor; and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is in the partition within the belly of the sole, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken plant; and then bind it with a long bandage, and let the staple be of soft leather as large as the plant of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a staple on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the fluid between the two.
And if the break comes to one of our fingers, it's the swelling, set it even, as it is necessary. and hold with the sole of the foot, and if you see that a straight small stick is placed to lift the break, and does not move.
and if the break is in another finger, just like in the index or one of the others, set it even, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows. where you bind them together in a straight line, so they don't move, or you put on a splint, just like a swelling.
and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and squeeze out what comes from them, just as I have said.
The bone of the hip is often broken, and you can see it well when it twists in front and behind.
and the restoration is when one lays the bandage on the fracture, and another below. The patient puts it on his face, then each minister extends his bandage to his equal part;
and that is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, let one of the straps be towards the finger and the other strap below the break.
And thus it is close to the knee, and then the bandages are below the knee, and then the extension is downwards;
then put the mirrors to the bone equal with its two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and there, where abscesses do not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down, then return to your work and your treatment; the bandage is made in such a manner.
It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a strong double bandage in two or three layers, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the ankles come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above;
Then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the break this splint, and put a spike on the bone of the leg;
Then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft fabrics to equalize the constriction, then start to bind firmly three or four turns on the break; and when you go further up on the break, it constricts less;
then thread the two heads of wire that you had placed between the leg and the thigh, and bind three splints that are above, then return to the lower end of the wire, until you come to the foot;
and constrict it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that neither an abscess nor swelling nor another similar thing comes. And if it happens, if it dislocates, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times;
and if there are fragments of bone that hold, one must extract them, so that one can sew; and if one cannot, one must break the bone, and make a new joint; and heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
And sometimes the fracture of the hip occurs thus, as in the shoulder and arm;
in any case, in the restoration done thus, it does not hinder the patient.
And you should know that the hip is restored at the joint, either less or more, according to the diversity of the complexities.
Know that in the groove of the knee joint there is little breakage, but it often folds.
And if it breaks, it's not just a crack, or a perforation, and it has a complete wound, and feels a wound, and this feels very bad.
And the restoration is done by setting equal what is crooked to its joints, until it is assembled as much as one can.
then put on the splint, and set a round stele, if you are a master of it, and hold it as it is fitting, then reward all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, like hot abscesses and similar things. if one applies to each accident what he needs, as long as he is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "tibia", and the other is called "fibula".
and there is a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all alike. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
And if the subtle bones are broken, they turn beforehand.
And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it is clearly seen. and it twists awry.
Then one should provide extension, and set it equally, and lay the splints equally.
but always, it is necessary that the fracture be gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension should be minor and lighter. and apply the ointment according to your strength.
And when you have completed your work, take two straight branches of fir wood that encircle the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee joint up to the thigh.
then wrap it in two layers of bandages above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this wrapping the leg will not decline to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
and no one should administer two rods as long as the leg, and it is of fir wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make it in the fracture or where there is a wound.
and reset the leg each day, to see if there is an abscess or another accident. if he heals so long as he may be healthy.
of the break of the bones in the foot
At the hip, there does not come a point of breakage, but at the double bone sometimes comes breakage and at the two little bones, and it is not necessary to have a fracture in more than one disposition.
And if he has a broken bone in his foot, and you see the bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and now place your foot on the joint where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places.
then put the plaster and bandages on top, and place under the belly of the foot a small table at two flat planes, then hold the foot firmly, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether broken, whether dislocated.
And if some of the toes are broken, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand. then put on the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot that table I mentioned, and hold it firmly.
and if there are two or three, or more, break them, place a star on each finger according to its quantity, wrapped in a bandage of linen, and hold the table steady beneath the foot; and let it be standing on the top of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken. and attend to each accident as it is necessary.
from the fracture of the bone one should prick
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, if it makes her sit enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and let it be held from behind;
then fill the container with the natural remedy for the wound of the thigh, and put therein as much as it can hold;
Then strip the woman, and lift the back slowly and gently, and then jumps the cotton, until it reaches the entrance of the womb, and returns the bone with the stool.
and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or more. if it will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie a string to the perineum, and insert the whole bladder into the womb. then blow into the string forcefully, until the bladder is inflated inside. the womb will return the fracture;
then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healthy.
And when the bone of the hip of a man or woman is broken, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh.
and they are not hidden from these nearby fractures to one who applies his study and his practice, and intends my book.
For the fracture signifies more dispositions the right way of restoration: while giving them.
At the break, when it is fractured, take a mouthful of oil and anoint the break; then wrap drapels around, and leave it three days or thereabouts, and it will be quickly healed.
of breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be set in place now, so that the healthy ones that we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, and the treatment with vitriol fails, and you have no other remedy, then recommence to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come from it.
And if abscesses come from it, leave the restoration until the ninth day, so long as the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident to happen.
And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered skin of the chest, it is necessary that you set it in place lightly with your hands, with small extensions.
And if the extension does not appear to you for putting equal in your hands, then take this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four, according to what he needs in each treatment of fracture;
and be rough and a little thick, so it doesn't swell at the compression on the limb in your work, and be gentle beforehand, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainché", because it requires that the curved head be placed on the apparent bone of the joint; and the ends to one time, as much as it regains, and be equal one against the other. And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, it requires that you cut into the head of the bone, so that the instruments have a grip on it.
And if you cannot set the bone, as we have said, if the handle of an instrument convenient to this, or incisor or saw, is in your power;
then reset what has remained in the bone of asperity and minor scratches.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do so much that it is in its place, then moisten it with a strip of black wine, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put anything on the wounded area except oil, so that it does not cause rotting and decay;
then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the splint;
and many times they have done foolish things, and have brought about death or corrosion to the patient, or mortal decay; and let the strappings be more gentle and softer than the other splints.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, then it is not necessary to put these on. but envelop it around, instead of these, with thick dressings, and bind them.
And when you see afterwards in the morning or evening to apply a remedy to the wound, if you have put on all good wine, and you mix it with healing remedies, as you mix tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be arranged in such a way that the bone returns to its lighter course.
And if it happens many times, and it cannot be joined back but returns to the bone, knows that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tenderness, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he said in his chapter before.
And when the bone is broken, and opened on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death comes, but let it be until it heals.
perhaps it will scab over by itself after 20 days or 30, then you can treat the wound, if you can;
and if you cannot, let it be.
We often come across this after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a difficult thing to see the proper shape of the limb; and perhaps it cannot make the limbs perform their natural functions.
Take care that our hand is fresh: if you administer medicines in the form of stickers, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine in the form of a sticker, or with a lot of water, or with oil; and he puts them on the nail in stumps, and holds it well, and does not dislodge it for a long time;
and he puts them on the nail in stumps, and holds it well, and does not dislodge it for a long time; and then he dislocates it, and starts again another one, until the nodes are removed;
where you hold onto a well-made piece of plaster; for the property of the plaster is that it removes all the swellings from the limbs;
and if the node is already converted into hardness like a stone, and it needs to be removed, then scrape above it, and make the superfluous flesh appear; where you take it to no rasping, until it is removed, and the treatment until it is healthy.
the member which is weak after the recovery
When the break of the bone is restored, and it remains afterwards with weak and subtle limbs, then it happens for many causes: because one is for this that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been. or because there were too many bindings, and could not bring nourishment to the limb; or due to a multitude of adornments; or because of too great movements, not in their proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, if it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood may be multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness;
then apply poultices to the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and often removes tedious water, until the nourishment flows into the limb; and restore to its natural shape.
the member is twisted after the healing When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not perform its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
and this practice is blamed, and great evils come from it, and sometimes death;
however, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be raised with warm water, or that mollifying herbs be applied, as in the case of vismalve leaves, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and make a mollifying plaster, as one makes dyaquilon well, and take the mucilage of vismalve, and mix it with fat of goose or oil of sisament, and apply the plaster on;
where you take ripe figs, and crush them with fine flour of colin, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And often is the knot removed by continually and extensively rubbing with moist hands. And let the member be gently moved every hour.
And if the tortured area is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be opened with iron, if it is necessary to cover just up to the bone, at the subtle incision lightly; and apply cupping and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it must now be brought back into alignment.
For if we delay, the eyes will swell, and perhaps by chance it sets back into its place;
because it is not necessary to move it to the hour when it is swollen: it often brings on spasms and other pains;
in any case, when it happens, if you make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the abscesses and wounds are appeased;
Then arises the member from warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and cure each member as the cure comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the main joints up to the feet.
Because the jawbones are often dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the arms are in two ways: where they are a little displaced from their places, and softened a little; where they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entwines its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to a better position through several manipulations.
And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the ministers take hold of the head of the patient, and insert their fingers like a pouch into one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other finger of the hands should be straightened, to set even;
and instruct the patient to soften them, their jaws, and move them from all parts. And the fingers place them evenly, until they regain their proper position.
And if the joints are stiff, especially if they are the two jaws together, if they rise from hot water and oil, until they reset lightly;
do not touch the stiff joints, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without being softened, if you put on a moistened cloth made of oil rose and wax, then tie it lightly with many ligatures;
and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, nor exert himself too much, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are numb;
and then advise him to eat lightly, and not struggle to open his mouth to the manger and the drinker, until the jaw is well-set and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be adjusted to a point at one hour, and are not converted to their proper places, then fever and severe pains come, and perhaps a disturbance of the stomach, and perhaps a vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it's a perilous condition; and many times dies the one to whom it happens, within 8 days.
The force cannot dislodge from the side where it is continued and from the foot, and it is dislodged many times at the defect, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies comfortably on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place;
and the head which is towards the side cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates again, reset it to its place, as we have said;
Then put on the poultice and the bandage, and hold it steady, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy.
and likewise the head of the spine is reset, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the joint above; and the second is at the part behind the pis; and sometimes it dislocates at the upper part, and that happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate within for the tendons;
and often it dislocates downwards towards the joint, especially to those who have little strength, for they have a hasty gait;
For those who have sufficient flesh, let them prick at the tips, and re-enter at the tips.
And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fall, and inflame the shoulder of a hot abscess, and believe it is dislocated by this.
It is necessary therefore that you test it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocations occur when it falls towards the axilla, and makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axilla touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movement;
and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch;
and this manner of dislocation is not forced to reset, when it is new, or if the patient is ill.
And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient high up, then place their fingers beneath the shoulder blade, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it high up, then place it beneath; if it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should gently soften and soothe, as with a decoction of alder, fenugreek, and melilot in warm water, and be soothed;
then let the patient be laid on his back, and place beneath the shoulder blade a piece of linen cloth, not too soft nor too hard, then place the mirrors on the heel, and lift the head of the shoulder strongly, and treat the hand of the patient;
and other ministers touch the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards; that shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see that you reset it according to this method:
and it is that you make the bone which is more massive than the patient's; and it is straight towards the rib, and puts the shoulder below the patient's axis, and lifts the axis upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the patient's hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And you reset it in another way:
and it is that one fixes the long stick on the ground, so that the head should be in the same position as the piston, and should not be too large or too slender; then it is placed under the patient, but so that it has soft drapery above, and the patient is stretched out along the length of the stick;
Then let his hand be extended downward from the other side in a formation, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: Take a stick of two cubits in length and four fingers in width, which has its head bent to enter obliquely under the seat, according to this form:
Then place the stick beneath the head of the two folds, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it under the seat of the patient;
and stretch one's arm on the stick of a long length, and place the joint on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on the crutch of a large chair, and let the hand be extended downward, and let the body hang from the other side: The joint returns to its place now.
And when it is in, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you place under the seat a layer of equal linen, then apply the plaster made with powdered mill dust, with incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the seat firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain there.
And it is necessary to eat little, so that the limb may be comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is out of its place due to moisture or another cause, then it is necessary that you apply cauterizations at three points, as it is described in front of this chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is injured or stretched out or softened. and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the chest, and the shoulders, or behind, if it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another remedy.
and heal until he is healthy.
And if after healing comes numbness to the limb, and later on movement, if the patient often bathes, as long as that numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the joint
Know that the joint of the arm is dislocated at points, and at points returns;
and it is dislocated in all parts, and likewise in front and behind, and the dislocation is not relieved, for one sees well and feels well; and dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the affected joint with the healthy one, if they can see each other openly. For the joint is strained, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus, lest abscesses develop in the vicinity, for if abscesses develop in the vicinity, it would be grievous to reset.
and by chance it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is behind. if it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you extend your hand with your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and the hands with fingers aligned according to the count on the outside and inside, and bend the joint at his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and fixes from the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold two ministers, so that it does not move at extension;
then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer of cloth long and wide;
and when the fingers join the joint to his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint forcefully, until it returns;
and when it is in its place, set a dry plaster on with an egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is closed in its place, then disentangle the ligament, and let it go.
and if you see that the joint does not close well, then restart the dressing and the ligament, and let it go thus for some days, until it is firmly set. then disentangle it.
And if he feels grittiness after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is soothed. where you put on the joint a fat sheep's bladder, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath. and when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the bladder back on, and then enter into a bath. and do this two or three times, until it is healthy.
and if you see, if you put on a moist warm cloth with butter, and hold it steady;
if it returns to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more so than the other joints. However, it is necessary to reset it quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limbs may be inflated, or lest an abscess forms there.
And the reset is that you put the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers, and align them equally, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you examine if it is well in place; then put the sick hand with its palm on a table at extension and reset. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on a table, and the doctor places their hand under the appearance of the joint.
If she returns now, it’s good. If not, then the strain of full abscesses calming down, and let it thus begin to feel better.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is anointed, and cannot stretch anything at all: then know that the veins are cut, or the arteries;
if there is no other remedy except to stretch by fire cauterization in this case, and by chance it is not worth anything else.
And when the hand is in its place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and let it go immediately, then release it and let it be thus.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, apply the warm water poultice, and rub until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
The fingers of the hand are dislocated at each part, sometimes in the back of the palm or in the belly;
then the fingers are straightened, and set the dislocation in your pouches as much as it grows back, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed;
and let it be still for a day, and then set it even on that day;
and do not touch the limb, as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and make it move, and set it back in place;
and do this often, until it is straight, and do the same, if it is dislocated at the wrist, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy;
and do the same, when it is dislocated in another way.
for the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur with great violence, and cannot be held back, and often some member is softened, either the two hips or the two arms or one.
And often the spine changes to four parts;
that which changes in the back is called "humpbacked";
The treatment is that you beware that the gibbosity came from childhood: if there is no remedy nor healing for the entire body.
And that which comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures speak in grand words, where there is no great benefit in all.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the chest before, there is no engineer who heals it;
and also that which comes directly to the ribs, and one cannot cure unless it is that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his face in an even level, and have support beneath him, so he does not slip.
then place the file on the patient's head on the ground firmly, and another at their feet, and bind a bandage around the patient's joints, and another at their thighs, and at their knees, and at their ankles;
and two ministers take care of the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two files;
and be well fastened, the file as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it settles back in.
And if it does not settle back in through this treatment, take a table of three long arms, and fix it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and place the head of the table beneath the patient, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and place the mirrors their feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it settles back in its place;
and if you see, if you do it at the turning point which turns to the hand. And it is that you place two tongs at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet the other two, and between each tong, above and below, a palm's width of space;
and let there be in each tong a perforation, where the turning point runs, and let the tongs be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move;
and between each two tongs let there be a turning tong, because the ligament turns, and let there be in the two turnings two small tongs of a palm's width, to turn the turning point;
and then loosen the ligament that is among the bones at the turning point towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turning point, and each of the ministers turns their turning point to the entire ligament, and the masters put the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, place a plaster of desiccative with an abundance of egg white, and then the staples, and then the steel of a three-footed table, which grips the limb of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligature, as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient's restoration, until they are sane.
and if nothing comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer mollifying and soothing medicines, with the steel that we mentioned before; and sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back of the spine behind the ribs, and believe that it is a dislocation; and it's the bone that opens, because one shouldn't have false confidence: by chance death may come.
Know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out of place through dislocations, not otherwise like the other joints;
and the joint of the thigh is dislocated in three ways: upwards and downwards, forwards and backwards;
and more upwards than the others, and a little dislocated forwards and backwards.
And the sign of its dislocation upwards is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the injured knee than the healthy one, and the injured person cannot bend their knee to the fire; and it is the limb that is below the inflamed abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of him who is approaching death are that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of the one who has it forwards are that they stretch their leg according to its full length; In every way, do not suppress the painful knee, and if one wants to make it better, if it cannot walk beforehand, and retains its urine, and inflames the ankle, and when it gets worse, it passes onto the heel.
And the signs of him who is going backwards, it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the level of the ribs beneath the ribs.
The remedies of this kind of dislocation are such that you rewind if the dislocations are old, and it remains according to its disposition, if there is no suitable cure; and it does not seem that he has a good prognosis.
And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the four manners of dislocation, you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch inside and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary that you apply the minister strongly, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands under his haunches, then tightens with a soft thread on the hip; and another holds the head of the thread;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If this does not work, then it is necessary to put a similar remedy.
When the dislocation is in the buttocks, it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the hip, and the joint that is under the groin, then stretch the thread upwards towards the groin, and towards the strength.
then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large joint of the hip of the patient, and stretch it to its former shape. if it returns to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft lien above the two heels, and above the two knees, and so the injured leg is extended more than the others;
then let it be suspended from the top of a beam, and let it be above ground level for a long arm's length;
then instruct the minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be suspended with the patient, who will strongly embrace the hip, because the joint returns now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the back, thus guide the patient, as we have said in one who has gout, and stretch the lien on the injured leg properly, and on the foot also;
Then place two splints, one on the head and another at the feet, then fix a splint between the hips of the patient in this shape; and have moist cloths wrapped around, so that they do not bother the patient, then stretch each minister towards him, and the doctors place their hands equally at the dislocation.
If she returns, it is good.
If not, put them on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibosity, and adjust the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and put the doctor's paw on the affected limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the affected limb downward, nor lift it from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, just as we have said about the positioning on the two hips. and let it be on its face, and the ligament is extended as we have said before, and one should press upon the joint at the table; and it will be a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the joint does not move; and let it rest for three days or four, then undo it, and apply the plaster on top;
and if you see that they are even, bind them, as before, and let it be for three days;
then undo it, and make the patient walk slowly, until the limb is comforted.
about the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: it is to know, inward, forward, and backward;
and do not dislocate at all points beforehand.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if they do not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their face, and put their foot against your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your two, then bend the two sides of the knee jointly; and another minister extends their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it adheres well to their thigh lightly;
and apply the plaster above, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then release it;
and do not bother the patient to get up, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not at all, if administration of strengthening treatment is strong, as we have said in the cure of the thigh, so that it may be healthy.
of the dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inward and outward.
And the signs are that the tendon is swollen, and stretch before the part where it is dislocated:
the remedies are lighter, and one must extend them lightly with their hands when they are slightly bruised.
And when it is dislocated from the whole, then you must make the patient sit upright, and pull gently on the limb above the tendon;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and set the foot well up high;
and do it twice, as we have said, setting and pulling the foot;
if it returns to its place, that is good;
if not, start the work again, for it returns;
and if he cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and hold the passages firmly to the ground between his hips, and throw blankets around him, so that the patient does not faint;
then tie the ministrations to the hip, and another ministration stretches out the foot with his hands or with a strap, so that it lies on the column of the foot; then stretch out each ministration equally, and the passages should be again between the patient's hips to hold the patient when they are stretched;
then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation with his hands, and another ministration ties the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return hastily.
And when it is at a point, put the plaster and stoppings on top, and hold it firmly, and attach the foot to the leg, and beware of the nerves that are above the Achilles tendon behind, so that the ligaments are not too stretched;
then let it (the hairs) remain two or three days, and hold them steady with a bandage.
then dislocate it at the third day or at the fourth, and delay sending the patient away for four days; and if he goes beyond that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses appear, you must touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of the two When the fingers are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended without effort, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the two toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then put under the sole of the foot a board with two edges, then hold it firmly, and let it remain three days, then dislocate it. and have him rest, until he is healthy.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, not hasty;
and use soothing remedies at the beginning of things for a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb in its place now, so that the hot abscess may leave;
and when the limb is in its place, then administer soothing remedies for hot abscess, and heal the wound, as it requires, with dry ointments;
and it is with dislocation to breakage, and often you will not succeed, if you reset the bones, and do what we have said in simple illnesses;
and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worthy of you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body.
