Here is the translation: And it came to me in a vision that I should accomplish this with the treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything everywhere, thus the knowledge is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the powers except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the knowledge is estranged.
It seems to me that I want to bring to life together the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. and I will bring together the forms of the iron instruments of cautery, and other equipment of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine extended. And it behoves him who undertakes to learn the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of the bones, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and resting of the veins moving and resting, and the issue of their exit.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned beforehand, should beware so he does not fall into error and does not harm men.
Thus I have seen many of those who engage in this science, and then abandon it without knowledge and without experience.
Because I see a foolish doctor who treats an abscess of the womb or neck of a woman, and treats the arteries of the neck; for so much blood flows out that the woman falls dead in his hands.
And I see another doctor who treats a stone of a man's water, and the stone was large; he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called by the doctor, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they had removed it well he would have died.
And I see another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage he had a wound;
and the doctor, out of ignorance, held the breakage against the wound with a strong bandage, and did not leave the wound to heal itself, and thus he made it terminal;
and he commanded that it should not be untied at all;
and then he delayed so that his leg was completely swollen and his feet went to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I dislocated it thus it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But entirely the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it;
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member so that the member was almost entirely lost.
And I saw another mirror that burst into an abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for this, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two sections: it is to know whether there is danger in many dispositions;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish mirrors cannot speak evil of you.
If you take your arms in custody, and undertake your maladies lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised.
and let the maladies expel the grievous sanities;
and remove your arms from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says among some of his warnings: Do not take a bad malady in hand, lest you be called foolish physician.
I have divided this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cautery and medicinal cautery, and these chapters are arranged from the head to the feet;
and about the forms of instruments, and the iron instruments of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups, and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;
and it is the chapter organized and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and it is organized according to the lame head just as feet, and the forms of instruments.
Thus we must remember in our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid, and of nuisance, are the longest speech and subtle science and the hidden responses;
and about this they spoke of the wisest men, and agreed to it;
and I suffered few words, for I reduce the length.
I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, before it forms complexes. It's knowing a warm temperament without material, and a dry temperament without material.
In a warm and dry temperament together with material, they devised none and said that cauterization is great aid; and the others said the opposite: that cauterization is not effective for an illness that comes from chill and dryness. For the nature of fire is warm, and it should not be used to cure a warm illness with chill, nor through dryness.
and he said that whoever says the opposite, that cauterization makes great aid to warm and dry illnesses that come from the bodies of men. Because you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times by experience.
And in no way should one interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of time.
of other complications we have no less fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
And know, son, that assembling fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine burning with ardor.
For fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member unless poorly named.
The fiery medicines pass from one member to another by connecting, and bring diseases of bitter sanitation to the limb; and sometimes kill the patient.
The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not make it so, if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I put into the art, and established it on the truth of things;
and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I reveal the secret which is hidden or fiery, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; For you receive in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they should agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and take precautions.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the surrounding injuries are often relieved by the aid of cautery. and meanwhile, the cauteries are for necessary pains and swift ones that cannot wait for the time when greater harm comes to the limb.
And think nothing of it, dear son, as if they do foolish mirroring. for the illness that is healed by cautery has no return. and they say thus.
and they say thus. but it is not so as they think, because cauteries are not just a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the hastening of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and its dominion.
And it happens that the disease often becomes worse according to the patient's temperament and the location of the disease and its strength.
and are gathered in him the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, so that it is not cauterized in a place where there is little excess and moisture, just as cauterization is dense for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterization is effective after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauterization the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cures for some disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it works.
Then it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
The ancient ones said that cauteries of golden instrument are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and because of the height of its substance.
and they said that the handles of the cautery do not make putrefaction, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I found that it is true in some homes;
and golden cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they said. And however when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know when it is hot because of the color of gold, and it is almost immediately cooled;
and if one heats it too much; they make to the fire; and thus there is enough of obstruction.
Here I have ordered this chapter of the loud chief just at the foot, because the way should be easier to find.
These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and they are used because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, ears, and multitude of sounds and pain in the teeth and throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicinal solution modifying the head, three or four times, according to what the strength and age and the habituation of the patient can suffer; and then make the patient rest the head.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on your shoulder;
afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and there where your two fingers meet, if it bleeds from the notch, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", because that is its form: And place it on the marked spot of ink, and make it descend and withdraw your hand little by little, turning it round and round; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see the bone in its small hole; and if you do not see it, then recommence the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
afterwards take a little silk, and put in a soft and moist cotton therein, and put it on the spot, and leave it three days;
after putting a small hammer in the burr; and let it be until the inflammation is reduced; after healing the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And the old ones said that the more one delays opening the wound, the more it suppurates; and for this reason it is often helped.
And they said that one of them should leave the cautery so much that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And others say that one should cauterize as long as one leaves it, and thrust so strongly that one evacuates the bone as widely as the veil that women put on their forehead to show that the humors are often driven out;
and one should leave the wound open for a long time; after that, one should cure and sew.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some cases where there is a way of fear.
and it seems to me that I should let them grow;
for the head is weakened by continuous natural remedies, as we have demonstrated in other limbs;
and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more saving and gentle for me, and thus I often use it in assembling health.
When the entire head comes with chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then one should use the patient's remedies such as yreis and pills which are called "cochiae", and of purging the head and eyes and of applying plaster. and one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, and it is not worth anything. Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold. then the fire cauterizer is applied below, burning a little, as we have said above. After making a fire cauterizer on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and make the cauterizer at the place that is called "vasselez". and it is there that one puts ventoses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patients feel much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and it is necessary that the cauterizers of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the tenderness of the head, and this is the method:
For the fire cautery of the head When suddenly pain occurs in one part of the head, and the disease has spread to the eye, and the head is purged by mondifying medicines, and one has done the other treatments that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not profit at all: then you make cauteries according to two methods, namely medical cautery and iron cautery.
The medical cautery is that you take a dose of salt, and remove the scab and recovers the little piece of skin at the place where the pain is holding in such a way that you can replace the dose of salt beneath the skin;
and when it will be replaced, bind it and hold it well and leave it thus for twelve hours; and then unbind it and draw out the dose of salt, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put on a cotton padding soaked in borax until it makes a scab.
After the treatment of the wound, until it be healthy;
and if you see that I have written about some burning medicines or twelve treatises on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery where it is in the form:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has a little curvature, and in a thousandth of a small appearance;
and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the skin's thickness is cauterized;
and lift your hand so that the artery does not get hardened, which is deficient, and runs with abundance of blood.
Afterwards put cotton in oil of seat, and put it on the place for three days; then I put moistened cotton in poultice, and then cure the place of inflammation until it be healthy;
and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at all points, and beware of cutting the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
of the migration
When you treat a migrane as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauteries mentioned beforehand in medicine do not suffice for it, then it is necessary to heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" so that it becomes white.
and mark thus on the painful spot a line of half a finger's length, and raise your hand once, and hold it steady so you do not touch the artery and do not approach too close to the bone.
and beware of the jaw that moves when one chews, and the nerves have no regard for the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the disorder of blood in the artery when it is touched, where touching brings great fear and dismay to him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced. and let the vein be in my way;
but I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it often happens.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound at the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy;
and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said in the chapter on extraction of the artery, with the cauterization that has two cutting edges; and these are better cauteries than those and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears due to cold.
When pain comes from cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments which we have mentioned in the section, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery, called "points", because of its shape.
After puncturing all around the ailing ear, or around the two where the pain holds in both, and detach a little below the root of the ear before you have designated the place of the incision; and let there be X points around each ear;
after healing, the limb so that it is healthy.
from the torture of the mouth
Pain that should be cured by cauterization is not fierce except for those that move with inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
and do not make a cauterization on similar things that come from dryness and numbness of nerves.
When you cure this type of pain that moves with inflammation and purging of the head and gurgling, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauters: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third at the joint of the two lips;
and place the cauter in the part that appears healthy, and make him cauterize the top of the ear a little above the crown of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and let the cautery iron be so hot that the tender skin is almost burned;
and it's the form of the cautery:
And it's similar to the scalpel that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the cuts be a bit larger;
after healing the wound thus as I have said before, until it be sound.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then you make three cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the vein which is called "vassels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be treated thus as we have said before.
of the sluggishness
For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large years and mild pills modifying the brain;
afterwards, place the whole head of the patient on the occiput, the plaster of mustard which is written or treated in the treatises of plasters;
and this is the manner of the cauterization: if you do it as I have said.
If he is thus healthy, it is good; and if he is not, do three cauterizations on the skin of the head descending to the neck, and leave a space between each cauterization of two fingers' width;
and treat it as the others, and if you see that it is put off, and the patient is suffering, do one cauterization in the middle; and if the masterpiece is, do two others on the two horns, and treat until he is healthy;
and let the cautery be called "olivare", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of what we have said before;
afterwards cleanse the head of the patient, then apply cautery to the head and on each horn, and behind and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the worst heat is burnt, and raise your hand; after the treatment until he is healthy, and let the cautery be called "olivare" which we have mentioned before.
of epilepsy
The epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to modify the treatment of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patients are great and suffer from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, then apply gargling and mastication purifying the brain often with good meat;
After the king has examined the patient, and he makes the cautery according to what we have said before, and he applies the cautery to the little vessel, and to each corner. and if the patient is weak and suffers, he makes cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and so the olive-tree cautery according to the method that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle cautery according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excessive fluids or corrupt and gross moisture, then you should apply fire cautery to those areas as we have said to one who has been paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is declining excessive fluids into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, according to what is written in the division.
After the king examines the patient's head; after he makes the well-made tourniquet, just like a circle, and places it on the head;
and the patient is stretched out, and held firmly in all directions;
after presenting the ligament, and wounds are treated with old borage powder; and the heat is tempered with fire, so that the fingers can bear to apply the poultice to suffer; After viewing the circle within inward towards the head, and let it cool down.
and do this for the patient every week once with another good government bone, as long as he is healthy.
Where you see that it is cauterized, make points more often all over the cautery.
This manner of cautery moisturizes the brain immediately;
and then put on a cotton molehill in mud and in fat of a hen.
of the heat of the eyes When heat comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begins and gives drink to the patient something warming the head, and warding off all moisture, and makes them sweat or bathe many times a day.
After commanding to shave his head, and make him undergo cautery in the head, and apply two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the faculties is as both eyes are alike, or if the descent is in one eye.
and seize all the cauteries on all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a piece of cloth as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery, how you will restrain it.
and sometimes one performs cautery or branding beneath the two hindmost ribs.
and one sees that it is from the cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I spoke of at the beginning of the vein descending to the eyes: I perform cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or brandings beneath the two ribs. and if it is more bothersome, then one cauterizes slightly above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give three cups of wine to the patient. after the king's head, and make a cautery or a thousand gold coins worth of olive oil; and make two cauteries worth of cautery which is called "clavus" on the two sorcils, a little below the eyebrows;
and beware of the artery that you do not puncture it.
And it is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivare". of that which is in the form:
And if you see that making two cauteries on the two sorcils is as long as the sorcils are;
and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair which pricks the eye It sometimes happens that the hair of the eyes is converted into a pustule, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two methods: it's about fire, or ardent medicine.
Where the fire cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then put the patient in good health; afterwards, draw on the parchment of the eyes a figure that is as much like the leaf of a dead tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs;
then put a cotton wad soaked in the yolk of an egg and a musk-like substance from a pearl on the eye, then heat up the cautery to the form that it is;
After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the heat may be carried to the exact spot;
and the signs of health in the work are that you see the paper drawn back, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then I put moist cotton in a bath until the inflammation is reduced; after the treatment of the joint until it be sound.
And if after that the hairs grow, and the paper is softened then recommence the cautery on the same spot, just as you did previously;
and if the hairs are broken, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The fiery medical cauteries are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are great and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
Then take French soap and lively chalk, of each a .Z., and crush them well together; and make it hastily, so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the form you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of eyes; and if the disease holds in one only sore, then one must operate on one, and if it is ambidextrous also; and put beneath the eye a moist cotton in a bath of egg white;
and let the head of the patient be in your healthy state and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the pouch and the cotton cloth all the times that the patient feels biting of the medicine, for it feels biting as from fire.
When you have had this done for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the biting will be past, lift the lever of awe, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted also as if it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, it is good.
If this is not so, set the medicine again on the wound or the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are at a point;
then put on a cotton molehill in a burst until the hearts of arsenic are taken, after curing the wound of the junction which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it be healthy.
And if you are master of your operation, beware well to keep a great watch that the medicine does not slip from your eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that wound which is softened by the proper paper, thus as you have done beforehand; after the cure until it be healthy;
and that is the form of the leaf of dead myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and in smallness, and according to this will be your constraints;
and does not return to the right path for him who is studying this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to perform cautery in this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does he nod his head;
afterwards apply a cotton pad soaked in water of an iris or in juice of persley on the eye;
afterwards heat the cautery which is thus:
and it is shaped at the head like the form of a vaulted pen, so that it may be the cautery;
if you see, it should be pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you see, it should be also like a tent;
but anyway, this which is shaped is worth more for your work.
After pressing on the fistula, it is uncovered, and one draws out the putrid matter, and the dryness. and it is closed, if it opens, and one draws out foreign bodies from the bowel;
after placing the hot cautery in the form of a burning iron, and holding your hand on the cautery at the part near the eye of the nail, so that your hands do not play foolishly; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good. If that does not work, then recommence the cautery once more, and another time you have mastery of it, and leave it three days;
after I put on a cotton milliet in a poultice, and cure the disiccation of the ointment until it is healthy, and if forty days pass without it being healthy, then I put on a corrosive medicine as long as the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what he came into his chapter.
And there is a type of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then make a fistula, and sew up the place; after putting in the incision I introduce a subtle cane where it is the form: and they make a quantity of an ounce of poultice; and hold your hand or cane firmly, and the patient does not move at all, so that the poultice, melted, does not run to its saucer;
and it is necessary to put on the saucer of the patient a cotton wad soaked in egg whites or in water;
the poultice thus heats the place of the fistula, and the health appears wonderfully through the marvel of sanitation.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then one must administer pectorals to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is necessary for its own wound.
of cracks in the lips Many times we have seen cracks in the lips that are called "pox", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these wounds of the head that we have mentioned in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small cautery scalpel according to this form:
And you put it hastily in those cracks as long as it comes just to the source;
after healing the place of the scab, as long as it is healthy.
When an abscess forms at the root of the gum or in the eye socket, or in the roots of the teeth, after putrefaction and rot and becomes swollen and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit at all: then it is necessary that you apply the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron rod comes to the font of it, and where the rear of the hand;
and do thus once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it be healthy;
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and cut out the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then put the patient's head in a healthy position; after heating the cautery whose form will come thus afterwards in such a way that you put a chain on the tooth;
and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lifting your hand and recommencing the cautery according to your will;
after filling the patient's mouth with salty water, and holding it for an hour and releasing forcefully.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupting moisture is dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or glass, and the treatments of medicine do not help, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods: and cautery of borax and cautery of fire.
Cautery of borax is such that you take borax from a vessel, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it in borax boiled, and place it on the aching tooth hastily and hold it until it cools;
and thus do often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the moist cotton and borax become cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and place it in the hot iron so that the faculty reaches the decay of the tooth.
The cauteries assembled with fire are such that you take an iron or copper rod, and it should be thick so that the faculty does not reach the mouth of the patient;
After the fire branding, because of this the abscess forms hereafter, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand so long as the branding iron cools down.
Do it thus often, for the pain will be alleviated that same day or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good warm water in the impression of that branding iron, and then spits it out forcibly.
and that is the form of a good branding iron:
And make a branding iron according to what you wish for the head, and according to what you are able.
and that is the form of the cane:
of the scabs When the scrophules are of a flow and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then brand the iron from which afterwards comes the form, and it has two openings for the fumes to issue out from the branding iron on the other part.
and put the fire cautery hot on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the root of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, then put cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on a cotton cloth moistened in balm so that the discharge is drained away;
after healing, treat the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
When the moisture affects the channels of the arm, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with solutive medicines;
after you do cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but just a little.
After the fire cautery, another cautery is applied to the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and this cautery is called "clavicle" because we have the shape in front;
and heal the limb as we have said before, so that it may be healthy.
When all diseases of the lung are from cold and moist vapors, and the patient does not have fever or cough, and it is an old disease, then apply two cauteries to the ribs in their places; and another cautery between the chest between the breasts;
and this cautery is called "clavicle" according to the shape that was mentioned before.
And if you see, apply cautery in pricking to the whole cautery called "points" because the shape is thus before in the disease of the ears;
and let the points be just up to XXX, or prick within.
After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
And because they are lighter cauteries, because you make three of them in one application.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, soothe the patient on their back and on their side; afterwards, lift the heart that is within the swollen area with the fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has two nodes because it is in the form:
and cauterize the heart as long as it pierces just to the side, and would come the figure of the cautery together with three cauterizes;
and because of this, cautery is made with the cautery that has three nodes, because the figures of cauterization are six cauterizes;
and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery that has three nodes:
And at no time is it adjusted on this nerve because there are 8 cauteries.
After applying fire cautery, burn with a porous brand; After making the patient rest, and do not move the limbs too far for as long as it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens, then make cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauteries in pricking.
For the joint is restored, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach there come coldness and much moisture as it withdraws from its complexion, and multiple cathartics are applied to him, and customary cure methods do not help, then it is necessary that the patient be supported on his back, and stretches out his legs and hands. From that point on, apply three fire cauteries below the hollow of the thigh for the quantity of a finger, to all the cauterized area, and two cauteries above the two sides as long as the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and let there be space between one and another so they are not joined together when they will be applied;
and let the cautery be so profound that it penetrates the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterizes by pricking and signs on the stomach at that point according to the quantity that you see of the inch; then he cauterizes all the cautery which is called "points".
After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, so that it be healthy.
When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, so much that it is far removed from its natural complexion through the excesses; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, if it is necessary that the patient be treated on his body; and signs of the inch three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, driving away the hypochondries, there where the sides of the stomach come;
and let there be a space between each cautery the width of a finger; and let the cautery be of the same length as the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the whole cautery;
and let it (the cautery) be so subtly applied to the middle of the heart, and let the patient's right hand be on their feet;
and if he cannot, let him sit, and stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms;
And if you want to, you should cauterize these cauteries of the cutellaire, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would make it dry up the entire body; and let it not approach the navel, because the heart is very subtle there, and one should beware of seeing it.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If he is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too extreme;
and if he is in the membrane, the patient feels intense pain.
And when this treatment affects the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be warned about his head;
and then indicate the location where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery that resembles the root, from which this form is: And cauterize with the cautery as much as the skin becomes burnt, and reach just below the sphac, so that the pores are entirely closed.
after the treatment, according to the treatment of the evacuations until he is healthy;
and it is not necessary that anyone uses this cautery except those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine, and whose hands these diseases have corrected many times.
Then it can hardly work, and always it seems to me that moving is better than leaving.
with fire cautery of the pleura.
The ancient ones said that one must make full cauteries of roots according to Aristologus, and in such manner: Take a root of Aristologus as long, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your fingers; and grind it into oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the forearm and the neck, and make small cauteries a little downwards in the part that is beneath the beard;
and make cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backwards a little; and make a cautery in the thigh, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on both sides of the thigh below the cautery that is between the shoulders;
and do not press with your hand, but rather make it open as if in an odor;
And they directed an old man who was using fire cautery similarly to a razor, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it came to that abscess; and thus it was the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the spleen
When you treat the disease of the spleen according to what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then they resort to three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
Thereupon one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, in a line according to the length of the affected part, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before;
and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be comfortable on his back;
and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the heart which is opposite the affected part, or where the sides of the patient come from the left, and let the elevations that you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After they burn the two veins so that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then draw fire from the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you see, if you cauterize the entire cautery to three veins.
After the treatment when it has obtained purification by long tension, and this is more than the other cures mentioned beforehand.
Cautery does not work for hydropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
When you treat according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the area of the thigh; and let the cauteries be very close to the width of a finger.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time, and do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery. and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here beforehand.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of citrus-colored water, it is necessary that you cautery on the back of the foot between the auricular and the anular; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not insert it too deeply, lest the yellowish fluid would flow out, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Afterwards, do two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cutaneous vein; and let the cauteries be of a long duration, one below the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauteries on for a long time without removing them, so that the water goes out;
after the treatment of other treatments that we have mentioned.
When a stomach problem comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, if you make a great cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken about before, or cauterization of the stomach, to circular cauterization; and three cauterizations within the subtle bowel to the entire subtle cauterization, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each island, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all, if you make cauterizations: On the spine of the back, which is all deformed below in a slanting triangle, and I apply fire cautery to the nodule twice.
and if you think that the stomach is chilled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflamed, then apply a great deal of fire cautery to the stomach, as it has been said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the fiery cautery. and let the fire cautery penetrate deeply for a long time. After treatment, let the limb be until it is healthy.
When you grasp the hip, heat up the fire cautery that seems to be soothing, and then apply it all ablaze to the grasped hip. and let your hand stay there until the fire cautery reaches the birth of the vein, so that the blood flows freely.
do this once or twice, and if there is much of the hip, cauterize each one as we have said. After the treatment of eye injuries, it is beneficial as long as they are healthy.
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the affected area, it will have greater aid.
When the patient cannot suffer cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When an abscess comes to a fistula, and it is wrapped and casts forth putrid and corrupt moisture, if you prove all of it with a subtle probe, and take care that you know the entire depth of the probe.
After heating the cautery that seems to be the remedy, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tension is entered, and recommence the cautery as long as the corrupted body parts are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of their need.
and guard against the hard nerves that are inflamed, and the large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, then guard against these abscesses, and do not make those false passages in the flesh, and think that it is not a personal problem.
after treating the flesh until it is healthy, and if the abscess is healed, and the materials are removed at length, then know that the abscess is entirely healthy.
and if the materials are not removed, it means that the joints are twisted, and corrupts the bone at the source; and thus as one of those things that we will direct to its place.
When pain from cold comes with rheumatism, and great windiness, and does not take the temperament of a woman, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on the joints on one side and the other, with the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before.
and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will bring greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then it is necessary to perform cautery on the lower part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the width of a thumb.
and you make a fire cautery on the back, or if it is swollen there beside.
and let the cauteries be shaped according to the previously mentioned form.
When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back;
and let the cauteries be shaped, as we have said.
When the viscous moistures descend to the hollow of the thigh, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
and it is found that the limbs of departure are visible, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the box of the hip at the cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the limb within the box as it turns, so that the box should be inside the circle.
and if the cauteries are such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present for you, make three cauteries of large olive-trees, and let the cauteries be as deeply penetrating as all the wounds.
and treat until he is healthy.
of the pain in the ankle When pain comes in the box of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old. Then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humor of foul-smelling pills or other good-smelling pills. After doing cautery;
and the manner of doing cautery is according to two manners: it is to know assembling burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such:
that you cauterize on the skin of the thigh three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and size, and have between each cauterization a space the width of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
sometimes one does cauterization in the middle on the head of the thigh, because there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize at the cautery of a circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the thigh;
but do it in such a manner that the circles contain the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the heart are burnt.
And it is the manner in which one does on sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg.
And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and three cauteries above the knee, on the left side a little;
and let the cautery be cutting, and let the spaces of the heart be burnt;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near the ankle, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points". And if the master is, make them do more;
and if they know that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, make them do a cautery at the cutting or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater annoyance and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have performed fire cautery on the shin of the foot, and they let it be until the leg was entirely swollen, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the feet. After a flux of belly that he got death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, perform fire cautery on one and on the other, according to this method.
And the wise men said in the cautery of the ankle, because it is the manner, make it thus fierce and be at the top as big as a thumb's width, or a little less, and be between the tendons and be from one tendon to another, spanning the width of a thumb.
and let the tendons be exposed in two parts, and also be like nails, and have a well-made iron hand.
and that is the form:
And let it be heated until it is completely red-hot and emits sparks, and then place it on the diseased ankle's joint, and turn it to the healthy side.
and let it be cauterized once with the cautery reont and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of borax, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time. After the treatment of joint adjustment so that it becomes healthy.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it.
and yet this is one of the good cauteries, which can suffer him, and there where it afflicts him.
The cauteries of medicine are so that you make the instrument at the joints in which it descends to the edge of the door, and be of iron or copper a long bar, and in the height it has II among us, and each one has the quantity of the thickness of a finger. and be open below and above, and they join together in this form:
After putting on the box of the hip to the patient lying on his good side, and then put your hand well on the box of the hip. After the hand is placed between the two circles of the warm water which has been heated by fire, and it is left for an hour and a half, and then the patient suffers from heat and numbness.
For it finds mortification as if from fire;
and when the mortifications have passed, he raises his hand with the instrument and lifts the warm water of the bath, and lets it sit thus for three days, and applies a poultice until what is black from the burn is removed; and he lets it sit for three days so that putrefaction is straitened;
and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds, so that they may be healthy.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, he makes an instrument that draws warm water according to what you have done in the bath already.
and it is the manner of warm water, and I have written about treating with the correction of medicine. Take equal parts of live alkaline and hot ash, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where he has a small perforation behind so that the point of a razor cannot enter;
where he has a small perforation behind so that the point of a razor cannot enter; and put behind that pot another well-plumbed pot, and put on top of alkaline and chalk and warm water above, so that there is a duo of powders beneath which you will have prepared well in your hand;
and let it sit thus until it descends into warm water and reaches the well-plumbed pot, then take all that water, and pour it over chalk and alkaline as before.
And when it will be very warm and is administered in many works of medical treatment and in cauterizations of other members.
For it performs the same work as fire, and if there are other medicines which one cauterizes well with the thigh thus as thesis and honey and nut oil and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galien tells us about a cure where one man was cured of the pain in his vein and sciatic nerve, and the doctor said that there is no other cure, and that he was healthy at once when this cure was done, and he was bathed as it is taught hereafter.
And it is in this manner that you take the fresh and dry litargire herb, and crush it well with a little fat, and put it on the ankle and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain holds, and the ligament.
and let it be for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the bitterness.
Then have him enter a warm bath so that his body is somewhat relieved, and have him enter bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healthy.
And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with hot iron, it helps a lot;
and it should be done, making the cauterizations in this manner. Take a linen cloth and the warmth of old oil, and apply it to the hollow which is between the thumb of the foot and the other called fossile.
After taking dry hot iron, and heating it to fire until it is red-hot coals, and putting it on the wool, and leaving it until it is extinguished;
and do it again thus, and do not cease from doing thus until you think by sensation that it reaches the ankle, and that the pain is ceased;
and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of the vein".
of the pain from the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or too great an evacuation, or from similar matters of cold expanded material, none of these similarities is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold material.
It is suitable after that the patient is freed from foul pills or similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer.
and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery that is called "points".
and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the cautious moderate cautery according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow belly when they get up, and fear. and you find in the last spine of the back and in the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, then apply the cautery according to this method. If fire cautery takes hold of each part of the spine evenly.
And if you see, if you cauterize along the spine with a painful cautery at two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another.
After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in curvature which is in a spasm of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain in the joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the doctor calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and treatment with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such a manner:
Make the bundle of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the olive-shaped cautery be according to this form:
And if there is need that you prick on the surface of the foot, then make cautery at all the cautery that one calls "point". And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make three or four cauteries on each knee, all with an olive-shaped cautery;
and if you have mastery of more, then make more, but do not hold your hand firm for only as long as the skin of the heart is burnt.
And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, one administers the cautery that we have spoken of in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the fingers in two lines;
and if it remains a point of pain as two, then make punctures above each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come just as they are cut or just as they are separated, then cauterize each part, and make good governance for the patient and take medicines.
For if you make good governance for him and you purge bad blood, he will be healthy with the help of God.
When a fracture comes from anger, and the bones descend to the joints and it is new, then it is necessary that when you want to cure the limb, it does not harm anyone on that day. and that he uses things that loosen the belly, if his flanks descend from his belly;
after he sits on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the bone is repaired, and reset it with your fingers, and make a sign of an inch below the fracture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that resembles half a circle above the body;
Then heat the cautery to the form of the place where it is.
until he is clear and he throws off sensitiveness. Then reset the bowls to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return backward;
and work well the thighs of the patient, and put the cushion under him and the sergeant on the thighs, and another on the foot which holds his hands;
then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommence again another time until you arrive at the bone; and guard subtly so that the bowl does not slip when you perform the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and so that the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you do not approach the bone with caution, your operations are worthless.
And it is necessary that the cauterizers of children be subtle according to the measure of their ages, and of great men also great according to their measure.
after three days, heal the limb with a cautery of borax until the inflammation is removed;
after healing other wounds as long as it takes to be healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well suppurated;
and it is necessary that his bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the boils do not burst open when he gets up to go to chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a well-made splint is applied to him, and he carries it for another 40 days.
and let him have good rest, so that he exercises little and guards against too great a repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high a temperament.
and when he does this instruction, he will be entirely healthy.
And I will describe hereafter the treatment of surgical cutting in its chapter.
When wounds come to other venters and are congealed, and you see that they do not grow more, then have the fire cautery made according to its quantity, and be careful with the third degree of heat. after the treatment according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles according to this form:
but first mark the place of the inch and make a line according to the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the fire cautery instrument.
But the first cauteries are lighter and more moderate.
from ancient pain in no member When pain comes to a member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain holds for a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no value, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torments and of its pain.
if he is healthy from the first cautery, it is good;
by this name, recommend another cautery on that one, for it is customary that it should be changed in the limb that is nearest to it, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
The muscles are often helped many times by cautery with great aid, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
You cannot see that it should be cauterized, take heed because the disease is at the beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption may infect the whole patient, then you do five cauteries on the head. I apply heat to the new wound, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the ulcers. and it is beneath the horns, and behind towards the little finger.
and I leave it as long as my hand that the cauterization comes just to the bone, and until the scabs fall off so that the vapors of the great humors can exit.
and I cauterize on the tender spot according to what is before it.
And if the evil is scattered throughout. and it appears manifestly, so it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauterizations that we have said above the head, and I cauterize on the neck, and II on the spine of the neck, and VI on the spine of the back, and I on the chest and another on the sides, and II on the shoulders. and it is on the joints, and it is on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the last vertebrae of the spine, so you do not burn them;
and never make a cauterization on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more you do cauterizations, the more they hinder, and they harm instead of helping;
and know that the sick do not feel any pain from the cauterization if they sense it like a healthy person, because their body is already almost completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the iron.
After healing, anoint the wound with flour paste mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
When inflammation comes to a member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not completely healthy, then you make cauterizations on the member according to its size and smallness of the member.
and let the cautery be a little deep in the width of the skin; then heal the wounds so that they are healthy.
And often one makes cautery on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the outlet of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if there is swelling;
and never get involved in it unless one is knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the tools of medicine are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the width of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
then heal with flour of ferns and of lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of the colon and blood of the almond tree, each a part. and let it be entirely assembled, and let it be tied with a bandage, and let it be raised to the place until it is healthy.
the treatment of chancre by cautery
When a cancer appears at the beginning, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that seems like a circle, entirely around the tumor.
And the wise men said that one should also perform cautery at the middle of the channel of the tumor;
and I do not think that is good, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to avoid it happening at all times;
and a more direct thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays from getting better or because of the superfluity that it does or because of the eagerness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too weak) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you hasten to amputate: then you cauterize within a lot of small areas by pricking; afterwards, let it be so. For it hastens to measure.
And if you see it piercing through all the cautery, heat up the cautery of that which is its form:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" so that the cauteries have pierced the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels discomfort in some manner that the course of the pus is alleviated.
After the treatment so that it may be perfectly healthy.
Another manner of disease there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a withering of a limb, for it withers the limbs just as the fire dries the dry wood.
If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer from cauterization together with fire, then heat the small and large cauterizing irons, according to what is necessary for the patient or where the disease is.
afterwards, cauterize all parts so that you extract all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
And then let it be for three days, and place on the patient's cauterized areas a warm poultice with oil until the burns from the fire are eliminated, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of swollen eyes producing discharge.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's bad.
and if not, then recommence the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted limbs.
And this mangy condition has never been cured by medicine except in cases of fire cauterization.
but every way fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of the medicine for the fever in the division: take the quantity that you have in hand.
for the pores that come to the feet Often it happens that our feet are afflicted by a disease called "closed" according to our intention, and it is a large faulty thing which bruises the foot.
And the cauterizations of this disease are in two ways. It is to know fire cauterization and hot water cauterization.
Fire cautery is that you heat I heated cautery as if it were a pen of vaulted iron, and let it be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle edges;
after heating the entire hot iron on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and let it stay thus for three days until it begins to purge pus; then make a plaster of wild, savage, bruised mallows with oil, and let the plaster stay on throughout the night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then heal the limb of the injured joint by straining it so much that it becomes healthy.
And if they are turned away from the body by ulcers, and often happens in the hands and feet, it is necessary that you apply warm water cautery. and it is in such a manner: take a cane of iron or a hollow tube, and place it on the nail and the heel, that is to say for removing warts; and place the cane on it so that it encircles everything around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the cane reaches to the root of the nail, and thus finds the warm water way deep into the root;
and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot everything to its roots.
Thus you do one after another, as long as you stretch out those that are in the body, then heal the wounds that inflame flesh.
When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do three or four fire cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra. and one on the foot, and one on the stomach for an olive-shaped cautery;
let the shivering cease, and hasten the health of those suffering from cold disease.
No time is apparent through the skin's baths, or pus-filled pustules, which come from corrupted gross matters.
it is necessary at first when they appear that one should do fire cautery on each head of the pustules: a subtle fire cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by the fire, or of a long root of aristology, or with a lentiform cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but are dispelled the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut into the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And however when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold very still so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue forth more;
then apply to the fire the olive oil cauterizers, many small and large ones, as long as they are all red;
then take I, or large or small according to the wound and the location where the artery is located, and apply the cauterizer to that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterizer there until the blood is stanched.
And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are on fire.
And do not cease from doing one thing after another until the wound is closed.
and beware that you do not aggravate the weak nerve which is nearby, and that another evil does not come to the patient;
and know that when the wound does not close due to the artery, one cannot well restitch it meanwhile when the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three methods that we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to stop bleeding; and be bound and held firmly in place.
Whoever administers the stanching of the bleeding tightly with bandages or puts things around it, or similar things, does not profit if they do not do it well.
And if it happens to anyone and there is no miry or present medicine, one should put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind well until it is closed above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but rather the mill of cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and rested;
and make inquiries beforehand about those things which require cauteries and medicines.
We have said in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicines, and the indications and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries;
and I have placed this chapter among the lowest chapters, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because it is found to be lighter than what one would desire.
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for a cure. if they come from such as are weary of their illness that they die easily from the desperation that they find in their disease, and from the greatness of their wickedness; and of these one should have fear.
And of these there is who gives you his judgment, and says: Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is despised.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but place greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of those things of which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and lost.
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your diseases so that health may be converted;
and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and memory of longevity.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and direction, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Here is the translation:
You know that this disease often comes from children to the mother, and when the womb holds the child's head too tightly;
and sometimes it comes from a reciprocal cause that is not known.
And I never saw this disease except in children, and all those whom I have seen hasten their death; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in certain treatments.
And I saw the child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much every day that it could not bear to be supported;
and the moisture increased so much that it was mortal, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the symbaphacos, between the heart and the bone;
and the operations are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, so you make a large incision in the head.
and let it be as long as II (two inches), as far as the moisture extends;
and see here the form of the spatula-like instrument:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head turned upwards from each part, and the water jumps forth quickly when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: if it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this method:
And after the incision, remove all moisture completely afterwards. Afterwards, bind up the incisions with drapaulx and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave it like that until the fifth day;
Then unbind, and treat the wound with tinctures and ointments, and let the head be straightened, and give nourishment to the patient's dry and withered flesh as little moisture as possible until the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you open up the greatness of the abscess, and assemble the water;
for it is never before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Cut then where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water, and make it so according to what you have the power;
and beware that you do not cut the artery; and let flow a little blood, so that the patient may die from the decay of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens that a disease is called "catarre" in the eyes or in the chest, and the disease is chronic, and medical treatment does not benefit, then the last resort of treatment is cauterization with fire which cleans the arteries.
It is necessary, therefore, when you cauterize, that the patient makes his head back; after rubbing the limb with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, then stretching the patient's neck over the entire cloth; then look where the veins beat, and the lines of one and the other are behind the ears, and a little are responded;
then mark the lines of the injection, then touch one and the other with a sharp instrument of two edges, so that the vein's tail reaches just to the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
And if you see, put the pointed instrument below the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as much as two fingers wide across.
And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
And if the artery does not appear to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of three fingers' width, then mark the injection and make it just to the bone;
and it is necessary to put blood flow there if it is six fingers' width, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery;
then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone where it is painful, if the skin that covers it does not become infected, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of the joint until it is healthy.
of the migrating (or possibly "of the wandering") When the migrating pain arrives, and catarrh is sharp, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medical cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and apply cauterization, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples fall, and attends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is rarely found except in some homes that are too cold;
and when it is found, the patient strains their neck of certain cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and raises the place with warm water as much as the artery opens manifestly; then take the spatula in the form of which it is there: then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with pincers, and separate well the layers that are beneath each part;
and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the uncle, then cut according to the quantity of the two heads. Because she is not caught, if he does not know the saneness all over.
And let three kinds of blood flow from the six veins, just up to the third;
and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you ligate it in two loops of a strong double silk thread, which prevents bleeding before the suturing of the wound, and prevents excessive bleeding.
then cut the superfluity that is between the two ligatures at that same hour, and then, if you see fit, if you will, cauterize with a cellular cautery up to the bone as long as the heads are cut.
and it is the moderate work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion. For the cauteries are helpful in ending the moisture: because it is of greatest aid against moisture.
Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, one should fill the old vein with much cotton and place them on well-made tents;
and when they are detached, one should be careful with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healthy;
and if you cut an artery thus far as you observe, hasten to stop it by cauterization, or fill the vein with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is stanched; and if you do not have this remedy present, place your finger on the vein so the blood is congealed, and raise the vein with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it steady as it is necessary;
And you should have between the two cauteries a space of two fingers, and then when you have signed in the two joints, and you pass the burning iron so that it reaches just to the bone, and covers the vein in the two joints. and let them be separated between the two parts of the body, because it is not customary to use this cautery everywhere in every part.
and that is the form of the cautery:
and what is more moderate and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cautery of two parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid longer lingering of the heat. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their warmth.
of the tears When the tears of the eyes fall down to the veins that are on the top of the chief part of the fire, and it does not benefit from a cure of medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feel or sense a difficult walking as if of frenzies. and on whom the oil is tense and moist so that the hairs of the papers are fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, thus it needs this cure. And they called it "cure contuse", and it is that you make three equal incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, so that the hairs grow evenly from the front, then make three equal slits on the forehead according to the length.
And they called it "cure contuse", and it is that you make three equal incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, so that the hairs grow evenly from the front, then make three equal slits on the forehead according to the length. and let one of the slits be thus, cutting into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others two as they meet the ribs above the papers, and beware of incising the arteries that are above the ribs on the papers.
and align your hand with the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across the joints.
and prepare a piece of sponge and wrap it in cloths to suck out the blood, then apply the spatula, adapted to the shape of the two parts from which it is formed.
of the incision which goes down to the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the crust which is between the two fissures to the whole syphac that is on the bone, then make another section from the mean incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula. if you put the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first incision, it is very sharp on one side and soft on the other, not very sharp, and that's its form.
And place the cutting tool sloping towards the airy flesh at the heart, and make the cutting smooth towards the bone, and cut as much as it reaches the middle seam.
And cut off the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision continues up to what opens into the bone, and then make another section in the mean fissure up to the other defect.
and then extract the blood equally, and press out the bone for the blood taken.
then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on moistened drapels with wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that apostemes do not grow there.
and on the third day, dissolve the lien, and I will mix great plenty of water, then the treatment of anointing with basilicon oil, and other treatments that one uses to treat wounds, until it is healthy.
When no vein is found with accustomed catarrh, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and to clear the view, and the burned papers; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in front of a painful spot, and the patient is stunned; then you know by these accidents that those matters and that catharr come only from many veins, and the death that it is, if it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another one as wide as the thumb. And start from the fracture of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be just up to the bone; and withdraw your hand from the nerves of the temples which move to the brain;
and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the two lips of the wound and put in much cotton, and bind with linen; then lay moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of a hot abscess;
when it is swollen, it is necessary that you rub the bone until the flesh begins to grow, then treat with exciting remedies that make flesh grow.
In such a manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to grow flesh throughout.
of the swelling of the ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: where grains, where beast, where stone of mine or similar thing as iron; or seed, like jasmine, beans, peas; or thing flowing like water and oil and similar things.
When it falls into the pierced ear or another manner of thing that does not adjust to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of violet oil or oil of sesamum, then it facilitates extraction; and you make a condenser of condisi, and stop up the nostrils when the steam comes, and place around the ear pieces of drapery or wool; and hold the ear above.
Many times fever comes forth through this treatment;
and if it does not come forth, facilitate the extraction with subtle pincers, from which is its form:
If it bursts forth with pincers, that's good.
If this is not so, one must extract with subtle skill at the base of the small double-headed hernia.
and it does not jump through this, if you make a vein of silver and put the head of the vein at the orifice of the ear strongly, and block that which is around the vein of wax mole so that the veins cannot enter with the vein; then the flow is formed, for many times it comes forth as we have said;
and if it does not come forth in this manner, take glue from where you take the bones, and put some instrument that is at a point to make this happen, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and let the flow come forth.
And if it does not come forth from all these things that we have said, hasten to open the ear in such a way that an abscess forms on the vein, and spasm;
and the manner of the incision is that you make the patient's head healthy first, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on the fat or flesh. and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape according to your power, and suck hastily at your mouth;
and treat until it is healthy.
And if there are stones that are inside and they swell, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot exit, then administer the spatula instrument subtly according to this form: and makes an incision around that grain.
But do not do it when you think that the stones are moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
Then he holds the subtle pincers and the sucker, as we have said, so that the extractions should be aligned.
In the water then that falls in the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses the sternum of condition first, and fills the ear with a lot of cotton. And let it rest on that same ear where the needle is. if it jumps for fear, it is good.
If not, take many pierces according to the length of your thumb and fingers, and heat them a little over the fire; and insert the patient's one or pierced ear, and rise up to it from another part of his feet, and make a hole of another pierce on the pierce that is in the ear; and do not cease making pierce upon pierce until the water issues forth entirely pure, and thus it springs forth entirely pure;
and if you see, take the join, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head takes fire until the most tender join is burned;
then remake another part of the joins until the water issues forth entirely, as we have said in the pierce.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
but if it is large-bodied so that one can feel it, then prepare an extraction with pincers; and it is the lightest thing to extract which may be in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you clear them as we have said in the division and where you treat the drips, and the treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight. if you find no worms, then take them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the candle of where it is in the form.
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck formally on the candle. Do this often so that all the veins appear.
And if they do not obey in coming out, then stop up within the canal of cotton as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not sweat forth as we have said, then administer distilled remedies that the old ones have experienced in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat with distilled remedies;
and if you distill your oils and your medicines in the ear with this entire instrument, because it is the method as you see: And whether of silver or of copper, insert below into the small holes, and above cover with perforations for distilling;
and to press within the distillation with the copper instrument well-made for this, and if you see take the receiver and envelop it around the pointed cotton; Then you pour your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cane, and the cane is in the ear;
then put the entire cotton inside, and press your hand temporarily so that the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillations be warmed by fire in this way, so that they are distilled into the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born who does not have some pertussis in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men through swelling of wounds, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes come from deep within the ear, if one cannot see them;
and sometimes it happens that I almost lost the perforation, and I saw it was very good.
That which comes from the font, if one cannot see it, is a grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which one sees, you must put the ear of the patient in the sun. and look within: if you see the opacity appearing, if the work is all this spatium of wood where it is the form:
And let it be sharp and cutting before and behind all flat, so that it does not block the ear;
if the opacity is of flesh born or growth of the ear, if you hold it with subtle pincers, and touch it lightly, so that the flesh chars are all opened.
And if the opilations are deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle, light razor and heat it slightly over fire, then place it at the root of the ear.
If you feel the opacity where the patient feels great pain at the hearing, touch lightly, and beware that you do not injure the nerves of the ear;
Then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the perforation, and the mole in the Egyptian arrangement. Do nothing for a day until the wound is sewn, or take a tent and the mole in aqua rosa, and powder on broken glass.
and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you remove the tent and replace another mole-filled tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone. then heal him until he is healthy.
And if blood discharge comes out, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the blood discharge which are or treat with distillations.
It is the ulcer that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and cover with a spatula of its roots. then put on the place broken glass powder.
And if without a crust, the fire cautery of a subtle lenticular shape is applied, and the cautery operator is worth more after the incision.
and many times they repair, as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not grow back.
of the sprain Many times there come in papers from the eyes things that seem rough in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below. the works are such:
the works are such: take care that the grandine moves from one part to another, and it is an easy thing to know;
make the donor thus large, then scratch the skin of each lighter part, then take it with tweezers, and cover.
If you cannot cover the sense of perceiving a little of the paper, do not disturb anything to the patient;
and if the wound is large, assemble it into a suture, and care for it until it be healthy;
and if it is small, do not use any force, because the ligaments restore it quickly and without hindrance.
And if the vein is descending deep into the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper, and stretch the vein to pinches, and cover and press from one side and the other;
and if the paper is separated by the incision, do not disturb anything;
and when the vein is covered, lift the eye of salty water, and care for the limb of those who are quickly restored so that the patient may be healthy.
of the fat of the eyes Here is the translation:
and because of this they lie on their faces again, and sleep on them, and are their papers underneath their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered the abscess which appears in the eye. And when you press on the limb with your fingers and feel the crunching between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in a healthy tone;
and then take a piece of linen, and set up a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the abscess of each part, then put it on him; and press with your two hands, one part and the other, so that the abscess is assembled within the circle;
then make a milestone of the moisture at the sharp point of the instrument, cutting a slit of a large size, and let it not be more large than the wound that one makes in the vein;
and make the skin smooth in front as far as you come to the scar. and in many dispositions comes a scar from the wound, according to the form of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Remove then at once a piece of cloth torn between your two fingers in front, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as far as it is scattered;
and beware that you do not press on the wound, that you do not come at all to the spatula just up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
And if the scar does not open at the beginning of the wound, then increase it a little lightly so that it opens.
then remove it as we have said, then wet the dressings in oil and in water, and put on the wound, and remove the bandages.
And if there are such men who break it and put it back to corrupt that moisture which is retained.
Then treat until it is healthy.
And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then treat with poultices soothing until it is healthy.
the hairs of the papers When papers sprout hairs unnaturally besides their natural ones, and are wrapped up, if they harm the eyes, and bring about ways of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so that it is due to the destruction of the eyes.
and it is the treatment in three ways: where by fire cautery, or by medicines applied according to whether it is before or behind the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by canes, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand.
if it is converted, it is good. if not, then prick a needle into all the thread above; and let it be the margin of the parchment where the hairs grow from these hairs, and pull the thread above all the parchment, and turn to the razor;
then make in the part beneath the parchment, beneath the aligned hairs, all along the spatula, from the large lancet just to the small;
then extract the thread, and place beneath the parchment a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the parchment a figure of an inch, as if the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated on the parchment which is divided into toes.
And if it happens that one has mastery of coping with a great quantity of the parchment according to what the parchment is softened;
then make all along the spatula on the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the large lancet just to the small; and let it be one of the natural fissures near the hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the tumor, then scrape thoroughly;
then assemble the two lips at a seam of a needle with all the subtle thread of wool, and suck out the blood, and make a knot above the superficies of the threads on the two eyebrows to any glutinous things, if you want to do this;
and if it doesn't heal, then leave the seam and the threads for three or four days;
then cure the wound without a seam of things that are dry and constricting, for the skin relives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is murder (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear; and if there is another way:
and if there is another way: and it is that you design the paper of a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, as we have told, in three ounces according to the form which is here:
then apply this which overcomes small equal forces similarly to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle or it has one thread, and put the end in the figure; and put another thread from the large lantern, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble between your two threads evenly;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suture, and heal it until it is healthy;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted:
so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and cut as two heads of two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly above what surpasses the parchment of the eye, and stretch the two wounds of the two parts forcibly; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin that is stretched will become numb and blacken and decay, until it falls off by itself.
If he delays, if he has forces, then heal him as much as he is healthy;
and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer puncture the hairs;
and it's the shape of the two canes that you will make according to this design, and according to this quantity of length and width;
the operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and you pull the silk thread soft and subtle; then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width long;
then order in the hunting another subtle thread of silk briefly, and tie the two heads of the thread;
then put the patient's head in your healthy one;
and let it be beneath the sun so that the operations are declared, for it's a subtle and minor operation, then put the needle at the root of the hair implanted, and make it pierce the paper hastily as much as you draw it above the natural hair;
Then shave the hair up to the wound, and put in the wound that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then extract your hand so that the hairs grow outward from the entire wound onto the parchment with the natural hair.
And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not grow with it, then you will pull the wound back to the bottom of the entire thread that you have ordained there, so that the wound grows outward from the top and you see it by the sight of the eye.
Then you will pull the wound and the thread, and shut the eye and let it be shut for two or three days, until the hair takes root in its place and the flesh grows over.
And if the hairs are small, then accompany a long hair of natural whiskers, and be elevated with that one or you let it, until it is elongated and then lift it.
from the rotting of the eye When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the porridge comes into the eye, if there are two manners:
One natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from a cautery, and from similar things.
And the manner of the work in this is that you split that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and bind it so that it may be healthy;
and it is not suitable that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first.
but I work with softening things, as with fenugrec. and the rose water or altee and flaxseed oil being cooked, and anointments of yaquilon melted in one of the oils, and I wrap a bandage, and the cure of this.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care not to let it settle according to the form it had before.
and these treatments that we have mentioned are not forces that address this illness, so it does not return according to the form it had before.
This disease which is beneath, truly called "axacrati", and is naturally accidental.
The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cauterization and similar things;
and the method of treatment is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and you insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the thread passes through the head of the flesh;
then the flesh is sewn on top over the entire needle, and the scalp is covered with a spatula-like instrument large. And if the skin of the paper returns according to what it should be, that's good.
If this doesn't happen, take the razor and put it in the seam, and turn the paper, and make two seams or stitches within the paper;
and let the head of the two seams be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which is not "I griesche";
then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are adjusted from below, from what follows on the paper, then add the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of linen;
then apply the treatment with those softening medications that we have mentioned, and with tinctures, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from a seam or a stitch or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain seam below the hairs of the papers, and according to what is written before. then uncover between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
then uncover between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to have ingenuity in all they can do to make it return to its natural shape;
and the patients themselves, according to what they require of work and instruments in various dispositions.
When this joint has its main bond in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it up high;
and hold as pincers, until you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too dull, so that the patient cannot suffer from the spatula being too sharp and bleeding the oil;
and let your incision be such that you lightly scrape off the assembled (skin), so that the paper regains its natural shape.
and it is healthy all assembled, and never again in the sharp bitter oil, and raises gentle warmth, and of cooling.
then put between the paper and the oil a strip of linen, and put on the oil a moistened wool in abundance of egg whites. and after the third day use gentle cooling and soothing things until it be healthy.
Know that the nail is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard thick skin, and another which is not nervous, but resembles a whitish moist congealed moisture, that when one touches it with iron and cuts it with pincers, if it cannot be.
and one and another similar thing starts towards the large armorer, and increases little by little until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then bend the finger as pinces of small doubling, and stretch it upwards; then take a needle, and insert the hair of a horse, or of a cow, or of an ox, and pull it strongly; and double the point of the needle a little and fix it in the finger, and pass it through the entire needle, and tie the finger with a thread and stretch it upwards, and strip all the hair from the side of the finger which follows the prick and the vein to the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the arm, completely subtle and with small forces, and let the natural skin or arm, so that by the incision, the flow of tears does not come habitually;
and sometimes the nail on the thumb alone hurts, and the thread, as we have said; then the scab forms all over the spatula-like soft tissue from which it is the shape:
And beware that the spatula-like instrument does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the prunella is not perceived;
and after the incision, pour into the oil a little of warm broth, and make a poultice of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then heal those who need it as much as they should be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot inject the needle, and the nails cannot enter, often a cure is achieved with this type of nail medicine;
and it grows as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, then open the oil of the patient, and take the lighter spatula-like instrument according to this form: And raise the ankle subtly, and if you see that it diminishes at no point and the reason presses on it, then distill from your mouth into the collier oil made of litargire and red dou, and stop up the oil just until the next day;
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, so that an abscess does not form, then heal it first, and cure the hot abscess as much as it is healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it is healthy.
then restart the other work according to the same method, until it is completely restored.
And if the appearance of the flesh shows damage from the lamprey oil at night through great trouble, then suspend it on the ninth day, and take one part and not all, lest the course of the lampreys does not come to life;
then distill into the red collier oil which is made of litargire.
It is the eyes of certain men who never had red flesh, and they cover the plumule and hold steady on the papyrus and turn to the devil, and resemble a rose of balaust.
and the operations are that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes, and gather all those things which are conveniently adjacent to it, and hold them with strength;
then cut the first vein, and continue cutting to the resection just up to the end, and be careful that you do not blind the eye during the operation;
and let the incision be spatula-like, which we have described in the incision of the ankle and with small forces where one opens the sepulcher, just as the form appears after this chapter demonstrates;
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is opened, apply the oil of broiet or where you distill coliere rouge and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a piece of cotton with albumen of egg, so that it may be assured against a hot abscess;
and if it stays there, and the blood flows beneath, and you suspect an abscess forming beneath, let the eye be still and treat the abscess with soothing things that reduce the abscess.
then return to your work so that it may be healthy, and thus you make a straight characteer in the eye by this likeness.
But always it is necessary that you adapt the treatment to each weak eye according to its natural condition; and from the accidental way, in work of iron;
and do not put your hand into any of these works unless you see that this member is suffering from that work.
There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and they take away its function and obscure the eye for many years.
It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the eye, in which it is, is strong, and there is no other illness besides the cataract. then touches it in such a manner:
instruct the patient to put their head in their healthy tone, then suspend those veins all around according to his wisdom, and let the subtle double onions be according to this form:
And let them be treated with a ninth-degree cautery, in the fourth sign of the zodiac according to this form:
then one wraps the subtle veins strongly, and extracts the blood hour after hour, until you see removing the veins that are far from the eye;
and beware that you do not blind the eye at the points of the spatula, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not grasp further than those veins;
and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red colour to corrupt what is still dirty within the eyeball.
And if you are not able to collect all this in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and it is assured that there will be no hot abscess, then restart according to this method which is presented above so that it may be healthy.
and it's the form of the strengths:
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula:
when you treat it with cautery and ardent medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if there is an engine in it that you divide above the abscess, where it must be drained, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take out all the instrument of which it is the form;
and it is called "asper chief", and it should be made of iron indeed at the chief edge, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it on the level of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed;
and do this several times, then restore the limb with exciting medicines.
if the limbs are swollen, and the flesh is raw, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not recover and is not apostemized, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy;
If this does not work, then there is another technique to bring the fistula back to the perforated nose according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with bitter medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the forestay according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be attenuated up to the head as you see here:
then place it on the bone of the armier, and stretch out your hand to the eye of the pouch, then turn the entire forestay until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by this, that is if he holds his hand under his nose;
and then restore the level of dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh is reborn and hardened the limbs, thus goes the matter to the nail; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open all over, and it does not come to disturb the nose, nor diminish, so it is necessary that you read the patient.
then the sound, then apply ventouses or heating iron without piercing to suck, then put on the eye a linen cloth made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye, and apply a dressing with bandages and drapels;
and the way of the dressings is that you take dressings fairly soft, and fold each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need.
Then hold steady by placing a hard bandage above, and reapply the cups to suck out the noxious matter that causes fermentation.
Then remove the cups and keep the eye steady day and night, and if the ligatures are too loose, it is necessary that you tighten them strongly.
Then remove the ligature after day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it's good.
If not; Then reapply the plaster and the dressings and the ligature and the cups until he is healthy.
because of the tearing of the web-like membrane When cracks appear in the web-like membrane, then open, and issue forth like grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see;
Then if you have seen the copious flow, the operations are such that you insert a needle at the root of the affected part below, then insert another needle where it has the double filament from the part of the arm. and have them pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition;
then thread the double filament and tie a part of the tube around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place it on the same moistened eye in abundance of egg whites;
and let it be until the threads dry with the egg whites, then heal the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy;
and many times the wound is restrained by a circle of cloth, each part of it, until it is healthy.
And if the eyes have great appearance, if they pierce with a subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginous and descends to the eyes, and enters thus quickly;
then remove it until it is healthy.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not other than a swelling that is assembled in the eye, appearing like a serpent descending, and it's not a real serpent;
and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands from both parts, and move it so that you see the swelling come to the surface before your eyes; then be still, and do not move, and hold the light steady, and see the patient's things as they normally are;
and if it does not move below, know that it's a real serpent, and the descent of the swelling is not apparent as we have said.
make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and touch the cornified web at the point where the conjunctiva continues with the cornified web and the cornea, until the swelling subsides;
and when it is dislocated, if it is distilled into the sharp warm honey-like mixture at midnight, or warm or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healthy.
from the inflamations of the eye We have already seen the similarities of the sharp points in the division, and this is what needs to be pierced; if it opens according to health.
It is necessary that you sit the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy oil firmly and tightly;
then put the paper of the oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right;
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right;
Then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a ray in that whitish part of the eye at the lesser arm's joint, then apply the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so much until it pierces into the whitish part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing;
and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the forefront of the measure of the space which is from the pruning up to the end of the blackness; and it is the crown of the eye;
if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the cornual membrane, and then place the instrument where the water is, then press it down one way after another.
Here is the translation:
After rest a little, and if the water rises the second way, place the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little;
and then put back in water a small piece of gemstone, and lift up this eye from within. Then put by default the eye droplets or lane moistened with rose oil and abundant water, and bind with healthy oil.
Us, and those who are of our kind, put on common bruise with abundant water.
And if the maggots cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is this:
And prick then the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deep in the font, but make the subtle layer, then you apply alum, as we have said;
and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient the Dormiteur approaching, in which he sleeps on his back in the darkened room;
and be warned of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day;
then disengage him in the same darkened house, and test his vision, and make him see no things, and then put him back in bed until the seventh day;
and it is not suitable that you do this in the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate it, because the water rises hastily.
abscesses come, which you dislocate before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess.
and when it is appeased, if you dislodge the vein and put on its face a little roll to cover any day, and so be then in that dark house.
And then exits from the house little by little, and converts into its cases;
and knows that no disciples should intervene in this case. And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made ointment with almaga, which draws out water, but I never saw any of it in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of alumgada, because those who do not know them go astray;
and let them be arranged properly: And they are the head of water of this same subtlety, and the last in four angles aague.
There never arise or are born various joined characters, so that there are some which seem like scorpions with many feet;
and if there is such a one where it has a flesh-colored encrusted chart, and if it has a soft bone-colored chart. In that case of those charts which is soft and not encrusted, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In that case of those charts which is soft and not encrusted, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open their nostrils, and throw the onion at those charts, and treat them with fire; then seize that which you can sustain in the subtle spatula on one side, as much as you know that this chart is completely ostensible.
And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open everything to the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains. and do not surge above it, or abscess bursts, if you drain it as it is fitting;
and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the blood is staunched and all the flesh is burnt, then pour in either oil or egg whites or wine. If the egg whites do not work, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is healthy;
and if moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is a new flesh growing in the bone above, where the instruments cannot come to cut;
then it is fitting that you put a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and sew with our hands, and have between each stitch of space a digit or less; and place the patient's head on a thread of his own nail to purify it, and treat with aromatic herbs until he breathes through his nose into the mouth;
and many times they do so to the child as to schools, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
then hold one head that comes through the nose to one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth to the other hand, and know one after the other in being thus, as we who are in a thread.
Do this as much as you know that the nuts have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian unguent, and put it back in the nose as before;
do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh;
and then put or apply a poultice of warm plants for some days until it is healthy, and if it needs medicine treatments, then use them.
and this is the shape of the instrument for cleansing the head, where they distill oils and medicines or apply them.
And it is of silver or copper, resembling a covered lamp, like a cane, and the conduits thus.
and if you see, make a closed cane, and it is the plain instruments for cleansing the head.
and hold the handle to the head to keep it in place when one heats the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh over the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" nestles in the head, and grows and becomes large again, until it is seen clearly when looked at.
and therefore it is necessary that you cut into the bone at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then apply the cauterizing instrument or the burning medicine.
and one delays coping as long as it is great, if you take warning if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sense:
do not let the iron touch more, for it is an enchanted abscess, because when one copes only once, great evil comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can cope with it all, if you look at the patient and their sense of fear, and cure the limb of things that are dry and restraining.
Know that when continuations of solutions come into one of these cartilaginous passages, it profits little, because in some homes.
It is necessary then to make an incision when it has come to nothing, if you look at whether the wound is fresh in all its blood. and then adjust the two lips of a wound to a suture, then cure it until it is healthy;
and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrub all the parts of their heart until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a suture, and hold them in place, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and incense bruised. and put on the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another sudden plaster, and let it stick as long as it holds by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
The manner of the bandage is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the bandage of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
Many men have had deep abscesses in their limbs, similar to grains of veins, and smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you turn the limbs, and divide into each node, and take them as pincers and cut into each part;
then apply the oil after the incision of glassy pitch, until the wound is stained;
and then apply the ointment of ash, and heal the limb of dry things as long as it becomes healthy.
Many times there is swelling on the gums where it is pressed, which the old people call "albulus".
it is necessary that you hold them as in tongs, and cut to its root, and let the blood or sap flow.
then apply on the limb a vitriol ointment, or other drying and constricting powders;
and if it returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut a second time, and cauterize. if it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes they gather at the head of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and often are the black and yellowish-green teeth, as far as the decay reaches the gum, and are the foul-smelling teeth;
it is necessary that you hold the patient between your hands, and their head be in your sanctum, and take out the teeth or the scurfy scales, so that nothing remains; and thus make from the blackness and the greenness, and from the yellowness and other stains, so that they be worldly;
and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then start again on the second day and the third, until you have everything taken out;
and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one extracts from the teeth have other forms than those that one extracts between the teeth; and these forms and others are prepared with you equipped.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of his pain that you delay to handle it as much as you can, for one must not do it hastily. for it is a very high substance just up to then that one has no excuse to delay.
Then when the patient is constrained to undergo treatment, it is necessary that you be certain of the pain caused by the teeth. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and believes it is in a sound tooth, and makes them handle the good tooth. and thus the pain does not depart from him for that, as long as the bad one is extracted, for we have already wanted to do it to these sound ones.
and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides, strongly to guard the gum from all parts.
then place your fingers or subtle pincers at the first little by little, so that it is well loosened, then you will firmly affix the pincers. and let the head of the patient be in its natural position between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part, and remove it as you did previously.
And if the teeth are pierced and gnawed, it is necessary that you fill them with cloths, where the perforations are. and if you hold it subtly in the tongs, so that it does not break while holding.
and it is necessary to work carefully around the gum to extract the tooth.
And take care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and reveal to the patient through the malice of the larger root more great pains than the first.
And beware that you do not act thus like the ignorant surgeon, who in their haste and hardness often break the instrument, and do not amend what we have recounted.
but often they come through the observation of this great illness due to the roots that remain, or through the instrument that they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is decayed, if you wash the jaw with wine or with axle-tree and elder;
and we remove blood that comes, which often happens, if you apply the jaw with vitriol paste;
and if it does not help, then cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, which one must use to extract teeth first, should be long and thin points and large handles, so they do not slip when you pull out the tooth;
and these are the forms: And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the drawing, and let them be of iron well made, and let them be toothed to hold fast.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the pulling, it is necessary that you put on the jaw a moistened cotton cloth in butter I or II, as long as the jaws are softened, then you apply the clamps called "algefri", from which the head seems to be in the shape of a bird's beak;
and they are then made thus as a file and it is the form:
And if the roots do not want to issue from all these tongs, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and you put the instrument which is called "althali", it is to know plainness, from which this is their form:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break easily, and if its root grows through that, it is good;
if not, then aid yourself with all the instruments, from which the forms come here afterwards:
And if one aids with this instrument which has many grooves, from which it is the form: and other iron instruments that are presented in the arrangement of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, from which it is the form:
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of these dense instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted;
and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are certain diseases where the ancients did not teach about instruments because of the diversity of wounds; and it does not break in the thick cartilage or other bones, or it putrefies, if they seek the instruments that they need, which I have told you, and aid with gestures, from which this form comes:
And let it be thick and holding well to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and remove.
and then restore the limb with suitable medications for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural course, and the form is ugly, and especially in young women, if it is necessary that you know that the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot make it straight or limber:
then the root; and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument which has the form, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be of iron pointed in the end:
And the jaw closes little by little every day due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file a part of the tooth as it is in its shape.
and it is also like the file with which one makes the needles;
and with a file or instrument he touches little by little and gently in many places, so that it does not move until it is straight.
then the flat surface at the end has no roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, it is necessary to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When the front tooth falls out, whether by shock or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it because they fear it will fall out, and you treat them with medicines that constrict, and that is not worth it.
it is necessary to hold them together with a thread of gold, because the silver thread turns green and decays, but the gold does not move at all.
and let the thread be neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth.
and if you want to realign the teeth, take the thread and double wire between the two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you arrive at the sound tooth on the other side; then recommence the covering up to the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so that it does not move at all;
and be your ligature at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the heads of the thread to a small nail, and assemble them, and place them between the sound tooth, and set it so that it does not touch the tongue;
and then leave it constricted as much as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the threads break, hold it with another thread;
If it remains and serves thus all its tension, and it is the form of the teeth and the shape of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and of the two muscles, as you see.
And when the tooth falls out, if you put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said.
and do not interfere with it, for those who are not wise and suffer, and never make the form of a tooth of ivory, and put it in its place where the defect is, and hold it steady as we have said, and it remains and serves thus long tension.
Never are these bonds that come from under the tongue or naturally, which you do not know thus. or by accidental wound swelling;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue;
Then take the nervous cord as large, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is toughness or knot, and it is suddenly a wound, if you cut the uncinate and take as large the ligament.
and beware that the fissure is not too deep in front, because of the artery which is beneath.
and when you have done it, lift the level of warm water and of hazel, or of cold water, then place under the tongue a tent of linen.
and tighten the patient's bandage every night, so that the wounds cannot suppurate.
And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the wound a vitriol ointment. and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize it with a slow-cautery fire, which is good for that. then the treatment of another treatment as long as he is healthy,
and if you see that it is of bad color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a cancer;
and if it declines to a whitish color, and there is moisture, then he throws in the onion, and makes a subtle spatula-like instrument, and delivers on one side and the other; and if you do not find it in your work, then put on a vitriol plaster as long as it is stained, then return to your work as much as you can treat everything fully;
then lift the lever of vinegar and of seat, and the treatment of other treatments as long as he is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes there come into the throat bulges that are called "goiters", and they are properly called II swelling, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, take heed:
If it is abscesses hard of small sense and of false color, do not touch them with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, also for the ornamentation of blood; but let them be until they are ripe, and then you will divide them, or they would break apart by themselves;
and if it is of white color round, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument for covering, but first look to see if the abscesses are calm and at peace.
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head be in your healthy one, and open their mouth and take the surgeon's hands between theirs, and press the tongue underneath all the instrument, so that it is in the form.
and let it be of silver or subtle iron, just as our cautery irons:
Can't you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and fix it in the handle, and pull strongly upwards more than you can;
and pull something from the tiles with, then shape it to the instrument, because of its form, which seems like a force; and all the tips are curved, and one end to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with tongs, so that it takes its form. And let it be cutting on one side, and named on the other side;
and when you have shaped one of the handles, shape the other according to the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, hot and gentle, and if there is evacuation of blood, gargle the patient warmly, or use scorched pomgranates that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stained; then let the wound heal until it is healthy;
and often no abscesses grow in the throat except the two glands, if they gather together thus like the two glands unite.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was nestled deep in her throat, to be known as the small abscess of sense;
and it had almost completely closed off her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for a day or two.
And the abscess was so elevated there that it had poured out two loads through the two nostrils of her nose.
I hastened then, and made an incision in one of the angles, then the flow of pus was released, and a large portion of bowel was freed.
then I made another incision in the other passage of the nose, and I opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue;
After I burned the anvil in these abscesses, and I cauterized a part of it, and only a little blood came out. And then the woman's throat became constricted, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time.
And the abscesses grew again, and filled the void that I had emptied, so much that it became very large.
Then I tricked her and cauterized inside her throat: Then the swelling began to grow.
And I left those areas, and only God knows what happened afterwards.
of the egg
When the humors descend to the vein, and it is inflamed and it is long, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is very large and round, it is called a "vein".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit at all, and you see that the hot abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, so it is necessary that you grasp it;
and the one that is rounded and assembled, and is not lengthy; and it is blood-red or of a dark purple color or black, so it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger to the patient.
It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned previously. then prick the onion in the egg, and pull it from below, and grasp it with one of the two instruments that I have said for the incision of the two almonds.
And it is necessary that you do not remove more flesh than the excess which is beyond the natural terminus;
for if you cut more, it grieves at the voice, and at the speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two gums, and cure it until it is healthy.
And if the patient has fear about operating, it is necessary that you use judgment in the cautery of the senses, for fear.
And the manner of burning with fire is sharp and bitter. And it is that the patient puts his head in your healthy one, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cauterization, and confines it with living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using the application of this instrument, because it is its form:
And let there be on the head a lock of hair or where one puts the medicine, like the hairs of a comb, and put the instrument to all the medicine onto the wound;
and the patient should be seated on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth to the medicine placed within, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the blister;
then put your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the eye, for a quantity of about half an hour, until you see the narcotics and the murmurations of the medicine are appeased;
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into all the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the eye;
and do this often, until the cauterization is perfected, then let it dry, and wait after three or five days.
And if you have mastery of reapplying the cauterization of the medicine, so reapply it, and after cauterizing, suck in the cotton soaked in borax, and clean what is around the medicine.
and let it be raised from cold water, and let it be cured of garglings as long as it is healthy.
This treatment is safer than incision, nor the cautery;
it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it there, and make it boil;
and the pot is well glued with strong earth, and in the pot has an instrument that is arranged in this manner: And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be applied to the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified;
after the repeated recommendation, until the eye dries out, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things can happen; and do not make a fiercer fire than at the decline of an abscess's heat.
And if this instrument is not present, take a candle and put in the patient's head a thread of egg white, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot. for the egg white thread does not let the vapor pass into the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether for health.
Many times one is hurt at the throat by a fishbone or some other thing;
so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing clearly.
and what does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if he vomits the bitter thing
where the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and there is a thread on the sponge, and then it passes through; and when it comes to the place, if it sticks, and then you will draw it forth;
and if it does not come out of what we have said, take the instrument of a probe in this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high and lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all may come to harm, and do not push the bone within;
and it is necessary that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows when the thing is bitter; If you burn with fire below, or if you pull it straight with all the instrument equally, so that it is straight.
from the swelling of the throat
No wound is medicated, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit at all, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I told you.
And if you see the wound, so draw it out completely with the small hook, or with subtle tenaculas that are suitable for this.
And if that doesn't work, take a curved hook, and put it in the throat of the patient, then pull out with the curve of the hook the iron hot instrument, and make it often happen. And if you touch the patient's aquiline all day.
then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and let it swallow in sense, and move it to its hand often; and if soon the wound feels the water, it scabs.
And if it does not scab as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with assafetida, at the instrument that I said in the fumigation of the urine;
Do this many times, for it will fall sooner.
And the method of fumigation is that you take the pot where there are visible coals, and it should be covered with a pierced cover in the middle, and in that perforation should be the head of the instrument;
then you throw in the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to the sanity;
and the sanity will fall now, and if it does not fall, then recommence the fumigation many times;
and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water;
and then the liver will be cleansed by this government.
And the shape of the instrument is where one treats the vein, it is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs entering into the gorge; and has resemblance to a bird's beak, and it has roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot release;
Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size;
and it is in two manners, one of which is in its own likeness, and according to what it holds moisture.
And the second method is by the abscesses or where they are on the body.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the swelling is mild according to its accomplishment;
and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are on the joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves them until they are ripe on the outside, perhaps if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Where the abscess is on a main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it becomes ripe, it will not injure the main limb.
where it is at the foundation, if you pierce it in this way so that it becomes mature;
and it is not necessary that you pierce the abscess without complete digestion, unless it is at the foundation, so that it does not putrefy within, and becomes long and fistulous; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the debate and agreement of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
and it is necessary that you make a seat for the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens mouths;
and let the perforation be far from the long body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and veins and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no abundance. In these cases where they suffer, according to the affected limb.
And when abscesses are in the flesh, if it is worth more that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you make a hole before that, the body will be elongated from the venom of it, and is full of much foulness; and by chance they harden the lips and the depths of it.
And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limbs need.
And it is necessary that you make small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many fissures according to the likeness of the greatness of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the head, and cover; when it has thus become jaundiced like I am wrapped, and is numbed, then one must do thus as they do for bubbles:
and if there are such ones that are split into three angles, and if there are such ones that one covers thus like the leaf of myrtle, thus like abscesses of the loins;
and if there are such ones where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Those who have no head, thus like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has gathered great matter, and you pierce them, if you do not draw out all the matter at that hour, but rather draw out a part; then stop the abscess just until the next day, then draw out nothing further there. Do this many times with great effort, so much that the belly becomes entirely swollen.
Especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old men who are decrepit. For the expert often kills the patient with the issue of the bowel, which by chance causes the death of the patient, and you do not perceive it.
Examine carefully this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, suck out the pus, and look if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain ulcer, apply a dressing made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, then you should put a dressing in each one so that they do not touch each other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, then you should fill it with old cotton or a dressing made from linen threads without moisture, and bind it just to the third day;
then the bone, and the treatment of the joint until it is healthy.
And if the shedding of blood occurs in your work, so apply cold and still water, and do not agitate the dressing, and place it on the wound, repeatedly cleaning it many times.
And if the blood circulation perseveres, they will receive good government and treatment, and the powders that I mentioned in my hands in this book, and if it is winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then it is necessary to apply tents and warm drapplings soaked in wine and hot oil.
and if it is summer, and the limbs are weary, then it is necessary to apply warm drapplings soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
and then dissolve the abscess and the swelling and the treatment, as it is necessary, until it is healthy.
And it is necessary to recognize universally in treatments of abscesses:
where you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
Where the blood comes from small abscesses, and there are ways of our own that are in tiles, just like the juice of a gall, and much is similar to it.
There are some that are fatty and such as those which have moisture, just like pores;
and if there are ones that are hard and stone-like to the cutter, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
And the operations of the cutting are that you experience with every instrument that is called "intromission", because its shape comes from this, whatever it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then they feel it by probing above the loin.
And when the moisture is evacuated, it dries out completely, leaving behind no skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing.
then dip cotton in Egyptian oil, if it is present; if not, with water and wine, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; and clean what has remained of the pus.
And then replace the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that there remains no pus.
then heal the wound of pricking at this suitable time, so it may be healthy.
And if the abscesses hold in a thick humor, then cut according to this form, far from the loincloth. and you scrape the ulcers, and remove the scabs from all parts, and put all your treatment of drawing forth the humor from the hip where it lies.
and if the artery does you harm in opposition, then do what I have told you to do afterwards.
And thus do for the abscess if it is porous, and on cutting and on healing as I have told you.
And cut into the porous and moist abscess, it is easier, for they contain little blood. And if there are none of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and it was one of these abscesses that I cut from the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess just like a sour, rough and white stone, and it could not be broken. and if one had touched any of them, one would have made a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses coming to the head, because those that come to the head of children and roots of the ears, the opening should be made at the most dependent part, in order to issue the pus;
and the treatment should be as it is suitable.
Here is the translation:
And each swelling is properly inside its side, like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these swellings are many.
and the similarities of these swellings are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
in that one where you see good disposition in the touch, and it is similar in color to the body, and changes from each part and is not airy as nerves of the neck nor in the artery, and is not deep;
it is suitable that you cut it from above, and scrape each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart as onions, if you are skilled in this, as we have said about abscesses of the head;
and burn a little and slowly, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and are not too hasty with the scalpel, lest the hands falter, and do not see too far ahead, so you do not cut more than you should.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to stop, then put into the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound still. and let it be until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begin to puncture.
And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, until you complete it.
then seek with your finger if there remain small scripules, if you cut and mold them.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrophula, it does not suit to cut that scrophula at its root, but rather tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall away by itself without harm.
Then apply the dressing of old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then the treatment.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no more superfluity because of the greatness of the scrofula. it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of it, and draw out strongly, and sew as we have said.
it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of it, and draw out strongly, and sew as we have said. Those scrophulae that hold a surplus, pierce them where they appear most tender;
and pierce them thus as the one mentioned before, in a dependent manner, then I will treat them with ointment and similar things, so that they do not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then treat it with ointment inflamed with charcoal, until it be healthy.
The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I did not see anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have a squint, it is necessary that the notch of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be examined; and one must not help by this, because all the veins and the arm of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels.
When the disease is in the channel of the arm, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut beneath three circles or four a small cut of the traverse, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the siphac, not in the cartilage;
and thus it is convenient for the section of the epiglottis that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are far from inquiry.
And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the entire onion, then cuts the heart as far as it reaches the collarbone; and clears the vessels of blood, if you do not see anything, and then touches the syphac, as we have said;
and is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the collarbone which jumps forth by the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leaves the wound open a little piece.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew all alone without the cartilage;
then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
One must not delay until the throat is entirely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and lacks breath. Then touches the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and therefore they command the old one to leave the open wound as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four And then they command to cauterize the wound and cure, until it was cured.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took the needle, and she stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the sinew of her arm;
and I was called to cure her, and I found her almost dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not been properly covered, nor did a vein flow further than the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and cured it until she was healthy;
and I had not seen the young woman feverish when her voice was hoarse, and she returned afterwards to her usual disposition;
because I said that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
This posteme is called " Hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental;
where nature has no point of obstruction.
And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which is similar to a fatty swelling, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not want to open or make fierce efforts except in the one that is small, and it proves and searches everywhere for the entire interior; if you find it thus as I do not find fat, and it does not penetrate to any vein, if it bursts, if one bursts as we do, and it draws out all its filth, if there is any; and search well everywhere, and the doctor if it suits him, so that he may be perfectly healthy.
There are many ways of our own, which I will describe all the similarities;
and it suits that I say all the difference that is between us and them.
I say that the patient is feverish and tense, until the inflammation has passed, and the corruption is accomplished; then replace the fever and the heat.
With the new wound there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a abscess, and grows large;
and they are according to their similarities, whether gray, or moist, and many colors are thus as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its shape will be or the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring into the abscesses of the nails is that you grasp or touch the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you feel that the struments have pierced the heart, then it is according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the suppurating matter, and take care in this that it bursts forth.
If the running moisture is warm, whatever its color may be, thus do as I have said about the other abscesses;
and after the suppurating matter has come out, know that it is fat, thus do it in a cross, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and turn the skin where it lies so that you draw it forth whole with the nail;
and if you cannot draw it forth whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if it stays nothing, it returns to us many times;
and if it stays a little, and the wound does not grieve, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and treat other wounds until they are healthy;
and if it is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat what injures flesh.
and if the vein is beating against you or otherwise, then hasten and apply the liquid of broken vitriol, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the treatment that was left undone from the beginning.
Here are the forms of inward-turned instruments, and they are of three kinds: big and mild and small;
and there are three kinds that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways: big, mild, and small, to encircle the abscesses of a fistula;
and they are also like the needles with which one sews up wounds, and they are of citrin tin, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more proven for sewing up black pustules;
and they are of three kinds: big, mild, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The forms of the onions are very similar, as you see here:
and if there are wounds that have three kinds of curvature thus;
and if there are wounds that have three curvatures, and are thus of three kinds;
and if there are wounds that have two curvatures, and wounds with a single curvature only, and are of three kinds;
and all this is necessary in their place.
The head of these is where they are cutting, and of such there are those that do not cut except in one part, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not touch the vein or nerve;
and of these introductions are the swollen limbs placed in shackles, so that the patient does not perceive themselves at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and moderate, as you see;
and one does not make more use of it than in the charcoal burned flesh, if like legs, and arms, and limbs, and fingers, and similar places;
and one does not make another small instrument, similar to the scrapings of fistules, according to this form, where one stains blood: and one puts it sometimes in the body that is connected to the gathering of veins, and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form;
One does not inflate the limbs of certain men when they begin to be corrupted, as much as they seem like feminine limbs;
and they remain worn out and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form of this line, up to G: then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicinal plaster in the open wound, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and cure until it is healthy;
and if the limb falls downwards, and is amazed by its greatness like they have in women, if it makes two ribs above, through two similar fractures; of the one being held to the other at the end of the one and of the other, so that the larger line includes the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape off the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and prepare what we have said about bandages and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, so that it may be healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil; and let it be until it eats away the remaining flesh and fat, then cure until it is healthy.
These abscesses that form under the seats are kinds of hard scrofula sores where there are ribs, and if there is only moisture in them.
Those who contain moisture need to be treated according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: And when the entire tumor that is in the abscess is evacuated, then fill the wound with much cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and cure by applying ointment to the extent that it becomes healthy.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then they do as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound is open, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin that is above it is swollen, then many abscesses come from it, and just so does it happen to the inflamed and abscessed vein;
and if you recognize it by its signs as it is for the artery, then are the long abscesses deep in. and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the strangeness;
and when it is for the vein, then are the veins devoid of apparent function;
and it is folly to cover this abscess, and similarly when it is under the seats and in the corners and in the hollow of the shoulder and many other places, and they are very large. It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and he who is at the head must choose also, and in he who is inflamed with arterial fire it makes a hole above the skin of the loin.
then operate on the incision like a wound, and beautifully separate the artery from the tiles, until it is discovered;
Then stick the needle underneath, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two eyes, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then puncture the abscess which is between the two lines of an introjected foreign body as much as the blood that comes out of it, and so be freed from the abscess;
Then proceed with the treatment that soothes the bowel, until the swelling subsides; Then heal the wound of the eye socket, arriving at that, until it is healthy;
and if the abscess is of the size of a vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin, then stick the needle underneath where you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread, so that you draw from the other side; then touch the abscess, as I have told you, or bind one of the two parts with a thread as the head of the vein.
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then I rebury another needle under all the thread beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
then cut into the abscess until the superficies emerge, then cut into the superficial part of the heart and let what is bound go.
then put on a dressing of soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply gentle treatments of poultices and ointments until it is healthy.
Also, how abscesses come into the arteries and veins, they come into the kidneys when they are fermented, or by too great a labor, and similar things.
And it happens more often with joints and fingers in all places where there are joints, and this is the grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many dispositions without pain.
and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not at all in the deep part of the body, but beneath the skin.
and it must be well adjusted on all parts, and does not move forward or backward, neither below nor above, and the one that is in joints does not need to be strengthened with iron. perhaps they will encounter contraction; and those who are at the head or forehead, make the skin on the spatula-like.
and those who are at the head or forehead, make the skin on the spatula-like. If the abscesses are small, you hold them with pincers, and cut at their root;
and if it is large, you suspend it with an onion, and scrape it, then bone and assemble the wound to the sutures, and treat until it is healthy.
It sometimes happens in the belly and not another part of the body, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by the resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps.
and there are small and very large ones;
and I saw some that had II or belly wounds that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were split open, and immediately corroded with moisture.
I weighed them and found that one weighed 18 ounces, and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you observe if the patient's moisture is moist, and the color of the joint is pale and moist and with a subtle root; if you touch the spatula to the large one, and be in its presence with the fire cautery.
if you touch the spatula to the large one, and be in its presence with the fire cautery. For when you cut too deeply, there often come great flows of blood, and if the wound does not close, then hasten to give a cauterization.
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of the iron, take the well-made thread of steel, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then hold it back, and do not cease from constricting the thread of steel until it touches the artery, and cut through it without strain;
and if the roots are large, you should fear to cope with them suddenly through the belly, but you can well cope with most of it, then cauterize so they do not return;
then cure the wound, and beware that you do not touch the ulcer that is of foul color and of poor sense and of lazy regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre afterwards.
when the swelling is full If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or fracture of the syphac, and it is on the belly and in some of the bouez, just as it happens in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
and it is through the rupture of the skin and the issuing of the bowel, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various issues. And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on it with their fingers if it recedes, and then returns, and by chance if it is constricted, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand, it does not constrain at all;
and if it is due to blood, it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the toucher, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the toucher, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter about abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be straightened out entirely, then sign from the navel all around the abdomen. Then command him to sit between your hands, then go into the place that you have signed to all the spatula-like, then is the majority of the abscess above all the large groin. Then bind him with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk, firmly, and be the nails that hold the dislocated limb.
Then open the majority of the abscess extended on the limb, and you thrust your index finger, and seek the intestine. If you find the limb taken by the dislocation, so dislocate it, and thrust the intestine to the depth of the belly.
And if you find the bowel, take it by the navel, and cut off the superfluity.
And if the artery does contrary, or the vein, then go gently inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and thrust two strong threads, and thrust the two needles into what you have done in a cross that you make pierce.
Then strain the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the limb relax as much as it can, and separate the dead flesh by itself. where you find it when it is subtle and porous, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave the abscess as we have said;
where you find it when it is subtle and porous, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs to be healed, and sew the limb.
because of a tumor We have spoken in the division about the similarities of cancer, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment with iron.
and say that cancer is engendered in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in the limb or where one can reach it if it is like cancer which is in the breasts, and in the hips, and in similar places, and it must be entirely removed when it is in its beginning.
I never healed any of them before me.
And the treatments, when it is in its place or where you can open it, as we have said, is that you should purge the patient of black bile several times;
then make him healthier if he has shown repletion, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the treatment;
then cut your onions or cancels, and shave all parts, and scrape all parts without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or anything, and if the blood flows back to you in opposition to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stanched; then the treatment of another treatment until he is healthy.
of dropsy We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the water is done, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment which is done by medications, and that which is cured by iron.
and one should not touch with iron in these two similarities: it is to know, tympanitis and hipsarca, for it is deadly things;
then when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" with medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, if you see that the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as a tumor and solution of stomach and similar things; if one should not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient has a strong vitality, and he has no other illness but only dropsy, and it is not too young nor too old, then you should operate thusly: lift the patient's right hand on your hands, and the assistants press the belly in bulging out the water at the lowest part of the thigh, then take the spine scraper in this form: And let there be cutting of two parts. to a point, and so that it is not inserted too far in that it can come just up to the intestine when one fixes it in, and does not make it burst;
then see if the dropsy is advancing towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision below the belly, and you must direct the needle right down to the groin; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the belly;
and if it is because of weakness, let it be to the right, and it does not seem that the patient should lean on the crack that the excesses do not run to the weak spot;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and prick, and lift your hand at all the spatium between the skin and the underlying flesh, as if scraping out the quantity of an ounce or so;
then pierce the underlying flesh until the spatium reaches the empty space, and it is the veins of the water, then pull strongly, and you prick this instrument according to its shape: And it is similar to a subtle silver tube, and it is of silver or lighter arching, and has at the back part a small hole; and where it is narrowed on one side, it has three holes; and one from another part, and one from another;
and the head is cut like a quill, and it's the shape of the incision that the writers cut with the quill:
at the top is the scalpel, so that when the instruments come to the water, they descend now onto the instrument;
empty the quarter or third part, for if you empty more than it is necessary at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he falls faint, or he approaches death;
but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses;
then pull the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the cord that stops up the passage which is on the syphac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
Then recommend the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw out a small quantity of water.
Do nothing for a day, and keep him from moving too much but only a little water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you let him have much water, if the treatment of the grave wound or sore is hot, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and refrain from drinking. and the treatment with drying medicines so that it be healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
Never is a child born who does not have smallpox on the rod, or the smallpox is small, or it is not in its place.
If you want to make it so that it does not perceive at all the spatiumile, a very subtle mole according to this form:
Then put or insert a subtle cloth of fleece, and bind it thus for three days or four and when he wants to make urine, let the cloth be removed, and make him urinate, and then replace it.
and by chance it does not converge at all points, for the urine that comes out does not allow it to close.
This is where the perforation is small, if it is medicated with a cloth of cotton, as we have said, it will enlarge itself.
Those who do not have the hole in their back are blocked, for none are born with a hole at the head of the penis, because they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up high; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come up to the marrow, and it's a bad disease.
And the manner of the surgery is that the patients place themselves thus on their back, then they hold the head of the penis and the cope as wide as a penny, so that the hole appears in the middle, just as it converges;
and beware of the flow of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then staunch what is bleeding blood, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
the blisters on the rod Many times they come to this bath, and it is a false appearance of a wounded hand;
and there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
it is necessary that you take them with the subtle onion, and clean and wash all, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then heal with ointment diafinicon until it is healthy.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, it is necessary that you apply fire cautery to it.
When you have cleaned it, and the bath is in a state of putrefaction, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the bath that is inside first; and when it is soothed, then heal what is outside.
For when you treat them together, it is not assured that the head of the wound will not be perceived, and there comes darkness and corruption in the wound and in its junction;
Here is the translation:
And if a flow of blood comes, then apply the lunar cautery in this form:
The cautery fires help with these two conditions together: it is to know, at the flowing of blood, and to the corruption;
and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you should push or lead the rod with a hollow cane, and urinate for the patient within;
and when the skin is attached to the head of the rod which has affected those who have not been circumcised, or it has happened due to a wound or an abscess, then you should scrub it with a sharp instrument, so that the threads are disentangled, and the head of the rod is freed from all parts;
and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then you should scrub it with a spatula at no point near the head of the rod and the skin;
Then separate it thoroughly between the two, and put the subtle layer of the millstone in a cold frog, so that it does not become stiff again.
Surgery is not one of the continuous remedies like the other wounds; Always when we make this work of our will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not practice circumcision on their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of my masters and healers who performed circumcision on the thigh, and with force, and at all novelty;
if it happens that the courses are there because they have two tolls, and by chance if one covers the upper part and delays the lower. Now it receives a covering, and the pain is double, and at the purification which is given from there, it is not assured of the point of the limb;
and for the purification of the nail by chance scratching the iron, and correcting the joint, and often they are born thus that they have no need of purification and I have wanted it.
From the mending which is done with force all along the thread of the vein I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly on the whole sole beneath; but let the thread be well stretched around the skin;
and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him do more than to tie the thread around the rod as gently, and then you make it slide in all the ways that you can;
then you make it stand upright between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so that the veins do not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then put your hand on the rod and blow or heat, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in; Then thoroughly clean the area of the wound which has been assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie underneath and attach to another thread.
Then thoroughly clean the area of the wound which has been assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie underneath and attach to another thread. and hold it with the second thread at the pouch and at the index finger, and wrap between the two threads, then lift the cord above hastily and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the remedy; and put powder on and on the powder I drizzle glue made from a cooked egg yolk mixed with rose water, congealed with rose oil that is good and fresh, and let it sit until the next day, and treat with another treatment until he is healthy.
The shape of the bandages for the wound is this:
the two heads should be even and should be equal, and the heads should also be as large as the equally balanced handle:
The error of the mundification is when the dead heart falls to the incision;
then it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the liquids make an abscess;
and equal coating, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, if you have tenaculum, and then the coating.
And if they surpass three days, and what is beneath the rod is inflamed, let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and the scab falls off lightly;
if you cover it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm it at all.
Healing then the wound of sudden blows with powder, which we have said to treat with powders, and if you cover beyond measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm at all.
Here is the translation:
due to retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or from congealed blood, or from a blow, or from a new wound, or from similar things, which we have said in the division.
and if the urine does not flow, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is there or in the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent over their knees; and they should place their feet on the back, and stretch out their belly from the upper part above the back, and the patient should strain to alleviate themselves as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the pressure of the stone from above, because of which the urine does not flow;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you administer the extraction with all the instruments which are called "syringe", of which this is the form:
and be of subtle silver threads lightly woven, like the feather of a bird; and let it be the length of a palm and a half, and subtly at the head.
And the method of releasing the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head with a point of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe;
and remove the superfluous length of the wool and cut it just to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist olive oil and water tided;
then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod downwards towards the bowel;
Then apply the syringe before it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel it reach the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor or she who was led astray.
Then stretch the thread throughout the entire lane little by little, and the urine follows the lane, then it is extracted further, and make the urine flow.
And restart the syringe until the bladder is empty, and alleviate the patient.
When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, where putrefaction is assembled, and you see distilling waters and medicines, if you do all the instrument called "clyster", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if there are three punctures: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see.
And the veins are sought out by which the medicine can be inserted in such a way that it stops the bleeding well, if one can then draw out the moisture, and apply as much as is necessary.
and when you see gathering your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the cauterizer in the moisture, and pull out the pulling which is inside;
if you pull out the moisture to the cauterizer, and then strongly pull back the pulling thing inside; if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and it is the shape of a subtleclyster which one uses to cleanse the bladder:
And it is made of silver or copper, and its head is higher;
and below that the vein or the sinewy part;
then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you see to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts in the form of a twisted double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
Then put the head of the scalpel in the orifice, then hold your hand on the bladder at all the moisture that comes, so that the patient feels that this moisture has already come to the bladder.
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly all around. then put the strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.
and do as if you had done with the bladder, to press with your hand so that the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of piercing, and the extraction together with medicines.
and I have said the difference between the piercing in the groin as wounds, and all the signs, and in what piercing one should operate with regard to size. and in the bladder, and in the rod;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is born in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similarly to water in its subtlety;
and it appears there, and touches the patient's rod, and it bites many times, and then becomes rigid; and at much of these jumps the foundations;
and it is easy the healing of children until they are 4 years old, and it is much grievous in old people, and it is as youthful moisture, to those who are between youth and old age;
and it is the cure easier for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to calm the patient by whispering, in order to expel all the bad humors that are in his intestines. For it often hinders the quest to pierce the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and push and move upwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and jumps out many times from the high place;
Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely downward.
then touch the spine and inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall to the toucher of the whole, anoint your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is weak, or your left finger, if the patient is young and complete. and thrust it into its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, anoint it at the neck of the bladder.
then press on it with your finger, and thrust it to the depth where you saw fit to cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand remove the skin which is beneath the loins in the part where the cut is made.
Then he applies the spatula-like instrument, because this is the form: And makes an incision between what is between the hip and the perineum, not in the middle but at the side of the left nostril;
and be straight on the stone, and the two should be thus or in the perineum, and the cutting should be so that it is wide by default, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
perhaps the pressure if the two that are in the perineum, so that they jump out of their sense of labor;
and know that there is some stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is difficult to remove;
and if there is some that is underneath, resembling a pebble, and round, whose removal is easy.
Where there are corners and edges, make the cut larger;
and it does not jump, so it is necessary that you stretch over the tendons which are like a file on the head, to stretch the stone so it doesn't escape; where you apply underneath the subtle, curved instrument at the head;
and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the little hole, and if the sense is deceived, then stretch with vitriol;
and if there are more than one stone, then apply the largest first to the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull out fiercely, and the small ones afterwards if there are many.
And if it is very large, then it requires more careful treatment, and causes greater harm. For these things happen to the patient: where he dies, or the urine comes immediately because the bladder cannot hold it;
but you must force yourself to handle it, or to remove the tendons, as far as you can treat them piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put over it a dressing moistened with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resolve the patient back onto their bed, and do not dislodge the bandage until the third day.
And when you remove it, rub in the oil and water very well, then apply the ointment of diyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healthy.
And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that the urine cannot pass, which is known in such a manner without passing with the urine: put your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy it.
Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of serum, and aid him in all the ways that you know, so that he may be healthy.
and it is necessary that all the wounds that you treat, that you bind the two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the spot.
And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; if the treatment of those things that I speak of thus, that you cut many times, is an excuse for the cutting through this treatment. I have already proven it thus.
Take a rod of iron in this form and it will be at three angled points fixed in the thigh.
then take the thread and tie it around the rod below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
then push the iron into the rod gently, until it reaches the stone. and turn the iron with your hand on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side.
If the urine comes too soon, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone that is within the penis. If it breaks suddenly, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this because of anything that bothers him, then thread the filament beneath the stone and another above, then make the penis in the place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract it outward, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat until he is healthy.
of the stone of women
It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, and if it does happen, the treatment is grievous, and is hindered by three things:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-acquainted with her own body, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands;
And the fourth manner is that the stones of the woman are deeper than those of the man, because it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear in this. And if you need to ascend to this, it is necessary that you take a wise midwife, and hold the true faith on, and if you do not find one, then ask for a subtle cast;
And it presents a wise midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she is commanded to do what you command her regarding the examination of the stone; and look very well if the woman is a virgin:
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to thrust her finger or foundation and search for the stone;
and it heals, if the swelling goes down under his hand, and he recommends that he puts his hand or with the patient, and wants and presses his left hand firmly on the bladder.
It heals, if it is necessary to move it gently from the entrance of the bladder downwards, until it reaches the root of the thigh;
then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft flesh, where it is badly arranged, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his finger on the stone or below, and let the cutting be at the first small size;
and do not move his finger on the stone or below, and let the cutting be at the first small size; then put the instrument in the incision, if you feel the stone and it grows into the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
it is to know, small and large and bitter and sweet, long and round, and which have roots.
If you know the symptoms to recognize the disorder.
And if the saneness fails, then put on the glass vitriol ointment, and hold it in place for an hour until the saneness is established;
then return to your work, until the stone is broken, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as men who will help you in your operation;
and if the saneness fails, and it is of the artery that is cut, then put the powder on the wound and hold tight with tents and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient may die; then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the limbs are at rest, so return to your work, until the stone is firm.
Ramice aquose is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white pus, which is beneath the skin of the thighs, that contains the egg;
and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly on the web of the uvea, if one believes that it is another eye; and it's the skin of the conjunctiva between the white syfac that we have mentioned;
and they did not have a small pouch. And the generation of this remedy is from a weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
And sometimes it comes from a blow on the conjunctiva, and this moisture has many colors: where it's a declining yellow color, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and this happens more;
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, because if it's white syfac that we have mentioned, then it's the red abscesses, a little long as the figure of an eye, and doesn't open the conjunctiva, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own web, then it's the red abscesses with part of the uvea, and therefore one thinks that it's another eye;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the groin and the white siphac, it feels all right;
then when you want to know the color of the moisture, it is experienced by the entire introjective quarter, because its form is thus presented. Accordingly, judge from what comes after the internal quarter, of what is inside.
And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to their power and the replenishment of their body;
then he puts it on his back, on a thing a little high, and places under him many folds;
then he sits on his left, and instructs the minister to sit on the right, and extends the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart near the groin;
then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the groin between the loin down to the little finger, and make your incision quite straight in dividing the skin of the groin up to the white siphac, and carefully scrape according to their power;
Then pierce the swollen area with a needle full of water, and extract all the water, then put on your onion-like poultices, and the swollen area will subside afterwards.
and do not touch the core of the wounds, but let the swelling soothe itself; take all or piece by piece the subtle tissue of it gently, so that if you do not take it well carefully, the swelling will return;
and if the swelling has gone for a time, then reset it in its place when you have accomplished the work of the swollen area;
then assemble the two lips of the wound at a seam, then heal it as with other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the swelling corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood.
then cauterize the entire circumference, and extract the humor, and heal it as we have said.
And if it is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; cauterize the other part just as you did the first one equally, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a lint soaked in rose oil;
cauterize the other part just as you did the first one equally, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a lint soaked in rose oil; and put another lint soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two circumferences, and put double wrapping cloths on top, and bind it all together with a ligature that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and fill them with lint dressing according to this similarity and are assembled by stitching into the girdle of the arms, and one of the hands takes hold at the bottom just up to the back, and the other at the part of the thigh;
and the other two heads on the two angles, and so the entire assembly is restrained in the loop of the arm.
and no time is medicine better than the fire cautery at the height of iron, and it is that you take the subtle cautery scalpel, and scrape the skin of the joints, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap which contains the water is uncovered;
if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that sap as with onions, and scrape it with this subtle hot cautery:
And you scrape in all the ways that you can, until you uncover everything;
and beware that the cautery iron does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more salvageable; and beware of the deterioration of blood, and dread the operations of iron;
and if nothing does contrary, or abscess bursts or blood flows out or something else, if you heal what makes it contrary, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, then make a small perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs we have said that the watery fluid is there, then seat the patient on a high-backed chair; then prick the abscess at the lowest part beneath all the spatula-like tissue, and put the perforation two finger-lengths from the body;
and let the pores be wide, so that all the watery fluid flows out freely;
then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining watery fluid flow out, then heal it until the wound is healthy;
and he should not let the white cloth issue forth from the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you apply a pen or instrument by which one draws out the water of the hydrops, whose form is thus before;
and enlarges the wound, and knows that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or soon afterwards, and when it is assembled thus before, and then the patient will spend his days.
Knows that in the treatment of this arm there is fear in more than one disposition, because it seems to me that many are worth more than leaving it.
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to a head, and likewise are burned. and it is in many cases.
It is to know by excessive anger and anguish, which is expanded as wounds, or of percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find a point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance it is a grievous abscess, painful and piercing, and of a dark color, and often comes from inflammation of an artery, or swelling of a vein.
When it is from inflammation of an artery, it is known by the disposition of hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers; and it does not matter if you touch it.
That which is made from swelling of a vein is known by its disposition to the expression of touching with the fingers, and one can well make the measurement according to this resemblance, and on other symptoms; and it is that you take the care of the wounds, then establish the egg white above, and remove the excess of the white skin, and deliver the suspensor from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already mixed with these new flesh, then it is necessary that you treat the egg, and take care of it;
and if it is on the skin, or in that which is inside the veins, then it is necessary that you deliver all this tension, and take care of it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is behind, it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the humor, as we have said.
And when your operations are accomplished, apply the poultice of mild lime oil and rose oil, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
These are abscesses wrapped in a wrapping similar to a poultice, with the softening of the wounds, and the patient's grievance increases greatly when it is seen;
and the treatment of this disease is very close to the fearful one that was before, and in every way we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then place the suspension of the joints below his two buttocks, near all the vessels that are close to the penis, and you tie the masters, and stretch them out forcibly.
then cut to the spatula, trenchant large and traverse the area of the vessels, until they are discovered, and then strip away from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
then fix a needle or where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint or where the vein was visible, and tie it again at the other end. then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt humors.
then heal the wound as with others or by enlarging the opening, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the joints.
because for this reason there is no point of evil, and if all the veins are visible, it is necessary to treat the joints on all the veins; so that the eyes do not lose their adjustment by the incision of the veins, and they should be steady and cannot be helped.
The circumstances of this fracture are by the section that comes from the Syfac, or the extension onto the belly in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the joints;
and this route is either from the Syfac, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes:
or from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a heavy load, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the Syfac, are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal as far as the ulcer, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the intestine, which brings sudden severe pain at its beginning, and they are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's decay due to the swelling.
And sometimes it descends beneath the ribs with the intestine, and is held back, and causes great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these treatments of iron with fear, because he thinks of escaping from it.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to hold their intestine in their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter it; then let it be sewn up on its neck between your hands, and lift the thighs;
then place the heart above, and cut all the skin of the joints down to the long part; then thrust inside the leaves of the waist uncinated according to what you have need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth;
then scrub off the swelling that is beneath the skin of the joints, so that the hard white swelling may be uncovered on all parts;
then put your finger index in that which follows the joint, in that which is between the white swelling that is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second swelling, and separate that which is behind the vein, and between the second swelling;
and then put the right hand inside the curve of the loins, and extend the white cloth upwards to the left hand, and lift the vein towards the entire waist; and instruct the minister to extend the vein upwards, and detach what is behind the ligament;
and examine your fingers if there is a point of intestine wrapped around or hard white cloth, and if you find nothing, then thrust it into the belly below;
then take a needle with a large thread made of X threads, and thrust it into the rear part of the vein, which is behind the skin of the loins; behind the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and bind the vein, which we have said is behind the skin of the loins, with a strong ligature of two parts; Then wrap the heads of the veins, and bind them in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them cannot enter within, so that abscesses do not grow there. and put a ligature according to the first ligature a long way from that one, and after these two ligatures leave enough space which is beneath the heart of the conjoined fingers, the width of a finger. and afterwards all the others according to the roundness that the egg carries.
then cut into the part that is beneath the skin of the fingers, until the blood flows, and the swelling, as we have said before.
then mix the millet flour in oil, and put it on the wounds, and I will mix the ligature that we have mentioned. And no time is it cauterized with a thread as we have said, after the incision, by fear of deterioration of blood. For this happens many times, and leave the ligature until it sticks by itself.
and if it delays at the wound, let it be raised with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it heals;
then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshy hernia
In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is done as the antimony which is assembled at the seam of the vein, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting lightly underneath;
then cut into the middle, and treat the abscess of what is swollen, until the vessels heal;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and opens the muscles;
and do not descend to any of the intestines as coils, and if they descend, it is little, and repair all hours;
and whenever it stays too long at this point, if he believes the wound or syphilis, so much that the intestines descend;
and this happens through the extension of the swollen face which is like a nut, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and inflates the eyes and opens;
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before;
and it is never cured by iron in this manner: and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then holds the arm of the affected limb inflated according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the swelling that is beneath the skin where it hurts, then take the rod and place it on the arm appearing swollen;
and press at the deepest part of the belly, then cut the two appearing eyes of the swelling on the head of the rod, and cut one and the other;
Then extract the head of the vein, and do not touch the spot where the blood does not spread to another area, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of intestinal ulcers. then heal by healing the wounds.
then heal by healing the wounds. And when you cut the threads, if it is mended and the wound is cured, so that it may be healthy.
The face is constricted, and has no appearance in the rut, and the cauteries are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
from the softening of the skin of the thighs
Many times are softened the skin of the joints in some men, because the flesh that is within them is softened, and it is easy to see.
and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, that one makes the patient sit up straight, and covers the skin that is softened on the natural skin.
then bring the two lips together to a seam, and if you see, first remove the excess of the softened skin at three seams or four firmly.
then cover between the seams, and heal it as with other wounds, until it be sound, and cut the thread.
of punishment
Know that cauterizations are recommended in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to speak of them in this book;
and it is not necessary to discuss them for they can be done in two ways:
where one is that the masters respond in writing when one demands it, and in writing the treatment;
and the other, because we often have need of cauterization of certain beasts to help us, such as goat and sheep and deer and other beasts.
I say then that cauterizations are done according to two ways: either by attraction, or by incision.
In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water, until its hide is softened and relaxed; then take them with your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Of the treatment of wounds: it is necessary that you hold the best, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then lift the suspensor, and sew on each bone to the cop, when you have well excavated them;
and let none of the thick skin and the subtle skin that is above the veins;
and this manner of treatment is better than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction something of the joints often remains, for which reason the best desires luxury;
then heal the wound until it is healthy.
and the hemorrhoids
Hermaphrodite is according to two manners of men: one is that between the two joints appears as if the figure of a woman's nature, where there are hairs, and sometimes it cuts off the urine.
And another manner is in women, and it has on the little finger as a rod and they bind.
And the treatment of the wound and the fame is that you should clean all the adjacent areas, and treat them as other wounds;
in the second manner, of men whose urine passes through the skin of their thighs, if there is no treatment.
Tentigen is an adjacent area on the natural part, so much that it is too shameful to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment.
It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tentigen from your hand or from the onions, and clean it lightly;
and do not rub too much in depth, lest corrupted blood comes, then the treatment of another wound as long as it is healthy;
and to another sore that grows at the mouth of the marrow, and the putrid matter, and by chance it bursts forth, and it is according to the resemblance of a cowe, and for this reason the old people called it "cowe disease". It is necessary that you take it, as we have said about the tenderness, and the treatment until it is healthy.
Error occurs when the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the pertussis is small; and it is natural from birth, or it happens by accident due to a disease that came about;
and it is natural from birth, or it happens by accident due to a disease that came about; or it is by chance encounter, or subtle douleur or thick, and it is made deep in the marrow, or in the ribs, or beneath, or whatever it may be;
and they hinder conception, and childhood, and by chance they have flowers to have;
and the knowledge of this is through the observation of the patient's pulse.
If the stoppings are nearly apparent, then seek at your fingers or in the vein.
If it is a subtle douleur and it is close to the liver, if you hurry, and the roundness then:
place your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
then the two livers are formed, so that the subtle douleur is round, and it is above the swellings;
Then take the thread, and the vein in oil, and place it on the limb, and instruct the woman to stay at home each day, so that she cannot strain.
And if the skin is hard and thick, it is necessary to take the cupping glasses similar to a leaf of myrtle.
If the swelling is from newborn flesh, then suspend it from the hook and the scalpel;
and there are stain-releasing medicines of blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and ensemble of abundant egg whites;
then apply a bandage of wide plaster, so that the wound cannot strain;
and let it be for a long time, and apply a dressing of dry linen;
then be cured by other treatments until he is healthy.
And when new flesh comes in the marrow, it is necessary to apply a cup according to this method, if there are no swollen abscesses. For an abscess that is swollen in the marrow, one should not touch it with iron.
of hemorrhoids Embrocations are openings of veins where there is no crust forming, and when the embrocations are old, they become thin.
and we have already said in the division the similarities of those, and the signs, and I will tell you here those that receive cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and the thigh, when they are deep in the marrow, and they do not appear to sensation, if it is not the cure by iron.
Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, afterwards stretch out the tendons as tentacles, and cover with its roots, then powder with medicines restricting blood flow, such as aloe and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her in cold air;
and if blood comes out, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and peel of green apples and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster to apply on her back.
And if it stagnates, it is good. If not, have her wear loose garments on her back and arms without constriction;
Then take a linen cloth, and soak it in juice of plantain or juice of angelica with old wine, and make it adhere to the limb.
And when the abscess breaks, then clean the limb of putrid matter until it is healthy;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough scalp, so it must be covered as I have said in the thesis; and then clean it until it is healthy.
Many types of abscesses come to the marrow, such as cancer and pierous abscess and herpes and estoimenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
It is necessary therefore that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus;
and if you want to know the work of iron, look if the abscesses are agitated at the beginning of their coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but make me ure so long as the pain is appeased;
and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have small stools or he leans against them, and supports himself on his back and brings his feet together in parts to reduce the swelling of the leg;
and let his knees be expanded, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a band of linen;
then suck the swelling towards the right side, and I will show you the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the form;
and it is necessary that when you have seen how to handle this instrument, you fix the rod first in order to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not go further in than it should, and it does not harm the patient; and if the swelling is larger, it is necessary to cover the deepness of the marrow of the torn tendons, so that the swelling does not bother them;
and it is necessary to put the point of the instrument above, and to hold the instrument.
And when the abscesses open, and one feels it with the hand, if it is necessary to cover at the head, with a spatula, lightly.
and when the wound is empty, it is necessary that you put into the wound tender moistures in rose oil, or in dry green oil.
and put the tender force of the wound at the depth of the marrow, and put below the marrow and on the wounded vein a nettle moisture in water or evil beak thus they are cured.
then heal afterwards for two days of anointing, coming to this, so that it may be healthy.
and at no time lift the marrow and the wound by injection of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and a long aristology should be applied; then reapply to the joint.
And if the wound is set in the marrow, it is necessary to beware of cauterizing with iron, but rather heal it as we have said in the division.
of the swelling It is better first to consider the natural formation of the child and the signs are when you see the woman approaching below, and desire to smell the air:
then hasten the children to issue forth; then know that this child's birth is according to natural formation, and it is the issue under its head, and the second one with him;
and when you see these signs, you must gently press his belly, so that the child issues forth quickly;
for when it descends upon its head, the second one is with him, and the marrow of his superfluous parts is purified by good mundification;
and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes against the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or above, and is converted by an accident on its neck, and by other bad postures;
it is necessary at the handling that it be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them.
If the infant comes upon its head by natural means, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the one is feeble, then make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her;
and raise its natural oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then put the handling between its two little spatula-like tools which are its form: and anoint the second one, and apply to his finger as much as the moisture that is there corrects the fires;
and bind the belly of the woman so that the children descend, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with a mixture of fenugrec with oil of sesamum;
then make her take and absorb a concoction, and hold her mouth and nostrils for an hour: if the children are now strangled.
And if both hands issue forth fire, it is necessary that you reset them lightly little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high; then rock the seat on the ground, and hold onto the woman, so that she does not fall at the rocking;
and if he cannot put his hand in, and the infant dies, if he catches the hands at the counter which is placed beforehand, and extracts the child, and resets equally.
from the birth of the child onto its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, if it is necessary to cast upwards; and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
then take the feet and stretch them little by little.
When it jumps just to the knees, if he commands to grasp, and makes it straighten with condition; if it jumps far, God wills it.
And if it does not jump far as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it will be lighter.
And if it does not come far as we have said, take a mixture of high water, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush all in the mortar; and put it on the nature of the woman inside and drive out this anointing, then make her sit in warm water until beneath the ribs;
and when it is softened below, have him make a collar of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour; then have him sit on the chair, then have him straighten up and hold his mouth and nose, and take a light hold of his belly, for he will now faint.
from the exit of the child onto its knees When the faintness comes in this form, then you put your hands on his belly little by little; then he should be supported on his neck, and his feet should hang down, and he should be laid out on the bed; and fold his hands little by little, and then take hold of his hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from below, until he is laid out downwards; and if the faintness does not leave him, take his feet and move them gently, then move his belly upwards, then he will recover from your hands; and warm the little child gradually; and instruct the woman to take hold of it as much as the infant sucks.
from the exit of the child who comes out with a wide hand meanwhile You must skillfully bring back the hand: if you cannot bring it back, lift the woman up and go.
if she cannot walk, make her sit on the bed, and bend her legs forcefully;
then treat the muscle strain that I have mentioned;
and if she is not inflamed, make her sit on a chair, then study how to bring back the hand; and warm the infant according to its natural shape, and make it straighten out, and instruct it to take hold as much as the infant sucks strongly.
from the release of the child on its neck, and it has expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back You must skillfully guide its hand, then turn it little by little, and warm it lightly;
and when it is even, then place on its natural muscle tone of the high and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
and when you have done this, then make him sit on the seat, and instruct him to take hold; and make him stretch out. in the same manner for all the secondary ones
in the same manner for all the secondary ones When it returns to this manner entirely the second time, then touch the second [joint] with your finger, as long as the moisture is evacuated;
and if it falls upon his face and neck, then touch the swelling, so that it is not retained, and soothe the boy;
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed him as it should be, and instruct the woman to take hold at no time;
of the issue of twins Know that a gem grows many times, and sometimes three or four grow at once. and it is not a strange thing, and it happens little. Two are strange things, and do not live, if little known;
Two are strange things, and do not live, if little known; I know that they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the bud;
and sometimes they issue naturally like all those under, as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, thus the cure as we have said, and let the subtle balm be, and make it thick and light, what it does. and do thus as it is worth more to health. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious wisdom, and it is necessary that the balm knows all this, for by chance similar things have happened. do thus according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman with a dead fetus or in the womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by manual operation; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her thighs be inclined downwards, and her legs be raised;
and the midwife holds the two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart by the descent of the child;
then anoint the mouth of the womb with oily moistures made from walnut and fenugreek and flaxseed, then oil the bath with these oils and these anointments;
Then put the buttons in the marrow lightly, then seek the place where they put the onions that are suitable for this, and take care that the veins appear to be prepared to descend to their head;
if you place the onions in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descents are on foot, hold them or prick them and the sides of the month;
and it is necessary that you hold the onion in your right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of your left hand, and lightly touch all of your hand, and place the onion in none of these places that we have said, until it comes to the evacuated thing;
then place against another onion, or the third where you have mastery, so that the extractions are equal;
and then it is set evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that it comes out straight, and let the edges of the teeth be for holding, as this is the form.
And if it remains in one part, oil the bail with some of its fingers, and put them in that part, and treat the other part.
and if it does not remain at all, put this edge or higher up, and do this until it issues forth completely free.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to stiffness, then you must wrap around the drapil, until it issues forth completely. then cup the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus you must do with the other hand, and with the two feet.
And if the head of the infant is large and it is constricted at birth, or it has an assembled stiff neck, then you must put the spinous spatula between your two, and make the head and extract the stiffness. where you apply the instrument called "almidach", which is one of the instruments or surgical tools that come after this one;
and thus it makes the veins naturally have a great natural head;
and then treat the bones like tenons, and the head jumps forward and holds onto the strength, if it is fractured, as long as the moisture that is or worse comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces in the muscle where you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if the swelling is on its feet, then it is light attraction, and the remedies at the mouth of the marrow are lighter.
And if it is strained in the belly or in the thigh, then it is necessary that you extract it with the drapil enveloped around the hand; and make an incision in the belly or thigh, until the moisture that is there flows;
and if the other members are numb, and the head remains still, then he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and draws it just up to the mouth of the marrow; then he applies the ninth or tenth, and draws it strongly;
and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by hot abscess that has come, then it does not need to be worked, but rather to be treated with moist and greasy things; and the treatment is with plasters, and they should be in watery, softening, and moisturizing (applications).
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it upright, then treat it with what we have said regarding the living infant;
and so that one cannot obtain power, if one draws strongly by sections, and does not leave anything of the secondary (affected area).
And when you have done this, remind him of what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow;
and if blood flows out, let it be put into warm water, and remind him of other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the dead one. After long tension the wind came into the belly, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to great portent.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long tension, and could not soothe the wound.
I put on a strong plaster of attraction, and an bone came out, and after some days another one. I was greatly amazed, because it seemed that the belly had no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and I treated it with my hands, until the woman was at her best point; and I watched over the woman for a long time afterwards, and then I gave her a little drink of good wine.
and I did not forget this chapter because of that which, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one examines the books;
and it has two turnings as it has two heads of the veins. However, the horns should be more subtle on the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood.
and let the mouth of the tube be wide, and the margin of the trees should be, and from a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two limbs should be the adjustments of this same tube, which are fastened at one end and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
and this adjustment is placed in the mouth of the clamp to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, in its more subtle and lighter likeness, should be made from ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the pincers. and have two heads with two adjustments, as you see, a palm in length, and two widths;
and when you want to open the clamp with all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet pendant and her legs covered, then place the two adjustments assembled in the clamp, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs; Then open your hand to the entire instrument, as you have done with the even tendons, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marrow, until the boil does what it wants.
These instruments are all elevated, and their similarities are multiplied there; and when the mirrors have appeared to them, so much more swift is the work, and higher are the bones among them according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in infancy, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his wing, and then make him stretch out his condition, and hold your hands on the mouth and nose; and let him jump through that, it is good.
If not, then take the poultice, and make a perforation or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calmant, rue, anise, chamomile, sassafras, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or put in water on the fire;
then put a cane or tube into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and hold it as long as the vapors come out from the patient;
then make them sneeze, as we have said. If the secondary symptom appears quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment, and does not get better, instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or musk, and then put it in the nostril, and desire the second one; and when they have found it, take hold of it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the patient does not feel extraction;
but you must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then draw it out; If he comes and dislocates himself.
And if the mouth of the thigh is already constricted, we have described the treatment of sternutation, and of fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not from all that we have said, beware that you do not fall into error in treating;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the thigh, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then anoint it with a four-drug ointment; if it will putrefy and suppurate, and come to a crisis;
but nevertheless, when it putrefies thus, there comes bad smell from the stomach and head, and blinds the patient. It is necessary therefore to use soothing fumigations for that:
none of the ancients have experienced fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument by which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this:
And it is to make similar to a dog, and place the subtle head in nature, and the large heads above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tar until it is roasted, and recommence another.
Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus the aid has been subtly stopped: it is necessary then to give to the patient who perceives it thus with his finger, and does not touch the spatula with the ague, and arrange the bandage so that it does not touch;
then put on the affected limb a mixture of wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it will not rest, then put or insert a piece of lead, and leave it there for days, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
And often these stoppings come suddenly from a wound or an abscess; it is necessary to cover that sudden one: if it be cured, as we have said about the falling of the spleen.
Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodes, and those that come from beneath the deep foundation are furrows, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
and when that node is ancient, it opens, and gathers moisture in a whitish or subtle swelling, and at no time are these fistulas persistent;
and they are known by the fact that there is a flow or flatulence when the patient makes an effort to eject, and sometimes suddenly jumps upwards.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the hip.
And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula by its foundation, and it does not hide. and it is that you apply your indexed finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or copper into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horse hair, until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from bad pertussis or evacuation or twisting or vermin, as we have said: know that it does not pierce badly; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is close to the bladder or near the urinary tract, if it affects the urine, and cannot be soothed by medicines.
If it is pierced just up to the joint of the thigh, then the probe comes just to the place; if there is no twisting and the origin of the pain is within, then it is that it is immediately swollen, and no medicine or sudden movement by anointing is of value;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure unless one works hard, and vanity of foolish doctors who get involved.
In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back;
and he lifts his legs up to his knees, and has his knees bent towards his stomach; then apply a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent goes.
If the patient feels it in the foundation, then it is necessary that you apply your right index finger, and afterwards it seems that the tent has penetrated;
and be discovered where you feel between your fingers the swelling or the flesh, then know that it is persistent; if one does not work carefully, one cannot heal it.
One can hardly ever fully heal some wounds, but this happens rarely;
and the help that one does, if it is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said before; and the entire hot iron is in the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, until you know that these burned scars are dry, which resemble a bird's claw;
and then treat the moist wounds with powder, until those scars are dry, then treat them with ointment, soothing and drying.
If he is thus healthy, it's good.
If this, no other way can it be healed;
and it holds within, and does not penetrate just to the finger that is at the bottom, and between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at what follows the covering of the hollow gut; If you cauterize at the beginning of the fistula, and cut beforehand beneath the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent; and the tent will be freed, and will fall;
then I will define those withered branches that seem a bird's wing, and none of them will remain.
And if you feel faint, and shorten between you and the vein, then cautery with fire or medicine is necessary.
For the fire cauteries assemble two bone things: it is to know, the dryness of those withered branches, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the treatment of wet tents in mud or in broken wood, until the juices flow out, and it makes the withered branches dry in the mud;
then treat the wound of the swollen fingers by applying dry charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
Because when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes almost to the font of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then cut off your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
If you feel the tension, and between there is the cloth or the suture or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways than the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
where you cauterize as we have said, or you sew just to the foundations, or if you can put tente and cure as at first;
and do not go too deep in the foundation, so you do not sew the holding that holds the foundation, and come to the gestures through the voluntary sense; then the cure, as we have said;
then the cure, as we have said; by chance it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the world then it is sewn from the deep foundation, or by tente or by another appointed instrument; then define that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can; Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the weakened part at the foundation:
Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the weakened part at the foundation: if it is lighter for the patient.
And often are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is or costs the depth of the foundation beneath the skin above, if you take a perforated tent at the head in this form: And you push the twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it reaches the head.
It is piercing into the margin of the foundation within, then pull out the thread of that which is pierced, so that you push with your finger or foundation;
and pull the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for a day or two;
and restrain it often, until the thread grips these flesh that are between two, and cicatrizes;
Then cure the wound so it is sewn up and healthy.
If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all ways that you can, unless it is too deep inside. For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the dressing wound if it is deep inside, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of the spine of the backbone where the fistula is made is very narrow and piercing; and on the other hand not, because one cannot cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Wounds are classified in two manners: where they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they cut short the blood flow, and there is one or more, and they destroy the foundation and at the head of the foundation;
but those that are deep have little moisture, and they cut short or a little of citrine water or a little of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those that have them deep in the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to stretch out to go into chambers, until the foundations issue forth, and they appear as threads; if you hasten, and he bends as tendons, or you hold it at your finger, then he covers in his roots;
and if the tendons cannot hold them back due to their moisture, if they take it to the apron, or to the cushion, or a piece of chamelot; and stretch them with your fingers, then cover, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are in the fire of cautery; or you cauterize as it is said or according to the chapter of cautery, then heal with other cures until he is healthy;
and if the fundament cannot issue, then clisterize the patient with a biting and harsh clyster to cleanse that which is in the fundament, so that it can issue openly; as the patients cannot hold themselves, and if their vein is outside the fundament, then the treatment is light;
as the patients cannot hold themselves, and if their vein is outside the fundament, then the treatment is light; and it is that you take them in your finger or nails, and grasp them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron. It is fitting that you adjust the bandage in this manner:
It is fitting that you adjust the bandage in this manner: Take the thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread above and make a piercer with the needle from another part, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, and if it is double;
and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to correct the superfluity of blood;
then put on the dressing a clean cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that he should rest;
and then let it cool down as much as it congeals, and when they are cooled, if they receive treatment of ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
to dry the wounds or dressing Often it happens that there is a burning of fevers in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help. It is necessary that you remove the point of a splint or of your nail the crust above, which does not let it get moist. then treat until it is sooted as it is necessary.
and if it cannot be sooted, then recommence the rubbing more strongly than before, until it is very healthy, and is scarred. then treat until it is healthy.
two fremits A formice is a small faulty appearance against the body, and goes very deep in.
and sometimes it finds the coldness, and one feels it as if dead from shivering, and it comes into all the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a thread from a bird's feather, or a strong thread of wild duck, and put that thread on the fracture, so that the circles penetrate the fracture entirely. then turn your hand around the entire thread so that you grasp everything entirely around the fracture, and put it in the front, and draw out the fracture from its roots.
And if you see, make a frame of a cord or iron in this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above. do not pierce, because you must hold at the finger, and press strongly.
And if you see, if you cauterize the fracture, as if it is before or in a chapter of cauterization.
Never make an injection of silver or copper, or of melted lead or vermillion;
and never use those small and large instruments, according to the ones to which they are accustomed. Those therefore which one prepares in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
Those therefore which one prepares in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the cluster, small and large, is above large, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and it has a displacement where the stomach is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived inside.
and it has on one of the sides two perforations, and in the other one;
and it has the stomach where one puts medicines in a bladder of beast or parchment, and is perceived all around with many small perforations, and has between each perforation one inch of space, then put in these perforations a strong thread twisted into an X or circle, and assemble the stomach as if it were a bag. and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front of with a strong thread, then cleanse.
and that's the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clister with oil or album of egg, or similar thing, then put it in lightly. Then the minister's hands are applied to his II (two) hands together, so that they may be entirely visible, then extract the cluster, and raise the patient's legs to the partition, and if the medicine wants to issue, if it can hold as much as possible. and if he sleeps a night entirely, it is a greater aid.
And if you treat the illness of decay of the stomach, and the medicine hastens to exit, then recommend it as much as it is healthy.
And if the ulcers are in the foundation, or abscess, then the cluster should be as subtle as for a child.
and it is the shape of the subtle cluster above where the skin can be held in place:
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds.
Now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by thrust of stone, and cut of sword and of knife, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things.
where wounds are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come into its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, beware if it is a matter of stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great, and you doubt lightly of a hot abscess: if it makes the cephalic wound somewhat healthier, meanwhile if little blood comes from the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the wounded part;
and avoid the patient's fullness of wine and coarse meats.
And if he does not want to heal, let his meat be diminished, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any flesh.
and put on the wound, if abscesses and ulcers come, a cotton moistened with rose oil or wine steeped in it;
and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, so it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
and if the air has moved it, put on some ointments, until it is healthy.
And if the wound is large, like a sword's cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tending, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and bursts, and no longer holds but a little, then cover it. then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as tested and roasted meat, also like poultry, and similar things.
And if you find a skin with putridity, and it does not adhere to the bone, so cut around the putridity entirely, and throw far away, then cure.
and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without delay, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so seek to cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, so tie it with a thread. and if this does not benefit, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which absorbs in this way so that the arsenic does not move.
And the manner of the powder is: Take incense, a part; Dragon's blood, two parts; living chalk, three parts, and powder subtly, and fill the wound, and hold firmly, until it adheres well and joins with all its blood;
and then bind well, and let it not swell; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
And at no time does one make a poultice of living chalk solely, when one has not incense nor dragon's blood, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the arrow has moved in the wound, meanwhile in this state, if you do not put a little of this powder;
but put on some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it begins to suppurate; then heal with other treatments until it is healthy.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you about the fractures of the head afterwards.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation from there is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be soothing, if you heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it also in warm water, and other mined remedies according to this method, and apply moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, sew it up with thread, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then prick or pierce at a lower level;
and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for that is the craft of surgery;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular, and the conduits are guarded, because the flesh goes, then sew the jugular onto the canal of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it firmly, and let no days pass, then heal the wounds of the joints so that they are healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it out; and if there are pieces of bone, seek them out thoroughly, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound festers, and separate and align the outlet;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then make the treatment thus as I said in its chapter.
If it's a cut from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if the wound has become putrid where the patient's ailment comes from: know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, put the powder on it at the first hour, do not bind it with a bandage that would hinder it from scarring deeply, and let it heal by itself, and cure the patient; but I apply attractive ointment, and the patient recovers twice a day;
and if you have no ointment, put a lot of cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more; if there comes no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart, it is not restrained by the veins of the arm; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is healed. Heal the thumb of tendons and other treatments, until it be sound;
and if it cannot heal, and close up, then know that there is a fistula;
if the treatment is as one ought. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front. If it is large, of stitching;
and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, so that it wounds, and the torn fibers if they are dislocated; and if they are not dislocated, let the wound purify, then ease the extractions;
and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
because of the rupture of the belly
The remedies for the belly are large, medium, and small;
of the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, because of the introjection of them;
and the stitching is more painful, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one, because one puts the intestines back in place more easily, if one does not put them back hastily;
Because the intestine swells so much that it feels cold, if it returns to points, and because it makes the inner wound worse, because one must reset the intestine to its place like others do.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
the two common stitches have in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds of the body and the two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and however they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will tell each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and a gentle thing is to put back, it is by one of the two manners: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is frosty, heat it up partially in this manner: Soak a sponge or a cloth in warm water suddenly, or you cook in warm water and squeeze and press, and stir the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
and many times make these wines restraining, and it is worse than the sole for dis-inflaming.
And when you see the inflammation departing, if you moisten the intestine with warm water or hot wine and evil humors are cooked, for by this the entry is alleviated a little;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with an instrument by which one collects the humors;
and the first treatment is worse than the surgery, that we should not perform it without great necessity;
and it's the instruments for the wound:
if you cut within the curve and do not dig too deep, and see there the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine leaps forward, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, then you can have power over it, for that is worth much.
When the wound is large, and it is on the part below the belly, then you must make the patient sit on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is on the part below the belly, then place the head and chest higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then arrange it so that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus you must manage what I say about large and moist wounds.
For small wounds, use what is prepared for you, then hold it between your hands, and minister gently so that you draw out all the corruption with your hand, and bring the lips together;
and it is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you prick with a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound I do of space, and I fix a needle or it has I good strong thread. and pierce the two skin layers with the two layers of the siphac, which is beneath the skin within, until you make them pierce from that part, and assemble the two heads of the siphac together.
then strain with a double thread between the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound together, and then leave I do of space, and I fix another needle.
then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not cease from doing so according to what you have need of needles, until the whole wound is restrained.
and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse, for the subtle needles grasp the entire flesh, and those too coarse cannot enter well: because it is necessary that they be moderate;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too deep into the flesh and soft skin, lest they grasp and open the wound before the suture;
and then grasp the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and place tents or drapes at the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and let them be until the wound is sutured;
and this manner of holding the needles is more convenient in small wounds, for it often suffices to have one or two needles.
The second holding is common, and it is that you assemble the two heads of skin and the two heads of suture together with one needle or have one strong moderate thread.
and when you will have perceived these three signs together, then reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner that one gathers the threads;
and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
this stitch suited the man, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was wounded by a knife, and it was more than a palm in length, and it was two palms deep, and it was in the middle of the belly.
I brought back the intestine then when it had been twenty-four hours outside, and the wound was sutured until the fifteenth day, and I cured it, and it was healthy.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not care for ointment, because I was in a place where one found none, nor any medicines; and I applied cotton to the wound many times a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healthy.
Now I shall tell you the two proper methods of cauterization:
Take the needle, and prick the part that is defective just up to the inner skin;
when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if you have placed the head of the siphac or cauterized or where you have pricked with the needle, and make it pierce another part of the inner skin up to the defective area;
and the intention of this cauterization is that you burn as the pelletier burns the hairs, and that you leave the siphac on one part, and take it from another, until the cauterization is entirely complete.
The second method of cauterization, which Galen describes properly, is like some people do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one head of the siphac to the other head, in this manner:
Here is the translation: Then turn the needle, and make it pierce the part of the finger just up to the nail, as the head of the second finger.
Then make it pierce one and the other part of the finger just up to the nail, as the head of the two fingers that are on the other side.
and it is a bad manner of sewing and the most common.
Galen says this in this passage, and no one bears witness to it, that one must sew the belly with two needles, or where there is thread in each.
and one must push one needle from one part, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew wounds.
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, it is a suture more grievous than those of other wounds of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus that the artery has moved, then reset the intestine and the skin;
then put on a powder of charcoal, and if the artery has moved, then put on no ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the filament, and sew up the skin, and the membrane; then cure the wound as with the others, until it be healthy;
and if you have no medicines, then put on, as soon as it begins to heal well, cotton much, and remove it twice a day until it be healthy.
For you have no need of another medicine in many dispositions when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the main limbs, then it is necessary that you soften a lighter oil in a warm temperature, or in rose oil, and put it among the joints, and beneath the shoulders.
and if it feels pain or bloating in the belly, and often happens, then they cleanse with black wine enema, and meanwhile the bloating reaches up to the intestine;
and pierce it within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it's because of the delicacy of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approaching of its nature to the kidneys.
And if the intestine slips out of the wound, then put it back in place like the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and turned towards black or green, then it is necessary that you lift the black area, which removes blood that does not come to life, for there are veins and arteries;
Then cope with the one who is between the ligament, and put the two heads pending on the part beneath the wound until it's far from alleviating the extraction when the tendons release, and the wound heals.
from the rupture of the loose bone
When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some homes, because I have seen that a man was hurt or had his belly pierced by a lance.
and it was the wound on the right of the stomach, and it was enveloped and became fistulous, and thus it prevented digestion and ventilation;
I put a cure according to what I was able, and did not cease from subtling until he was healthy, and the limbs were sound.
And when I saw him sound, I doubted that the patient had not been ill in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
and there are some experimenters who say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied up in such a way: take threads to large stitches, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has covered the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it holds its mouth shut;
and then they cover the head, and it holds so that it cannot come undone, then put another thread afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely closed; and sew up the wound.
That head if it is loose in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is coated from the intestine of a beast, in such a way:
take the head of this thread of intestine that is very loosened, and then tie it to the head of this subtle twisted flax thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper position;
and this manner of treating the frenzied is not further than according to the way of faith and expectation;
and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the intestinal guts, if there is no ingenious healing, because of subtlety.
of a fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it swells up, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it is hairy and bent over.
And a fistula is according to the true nodulation of hard and white scar, where one does not feel pain, and it is also curly like the feather of a bird.
and sometimes in clear shallow wounds, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times enough;
and I have already spoken about the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only because of one of the eight causes: it is to know, by the smallness of the blood or flow; where he hides his disease; where for that reason he has hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow any flesh to grow; where there is too much swelling; where the pus is putrid, and the matter is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; where for that reason the corruption is a kind of plague; where the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in healing, and weak by nature; where there are veins or bones;
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by hand operation.
Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and from the arteries, and from the nerves, or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and if it happens to come to the property of the prime member's ownership, and similar limbs.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are grievous wounds, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not reach almost to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it clearly, take a thread of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, if you wish;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle thread of lead, for the leads bend more easily according to the twisting;
and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot search it well by threads, then cleanse it through one of the perforations, for the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it is purified;
Then you should examine the patient's power, to know if there is bone or nerve, and it is cut off in the front, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when pressing with your hand, and the place where they feel it.
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places I told you about, then cut according to what I told you, and remove the faulty and corrupt tissues that are within.
and then heal it until it is healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you must cut on the front, as much as you can, then I put tentes moillies in medicinal agua, and the buttons just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluousness which remains at the bottom.
and then he puts ointments on the wounded place, so it may heal.
and if it is not healed by this, then he should be cauterized as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then he should be treated.
If a vein or nerve is injured or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then let the ruler remove as much of the corruption as possible, then treat the wounded place so it may heal.
and if it is not healed, and returns to a condition as before, know that you have not been misled until now.
if it uncovers and searches as much as you are at the bottom, and removes all the corruption, then restores the place.
and if it is thus healed, that's good. If you do not, know that the corruption is too profound, that you cannot come to it; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with bandages, if it is estranged from the suitable instrument to this one, and if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave even one;
and if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, if it is coped and moistened and fleshed, and delivers the bones.
And if you cannot remove them at one hour, put something pleasant on the wound to induce suppuration, and let it be so long as the pus is suppurating among the bones, and then you will have less trouble with the bones.
and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, remove only the corrupt part until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound.
and if there is a large part of the corrupt body, it reaches almost to the marrow of the bone; if you want to soothe and cover up to the corruption, and then treat until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that befell a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
He was a young man around 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the materials came to the leg, and he was afflicted with a large abscess, and there was no way to open it.
but the doctor worked foolishly on it so much that the abscess opened, and they corrupted many materials, and it became a fistula, and there came many passages that completely gutted and moistened the body.
and many times I mirrored the cure within 22 years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands, until I was called there, and saw his leg and the medicines with which one cures it, and those that corrode through the pores to great body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a citrus color.
I thrust a probe into one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the pores as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
I seized what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption, except for that which I saw;
and I began to restore the wound with medicines so abundant by long tension, and could not soothe;
and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continued corruption in the bone, and the decay, and then I stopped, and I thought to rejoin the limb; but I did not dare touch it more than a palm of the bone, and I treated it with all its marrow, then I restored it with medicines; and it was quickly healed and restored, and there was no need to restart the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I had of him. Because blood is often evacuated, but it was entirely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in every way, neither in going nor in coming.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: take the linen, and hold it at the head of the bone that is open, and instruct him to stretch it upwards; and put another bandage of a larger size than the first one, and bind it on the flesh that is above the bone, and stretch it tight, so that you draw out the corrupt flesh to the bottom, and discover the flesh on the spot where you see the sore, lest the sore bleed the flesh;
and put a tampon or a bundle below the bone to cover the corrupt flesh;
and it is necessary to suck so much that one can see and feel the corruption, and suck again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then discover the entire flesh;
then put a tampon below, and then suck from one part to the other the corruption, and be the sucker of the length of the corruption in a pouch, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and sew the bone or where it connects to the other part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other remedy than to amputate;
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand, or finger of the foot, if it is very strong that thing, but however it is necessary that you inquire into that corrosion, how it appears to you; and treat it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not cause opposition to you;
and know that the incision and the saws to cut these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the holes, and their size and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of work with his instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument with which you will have mastery, according to the knowledge of this art, and it will testify to the methods of treating illnesses; if you prepare the instrument with which you have mastery according to what is necessary for it.
The heads become putrid either because of density or because of fever;
and when you have medicated that corruption with the treatment of medicines, and it does not benefit, then it is necessary to amputate that member up to where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes by means of death, or by malice, which is a greater defect of the limb;
and the signs are that the members turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards they become putrid, then the corrosion of member to member spreads, and it takes over the entire body;
If you hasten to couper, and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as scorpion of sea and viper and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, then cut, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, cut at the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy but to flee from its power;
and thus always do when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, cut after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, cut off the entire foot; and it goes up to the knee, if it gathers at the joint of the shin.
and it comes from above the shin, if there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
and the manner of gathering or bandaging the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one ministering to the lower lien, and another ministering to the upper lien, and you dissect the flesh which is between the two liens at a large spatula, so much that the bone becomes uncovered.
then gather or bandage, and put a drapil of linen on each part, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy flesh, and comes to the patient with another wound and abscess thus.
And if a flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the flesh hastily, or you put on some restraining powders.
Then return to your medicine as long as it is accomplished, then bind the numb member with a suitable ligature, and heal it until it is healthy.
and I will tell you that he had a similar case at home in his own country:
he had a blackness that seemed to be burnt by fire, and this corrosion came first in his big toe, so much that it took over the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to amputate the foot, and was healthy;
and long afterwards the corruption returned in his hand, and he came to me, and I applied things that push back after the purification of the body, but could not stop the corrosion;
and he saw that I was going to amputate his hand, and I did not want it, for I had hoped to recover the material; and I doubted also that if I cut off his hand, it would not die, because the strength of the man was feeble;
and he despaired of everything, and returned to his land, and ceased to coop his hand, and was healthy;
and I did not count it as a failure because one does something else, if one is a master of it.
At no time does an abscess come on the raw flesh, and stays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then it breaks and bursts, and the pus jumps out, and clears the vitiated veins, just like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as subtle as I unfold delicate, and does not corrode until it reaches the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula";
but if it is so enlarged that it comes almost to the eye in the forehead, then it is called "fistula".
and the skin is so that you should cut around entirely, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a thin cloth. and do not be afraid of its corruption.
And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface, and the skin is thick with flesh, then the treatment of the abscess is thus:
look if the abscesses are large, and the pus that is in them is of foul odor, then the treatment with Egyptian medicine is thus made: take aesil, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
and then take of this according to necessity, and they make it in water and in honey, and in cleansing the wound, and hold back the pus; and let the medicine sit for two hours, then squeeze it out vigorously;
do this many times, until the wound is made clean, and the pus is removed;
and no times is cleansing with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and throw water on them, then boil, and cleanse, until you know that the wound is well cleaned;
and if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then cleanse with water and honey, or where there is a little bit of litergite powder; where you apply a mixture of honey and wine, which has the properties of soothing and cleaning, and the wine makes the wound dry.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleaned, then apply a mixture of what makes flesh grow in it, and it is that you take a plaster made with rose oil and wine.
where you apply a mixture of some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned in the treatment of ointments.
and if the hole in the wound is small, and the cannula of the syringe cannot enter, then enlarge it with a piece of iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or royal ointment, as long as it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too large, then sew it up and let it heal so that the cannula or syringe can enter, and if the hole that is above is gaping, then stitch it up or sew it below where it is.
and if you cannot cover the lower seat thus as you see, if it appears in such a manner that the bowel runs to the lowest place where it is, for when the bowel is in front, if he does not let it swell thus and if you cannot cover the lower seat thus as you see, if it appears in such a manner: that the bowel runs lightly downwards, and does not let anything of the bowel;
that the bowel runs lightly downwards, and does not let anything of the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and stretch over it a layer of linen that covers the entire wound; then cover the forces in the right place of the deep wound more large than at first, then stretch a soft ointment over another layer according to the quantity of the deep wound, and put it on the deep wound of the bowel, and do not remove the great layer until after many days once;
and he who is above the perforated chest, often opens for opening the bowel, and knows that which runs from the bowel, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digests, or does not digest;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that jumps onto the perforated chest, then knows that the breasts have been altered already, and approach the health;
and then dislocate it in the morning, or the third day, and when you dislodge the wound, if you change into another dressing, and renew the bandaging.
And if subtle wounds come after a long period of time, do not despair of health, for the healthy approach.
For there are men who delay in their wounds, and of those that do the opposite;
and if the bowel does not digest what jumps from the chest after many days, knows that the breasts have not been altered;
and if the sinews are slow to recover, and it is sluggish, you should apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, just as we have defined, because there is a large part of glass, and this is the last remedy;
take a definitive ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the extract of old wine equal in substance;
then make a confection and use it;
and this same thing makes honey cooked and thickened, when the definitive ointments are not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is on the fire;
and then glue it on the plaster, and stick it to the sinew, and no time should you administer to an Aristologist, but rather roots of celestial lilies, which are also like flour of vieves and a hundred; and for the use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I said, and for use;
and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard members, or in the ligaments; if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
Painful is an abscess that grows under the nail of the thumb or hand, or sometimes grows in other fingers;
and when it is neglected, and no care is taken, then the abscess comes quickly, and corrodes and eats away as much as it corrodes the root of the nail, and sometimes it corrodes everything;
and there come corroding sores up to the bone, as long as it brings putrid pain, and is the head of two large ulcers, and is the fixed color livid.
When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you cut off all the excess flesh that remains from the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh in, and it begins to point, and becomes white, then you must put the rhadizet under the nail that touches the flesh, and lift it up high, and gently and lightly scrape off the subtle flesh, and apply remedies burning and corrosive to remove all; then heal the wounds thoroughly until they are healthy.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then scrape it, and pull out fiercely, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
and if you see the two corroding, then scrape them in one of our ways as it has been said before, then heal thoroughly until they are healthy;
and if he is bruised, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary that you soothe him first;
then cut the splint straight away from the spine, and beware that the cutting does not reach just up to the flesh that is beneath the splint, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on which soothes.
The two adjacent fingers that grow together by chance in some men's hands are all cartilages, and by chance they have a part or they have bones, and never an angle, and none of them grow from the root of the joint, where the growth is in no way two.
He who grows in some node of the toe does not move, and he who grows at the joint of the toe, perhaps moves.
The cutting of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: Cut to its root with a broad splint.
He who grows at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold back from cutting.
In those that grow on the back of the toe, it is necessary that you cut the round cartilage just to the bone, then cut the bone to a convenient size for that, then cure until it is healthy.
The sudden swellings that come together at the joints arise from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn by fire, or from similar things.
If you know that you have taken out the splint, then you should restore it according to its natural forms. then put between two clean towels or moistened cloths with rose oil, so they do not stick together. or you put between two subtle pieces of lead, so that the joint is joined, as it should be.
They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you strike that joint as it is suitable.
These are large, enveloped veins full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come into many parts of the body.
and they occur more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry heavy loads, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes a purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil plant.
The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one is that they are applied, and one draws out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
The incision is thus according to this manner: Raise the first leg with warm water very strongly, so that the thick vein is subtled, then stretch the leg of the patient from above the hip down to the part below the knee;
Then cut the vein in I, II or III, with a large incision, then elevate and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood as the virtue of the patient can suffer;
and then lay him down, and instruct him to abstain from eating black bitter foods;
and recommend the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.
The elevations of the blood are thus according to this manner: Raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with warm water so that it becomes red, and inflates the veins;
and if you have no bandage, heat it with fire, and then apply it directly to the vein from the hollow of the knee to the part below the armpit;
then open the skin at the ankle, and strip the vein of its covering from each part, until it appears when one feels it;
and it is seen as red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
then push the vein downwards, until it is lifted from the skin, and then pinch it lightly at the ankle, then apply it to another place in three folds;
then strip the skin from the vein until it appears, then lift it to the branch, as you have done, and pinch it at another ankle, as you have done previously;
Then take another size, or many if you have a mastery of it, then lift it, and cut to the second toe of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second size;
Then stretch the size in size, until it is entirely free, then cut;
and if you cannot pull and lift, if you thrust a needle to the strong double thread, and lift and pull, and you thrust beneath the thread, and turn your hand from one side and the other, until it is freed; and beware that it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot pull or lift, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have entirely pulled, put on the place of the wound a soft cloth moistened with wine and rose oil; and treat until it is healthy.
And if his eyes are contracted and twisted and entwined together, and they are not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary to bend them straight, but do not cover them. and pull them straight as we have previously stated.
The shape of the iron with which one covers the eye is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not touch the vein.
and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would touch the vein, but be large as we have said, and this is the shape.
This vein is in a valley in the legs, in warm parts where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture.
and perhaps grows in another part besides the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from under the skin, as it grows within the body like snakes and worms, growing between the skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the joints, and begins to issue forth like a root of a plant.
When the wound is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth about an inch and a half thick, up to two inches, and the knee, and let the cloth stay on the leg, and every time it is not in default, if you envelop it around the cloth, and the knee;
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is completely issued; for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body;
and it often happens that this vein when it is treated with five palms of length, or ten, and a man came to me, who had an issue from ten palms of length, and when you cut it, the reason bursts out or perishes, and pierces to the bottom, so that everything issues;
and let the material that is within be evacuated, and mix in the medicine into the wound to prevent putrefaction any day, then cure it as with abscesses.
And often at this vein many times, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot is, and a lot of pus comes out, and from which it springs forth.
Cure the wound thus as we have said before.
of wounds that grow between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often has boils, and is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, ascending and descending, and one feels it well as it moves from member to member, until it reaches the skin or where it goes, and bursts forth.
and is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, like worms and snakes and lice and ascarids or belly worms.
and doubts about his evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance returning, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it cured and treated, if one cannot be sure when it goes:
then it is necessary that you bind the limb above and below with a strong and tightly stretched bandage, then cut into it with a sharp instrument, and if the vers is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire, so that it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, hold it steady beneath with a well-formed bandage, then cut into it, and treat it sharply;
and it is necessary to treat the patient with mild remedies of dissolving medicines for the bad melancholic humors, and beware of eating rotten meat in excess.
of the pain that comes from windiness This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from one member to another;
and I see this which I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
and I saw soon after, it seemed to grow as swift as a viper on the shoulder, quicker than anything, as if it were living silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place, and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then a little afterwards spread throughout the whole body, until it reached the other arm;
then I think she will soon turn inward towards the body, as I see it.
I was very amazed how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. However, I had thought that they would have moved the pain from one place to another, but I didn't think they wanted it, as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and because of this apparent constriction;
and it does not appear to be the case according to this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and reopened veins.
And when you want to cure this illness, and the patients feel that pain, it appears thus as we have said, if you lift up and down gently, and then cut into it so that the constriction of the vein is released at the spot. and cauterize the spot;
and if you do not see with your eyes, the treatment of those who expel wind, like foul-smelling pills, and serpent-like pills, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the limbs of the body where they strike.
Their diversity is that there are those with large points, and small ones, and curly-haired ones, and swollen ones; and of those with two edges, and of those with tongues, and of those where there are fragments;
and that which falls in no member falls in two ways: where it falls into a principal member, such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then into no place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about later, appear: it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many disposals; and when this bad symptom does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then extract it, and heal the wound.
And the symptoms of the brain when the arrowhead is in it and pierces the bone, then it affects the siphac which is on the brain, it is when there is scotoma and swelling and turning and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomittings of the colon; and perhaps it is without force through the nostrils, or through the ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice; and it jumps from the white moist wound appearing like a pustule, and it jumps out also as if bruised flesh;
and this symptom appears to you, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is not in.
The signs of the wound when it falls on the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. and sometimes the wound changes as if it were a pulse, and in a short time black blood comes, and coldness and cold sweat come, and syncope: you then feel without doubt that death is approaching.
And the signs of the arrow wound that never leaves a bruise on the skin are that without pus flowing from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and feels cold.
And if the wound falls on the covering of the thigh, it is between the small ribs; and it causes great anxiety and great pain and sighing; and it moves all the limbs of the shoulders.
And if the arrowhead or stomach, by chance jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the flesh.
And if the arrowhead or belly, and it jumps into a point of feces through the intestine route, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the wound falls on the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out fiercely, and the patient feels strong pain: you know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several more dispositions. When the vein is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because you should do otherwise.
It happens to the man when an arrow or spear goes into the root of the nail: I probed it, and pulled out another part beneath the fat of the ear, and was without sense or numbness.
And pulled out a piece of an arrow that had gone into the fat of the eye beneath the parchment beneath, and the arrow was removed, and could not be touched except at the tip towards the hollow, and it was a large arrowhead of a Turkish bow, with a very light iron wire without ears;
The game was successful, and no bad accidents happened to him.
And pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I softened the bristles, and subtly manipulated until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And pulled out an arrow from the man, which was stuck in his belly, and thought he would die;
and then when thirty days had passed, it did not change its condition; I cut around the arrow, and freed it, and pulled it out strongly, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow has fallen in his back, and the wound was sewn up above;
and left the arrow within him, and did not change its natural disposition, nor did I find harm in any of his natural functions.
And I saw another man, whose arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sewn up; and he remained thus, suffering great pain;
and many other similar things.
And pulled out an arrow from the king's prince's man, which was stuck in his knee, and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and it was the arrow totally removed.
I was called to the treatment after she had fallen for three days. I found the wound very constricted.
I sought a subtle pulse in her entire body, and did not feel it at all; and he felt numbness and pain beneath his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow; I put on the affected place a digestive attractive plaster, because the abscesses did not inflame. and the abscess of the arrow appeared to me.
and the abscess of the arrow appeared to me. I put on the plaster for many days, and healed the wound again, and the patient remained thus for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day within his nose.
and he told me so. I put on the wound a corrosive medicine for many days, until it was opened, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which adhered to the flesh.
Then I applied to the opening of the wound by that medicated ointment, so much that the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and it progressed well within four months, and then I relaxed if the wound was closed where I applied the tourniquets, and the swelling on one side and the other, and could not exit;
then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously make devices, until I took it in hand with well-made tourniquets, according to what its form would be at the end of this chapter, so that I treated it, and restored the wound.
And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, for the book cannot take everything in.
but the wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on what is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of the strange things that happen in this art.
I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed, except according to two manners: either through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and that which jumps forth by there where it enters, it is the arrow entering into their flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is porous around, and the outlet is cleared;
and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and move it every day;
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, one should prick into the entire forest subtly, so that the eyes within are enlarged, and then the tract.
And if the arrow has been repelled into the body of the corpse so that it cannot be seen, one should search everywhere for it. and if you feel, if it resists against any instrumental examination;
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve, so it makes sense that the wound is large;
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds, so cut the flesh that is attached to two parts of the muscle where you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can extract it;
and subtly take care that you do not break the arrow, so that you extract it more gently.
And if you cannot at one time, let it stay until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood makes you oppose, so amend what we have said about the treatment in this chapter;
and beware of the incision near the nerve and vein, and set in motion how you can extract the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently;
and place the patient according to the form it was when the arrow fell in, for it is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, so arrange it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears with no sign of it, or the skin is inflamed in that place if one sees or feels by touch:
cut then so much, as long as the tongs can grasp, and then extract: if it jumps out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;
and if the remainder of the arrow is there, cut around all the remainder;
and if the remainder is small, and you want to administer a cutting, if you administer an instrument cut, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument;
And then apply fire, and if the arrow is barbed, he applies the instrument to a precise point entering inside, in order to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it suits.
And if the arrow has struck the hand or foot or in the belly or in the bladder or in the ribcage, and it is close by, and you can reach over, he reaches over.
and beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your profession. and treat it until it is healthy.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the button-like head is like the claw of a bird, for pushing at the point of the arrow, as it is the shape.
There are thirty-one veins from which one bleeds, of which sixteen are in the head, that is to say: Two veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech". and the two arteries which are apparent in the two temples; and the two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspirers"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two gullets which are at the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and simple people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basalic, and simple people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilisk is on the right side, and they call it the "vein of the belly", and it is on the spleen, and it is the one that is felt, which appears manifestly on the groin.
And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and the anular, and if it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the hollow of the left side, and the second Sophene which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The wisdom of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient cataracts and migraines;
and the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the limb where the veins are like a rough cloth; then strain the patient's neck to a vision, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two vessels depending on the head: where the fingers give you pain, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of anemia;
then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand over the entire vein above, and cut through the skin and the vein well, two inches deep, and make the blood flow out until you see;
then strain and lift, until it is healthy;
and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is to emigrate an ancient vein, and soothing, and accustomed optalmia, and in the course of the bitter tears as the eyes;
and the quality of the health of the veins if it is so as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse beneath your finger, and then signs of an inflammation;
then lift the heart onto the vein above your finger's tip, and insert the lance beneath, and lift the vein above, and the cupping, just as you have done with the other veins, and make the blood flow according to your necessity;
then lay down the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then apply a formation, and let it be until it is healthy;
and we have already spoken of their coupling and their extraction, where the book begins.
The health of the vein at the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic area, for old facial diseases, and for migraines, and for redness;
and the quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting, so much that the veins appear; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and lay the vein as it should be healthy and never again will the swelling occur from a large flame.
In no way, it is not suitable for the flames to be too sharp; and the wound across, because the bone is near, and by chance break the flames when they are subtle.
The wound of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with the eyes, and the tendon, and the reddening, and the orifice in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
and the quality of their wound is that the patients strain their neck by twisting in no direction, as before;
then the wound, and let the wound be across, a little deep, a little long, a little wide of the flame, for there is no spot of flesh. And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
then make a correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then lay it on a cushion, and lay it well.
The wisdom of the vein that does not know how to cure, and suffers from being overwhelmed, and from facial diseases, such as migraines and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is chronic.
and the quality of the vein is such that the patient constricts his neck, then constricts his nose with his left hand, and takes the subtle flame in length, and inserts it into the liver in the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well in this way, and the blood will now begin to flow.
and do not go too deep in the fontanel, and make the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, for it is almost completely restored.
The vein of the two gundeges helps with the constriction of the wingbone, and with the beginning of messelry, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosions, and herpes, and similar things.
and the quality of the health is such that the patient strains his neck now one way and then another, as we have said;
and let the master stand above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a stool, then opens the vein of the arm a little widely, then draws out the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary;
then repeat the same on the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold both veins moderately, so that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
of the health of the livers The health of the veins above the liver is affected by gathering at the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks in the lips, and painful nostrils and within.
And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the leaf, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right leaf and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins;
Here is the translation:
of the health from beneath the tongue The health of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the veins is such that the patient's blood appears between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein:
examine then one and the other, and do not insert too deeply, because underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck where one usually examines are examined in two ways:
where we prick with a flame making a large scar, or subtly with an olive-shaped instrument as if cutting into the neck, and it is called "aneuil"; and they are large and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins. The form of the flame-like burning is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veined surfaces plainly with a lot of apparently thick blood, and that they contain a lot of blood and turmoil; and it's the form of the inflamed flame-like swelling:
and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for clarifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed moderately, and that he beware of the artery that is beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one should not be pricking the inflammation, but rather cutting in this way skillfully.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; where you want no vein of it, or you feel in its place the vein in the arm: it appears manifestly; and the joint at the flame anesthesia, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the vein, it is necessary also that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the place as much as you feel the pulse; then mark the place of the incision, and then stretch out the arm, and cut into the vein at the flame anesthesia; and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is an artery: avoid that then.
And if you see it flowing upward like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery: Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
and let it be on paw, and do not move it until it is healthy.
And if the wound is not cleansed, and it becomes infected, and the medicine does not present itself, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins returns; and cleanse the wound.
And take a dressing of figs, and apply it, and take one of the medications and place it well just up to the other joint;
if the wound is cleansed, that's good; if not, then make a cure, as we have said, with powders that cleanse blood;
and the cleansing remedies are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possibility of the ease of the arm.
The health of the vein in the middle is thus aided so that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be aware that he warms himself by the nerve which is underneath, and if he presses too much in the wrong place, and he cuts the nerve, and he swells and the healthiest becomes grievously ill, and perhaps cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, it is necessary that you anoint the instrument with oil; and avoid touching the nerve with your finger.
And if it has a vein between the muscles, then they make a scar far from it.
The health of the head is assisted, which draws blood from the head, and assists the eyes;
and it is necessary to healthily puncture at the flame olive or at the flame myrtle, because it is the safest of all the veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery. However, it is necessary to seek the lightest vein, and not to harm anything if one fails the first time, and one recommences. and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when one does not succeed at first, but it does not harm anything.
The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not maintained except by preserving healthiness and avoiding future diseases.
and let the health be done in one of the three veins that are or are touched: it is to know, cephalic, delestic, and basilic; and one must heal at the beginning of taking care of oneself in spring, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one must heal on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The healing that is administered for the diseases has no determined hour, but only when need is of day or of night, in all hours and at all times.
and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for less than four months until the seventh. Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that they empty the intestines of a lighter clyster, if they have much flatulence retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful matters from the principal members.
nor should one be cauterized who is too full of food, nor one who is drunk, as long as they are furious, nor dropical.
and beware of cauterizing after colic passion, and vomiting, and decay of the stomach, and multiplication of habitual abortive in a woman, and of travail, of watching and of judging, and all these virtues, or through some thing of the arm or of the body.
Then subtle the humors, if his sense is gross, by food and by drinks and by medicines, so you have little power over it.
Then enter into a bath, since nothing should be lacking, to subtle the blood, and you will be healthy from the vein of the foot up to the third, as we have said.
and beware of that day of labor, and of puncture, and of luxury, and of similar things;
and be gentle and joyful, and the healers should be higher than those whom one heals, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull out the ligament above, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sense.
and then rub the shoulder with your hands, until the veins swell, and feel them thereon.
then soften the healers with a little warm oil, then put their right hand on that vein beneath the shoulder a little where it wants to heal, so that the vein does not fade and fails to strike.
Because there are veins that flee away like cords from the sainier, and if there are those that are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these. and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be warned about these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the hastening, if the veins are not inflamed.
And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a spasm, let him stay for a day or two, and do not bind the arm. perhaps there will arise apostemes of heat;
Do not enter where it hurts, then resume the healing as it pleases him;
and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then stitch the wound itself throughout the entire flame directly;
and stop the bleeding quickly, so that the eyes are not inflamed; for it often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the eye inflamed, do not resume the healing, and put a little of warm oil on it, for it alleviates the body's pain, and is moderation in this wound that the oil;
and thus administer the warm oil in each healing that you heal the veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same thing makes a triangle and bulge of eyes, when one puts it on the eye; If you subtly remove the blood and separate when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often occurs, especially when it is not healthy enough to be opened at that time or the opening of the vein is small, hurry up, and place on the limb a moist sponge in water and boil it slightly, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has been let from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm him; and if you see, place on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calendula, Master, or similar.
And many times an abscess occurs and appears at the wound of the basilica:
place your hand thereon, and if you find the limb soft to the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance. Here is the translation:
but you make it firm by placing a plaster cast, then treat another wound, until it is healthy.
And take each one according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it issue forth until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it be until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it suits one who is full and strong, and has need of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and the flames are large;
and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits them to bleed less often, and they should be bled in a slanting cut, not in a puncture.
and this manner of bleeding is free from blood decay and nerve damage, and is worth more than the bleeding that is done far or wide.
And to him whose body fails at the health, it is necessary to give mild pain with juice of green apples. If he is hot, drain three or four pints of blood; and if he has a cold complexion, diminish beforehand the mild pain with syrup made from muscatel, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
And if he touches the healthy area, after a large amount of blood has been let out, it is necessary that he should have a broth made from meat, and a subtle and fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter on fainting, for evacuating the vein.
And if he wants to restore his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is afflicted by great pain, that he be healed little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
And he who wants to restore his arm after the first healing, and it has a strong course, if he is healed in twenty-four hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to heal from another part, if he must heal on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that is already hot, and it brings on fever; if it is necessary to drain a large quantity, and widen the pores so much that it reaches the pamum; then you observe all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse when it is healthy, so that death does not come into the pamum, and this has happened many times, when the healers are negligent;
and it is not necessary when you dislocate the arm, and to make blood issue a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully upon; if it is curved, he should stretch the arm quickly, for this would be bad;
but let it be until it bleeds a second time; or you hold at the tip of the flame, until the congealed blood at the wound of the vein issues forth, and put on the spot of oil remaining in the water, and press lightly upon it.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed.
And if you need to bleed twice, then let it bleed in the same spot, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein at the head because it is composed.
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, until the flesh becomes red;
then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then bleed now from the crossing, not too large nor too long;
And let the large wounds be, and be well close to the joint of the hand, and if you cannot issue from it, reset the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow in the warm water, until you have enough.
And if it is in winter, do not reset the hand in warm water, for they put it more in ivy than in winter.
And the wound of this vein is healthier than all other wounds, for it has neither artery nor nerve.
The wound of the salvation of the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Hold the hand steady, and put it in warm water, until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it. And if the wound is across, and if you cut through everything entirely, do not cause any harm.
and do not put too much pressure, for the nerves are very sensitive to cold, and then put your hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and it cannot issue.
And when you have drawn out the blood as much as is necessary for you, then put oil on the vein and sew it up hastily, and do this for each vein.
The sanity of the left hand is worth more than the disease of the right, and do everything just as I told you about the right.
The wisdom of the sphere is worth all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his blood is such that the patient's foot is swollen in warm water, and rubs against the vein until it perishes, and lays above the joint of the foot. and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go out in many branches;
look for the one that is larger or thicker, or at the ankle, which is more useful.
And if you feel the veins under the foot, beware of the nerves that are very sensitive, and the vein of traversing also as in a cupping.
and let the flames be gentle.
And if the sans cannot issue from it, then put the foot in water, and let the vein well empty itself.
And if the surgeons fail the first time, they start again from above a little, because the joints are salty;
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make it equal on the other side in harmony.
The joints of the sciatic vein are at the junction of the thigh, and its wound is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of his wound is such that the patient goes between bad and good, and extracts above the flesh in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
and if it opens, then the wound heals in all the ways that you can, and by crossing over; and it is worth more that you bind it, for the joints are sound, and it is much restored to many people's hands.
and it is worth more that you bind it, for the joints are sound, and it is much restored to many people's hands. And if you do not find it, then no vein of those that open or give two fingers, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
and do so much correction of the blood that you see, and then loosen the bandage, and put on cotton and hold steady; he is now healthy.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or of brass, or of glass;
and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
And this cupping without striking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
and cupping done by striking and extracting blood is done in 14 places of the body, where one is all in a lump on the head; and the others are in the neck; and two others in the sides of the neck; and the cupping glass under the chin; and the cupping of the two hips; and the cupping on the buttocks; and the cuppings in the two arms; and the cuppings of the two legs; and the cuppings of the two ankles;
and the cupping does not draw blood, because of the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one does not become faint, as when one makes a vein bleed; and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all fire nor sense of fire, in any disease that comes from excess, as long as the whole body is evacuated.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to cup, or by habit, if we administer them every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and within and at each time;
because there are those who, when they have a task of bloodletting, weigh heavily on the head;
and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are those who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit blood; and there are those who faint, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command to wait for three hours of the day.
The saliva of the mouth helps with the grief of the head … which comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it should be after the evacuation of all the body.
and this bloodletting is in the place of the saliva of the head, and it is not suitable for he who is of cold complexion in usage, or who has a catarrh, because it does them great harm.
and because of this it does not suit but the old man who uses it, nor those who have or catch cold diseases.
And he who often uses it, becomes oblique, and therefore it is suitable to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of obliqueness.
The ventilation in the neck is in the place of the healthy head and of the basilica, and because of this it is worth to strengthen the foot, and to mend the channel of the arm, and to touch, and to replenish;
and it does not suit to push strongly, for if it holds too firmly, then it causes obstruction or stomach or heart.
The ventilations of the ribs on the neck are worth pains in the head, and obstructions and migrations, and strangulations, and pains at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the healthy basilica.
and it suits that you instruct the healthy one to press his hand to put, so he does not cut the artery, and does not bring forth excessive bleeding.
The breathings from below the jaw are valid for a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. and it is in the place of the healthy lips of the two lips.
Here is the translation:
The breathings from the thighs are worth as much as the three large veins of the arm, because they attract blood from these large veins.
and instruct the surgeon to not make a wound too deep, because the leg is nourished by flesh, and it knows beneath the nerves and arteries.
The cupping that is on the buttock is worth as much as hemorrhoids of the fundament, and similar diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of a certain quality, so that it may well treat. and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break. and they make large wounds.
The cupping glasses on the legs open wide, for they attract blood from all over the body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and restore the flowers;
and they are in the place of two sponges, and of two clamps, and always they weaken the body after long use, and cause swelling to come in many dispositions.
The way to apply the cup is that you put it on empty, and suck at once, and put it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the place red and swollen, and feel the flow of blood.
then fire, and reapply the cupping glasses, and take heed of the disposition of the body, for there are those who have such a tender skin, and clear pores. if it is necessary to cauterize only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deeply. and to suck lightly.
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize twice: the first time to subtly open the way of the large blood.
And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time;
and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, then we suffice only once. And if we want a lot of blood, then we repeat often;
and if the wound is deep, then we cauterize deeply, and the terminations are such that the heart should be perceived suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have strangled pores, that you apply the keys of opening oil, apt and dissolving: If it is in this state, of violet oil, or of almond sweet oil, or of oil from cucumber seed;
and if it is in ivy, of oil from cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
And if one has delicate skin and large pores, it is not necessary to apply oil, but rather wash with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
And he who has much moisture, take away the essence of ivy, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities lift with old wine, or with water of elder, or with a decoction of nettle or of chamomile, or with other similar.
and it is not advisable to apply a cupping glass before the bath, but after the bath, an hour or two.
and do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he should be warned, when he must be cupped and when he is being cupped.
And beware of those who are being bled, for they are choleric, and if their blood is too agitated and inflamed. if it is necessary to take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the basket, and similar things; and mild poultices, and flesh of capon, and moist meats.
and mild poultices, and flesh of capon, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and mild poultice, and mild poultices and small birds and pigeons;
and the day when he will be bled, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat before bleeding, or afterwards, to comfort the main members; and let the blood be subtly purified, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The bleedings that are applied without hurting are those that are applied to the liver, and to the spleen, and to the podagra, and to the belly and the bowels and the loins and the thighs, for these members do not suffer from being hurt on the skin, and one does not do it except to attract blood from member to member, as we put them on the arms when the veins are healthy;
To open the viscosity which is in the limb, as we put ventoses on the belly and on the thigh to reduce the swelling of the limb;
and remove the pain, when there is opilation or stone, if remove by its attractive virtue by chance the opilation, or dislodge the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one puts it on the hollow and on the thigh when there is retained viscosity, and these ventoses are administered empty to suck out so much moisture; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain hot water is used, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a way that one fills the ventouse with warm hot water or hot water in which herbs have been cooked.
The shape of the cupping administered by fire is thus:
And it has two large and half palm widths from the fontanel, and it has a small hole on the side of the millet, just as if to push in a needle, and be careful beforehand lest you prick the patient when putting it on the limb;
and have in hand a rod of across iron or steel, to put a clamp in place, and be they great and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the blisters of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin than of the fat.
And should one then put this blister on the limb:
take the clamp of wax or linen, and put it in the blister across the rod that is in the blister, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the blister so it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and hold it in place with two strips that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, the vapors go out, and remove the blister;
and take the linen as before, and reapply it often, if you have mastery.
In the cupping that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, to every ache, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only slightly;
and that's its form:
Without them being administered unless in members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their smallness, like eyelids and cheeks, and similar places; and in naked parts of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the usage is that when you find cuppings that are in soft, clean, and sensitive places without pore, if you take them;
and put them in a soft and gentle manner, so they become familiar, and have nothing in the way of wind; and then be healed of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the bandages;
and when they are full, and attract, it is whether there or one can put a cupping, if he puts, for it is worth much afterwards.
If not, then lift the lever of axle, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and if the levers are too close to the body of the bandages, then wet the linen cloth in cold water, and put on, until the wounds are strengthened;
and if the wounds are multiple, then put on a glassy paste, or wafers, and similar things, until they are strengthened;
or you put on the lever a poultice of peas, and let them stay until they adhere to the lever, then it will staunch now;
and if you have more of this craft, take other sinews.
And if the sinews do not want to take, rub the joint with fresh blood, or stick an needle in so the sinew takes it, and then put them back, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will become firm.
and when you see that they adhere, sprinkle on a little of aloe and of sieved powder, or of ash, so they will cling now.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish wise men of this chapter do not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter.
and for this reason is estranged the knowledge in our land, because I did not find any good in it.
and I know nothing, except by the knowledge of the ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the knowledge, and by experiment, and by the practice of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two chapters before.
It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the wise men place their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or twist or fracture occurs, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so that nothing harms them completely, just like weakness of body, or infants, or old people. or if the tendons are not very strong, or too fragile;
and avoid eating cold joints, that is to say frozen meats, and meat of goose and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat raw fish, and do not overfill with foods that fill the veins with blood, lest you have doubts about a hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb;
if he examines the patient at their first governance that he has used.
And when the broken bones begin to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, just as if they were cooking in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and stomach of a calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For a broken nose, representation makes sores and most quickly the break.
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reset or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children;
but it is not a remedy, to reset the broken bone in the large tendons which are hurt and join the limb together, so that it becomes strong as it was before; and not to burden him with all points of his work, and therefore he must be nourished with thick broths, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Because the break of the head is different from the break of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of breaks. For there is a break that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, as when one holds a pen for writing.
For there is a break that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, as when one holds a pen for writing. And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks into a small crack.
And in each manner he has his engine, and his proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes into his place;
and it is known that the breaking of the bone is through that which the joints are twisted, and appears well by swelling, and sounds to the pressing of the hand;
and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
but it can well have twisting, or crack, or small breakage. If you do not want to move your hand, but rather apply medicines that come hereafter, and then gently restrain it now.
And know that the breakage which goes into the joint, and are the two disjointed parts, they must now be set in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not gather there.
and if abscesses gather there, let it be for a day, as long as the abscesses are appeased;
then set it in a position where you can lift lightly and knowingly, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of that which has pieces;
then restrain it, as it must be afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, whether it is of two parts, it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or to a string and to your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are reassembled, you reset by adjusting all the additions in their proper places, and take care that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust the two heads of the bones according to their best forms.
And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well:
if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come to make an abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is in place, gently chastise the patient so they do not move it, whether awake or asleep, or turning, or in any other way; and take care that the limb is so well secured that it does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not at all points, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain;
and take care that the limb is so well secured that it does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not at all points, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain; and keep him straight, so that twisting does not come when he is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Here is the translation:
For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar: it is necessary to envelop with gentle and subtle wraps; and those that are large, such as thigh and leg:
it is necessary to envelop with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the entire large limb, and hold it steady on all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness;
then one puts light stuffing, three or four according to the limb, and holds the hand a little at all the bandage, then goes above the fracture and holds it less, so that the fracture then slowly releases the fracture;
and soften the little finger a little at a time, until you grasp a large part of the whole sound limb, then take the other finger, and turn it back again around the broken limb;
then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first rule above;
then place between the swollen fingers linen or cloth strips, until it is all even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, then put on something that appeases the hot abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and let it be so for some days;
then hold with your stitches, and make a splint of a large cane rod straightening, or of wood where they make the cleats, or of palm branches, and adjust according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the staple which one places on the fracture be a little bigger and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it needs to fit the member's smallness or greatness; then hold steady against the staples just as you did at the first dressing, then tie above a thread conveniently, just as at the first dressing on the fracture; the more tightly it is held, so much the less;
and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax;
for if the threads are thick, just as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, and it's a great error, for the dressing cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that there be less than two fingers' breadth between each staple.
And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after the straining in their sound limbs, then put beneath them poultices of linen, or a piece of flesh, so that they do not become bruised.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
And beware that it is not suitable to strain the stars (joints) all at once, lest the broken limbs be injured further on the first day. For when the limb is large, it does not need to be touched with these forces until five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the post-operative swelling that suddenly occurs.
and see in this way the method of the ancient plasterers to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist:
and it is that you take flour that holds itself as walls of the mill, and knead it with abundant water, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common method of the plasterer restoring fractures in many dispositions, and even for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plastering that restores fracture and dislocation and twist: take abrasives and lanolin and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and myrrh, in this proportion; mirror and balms, anoint with; oil of VIII; and make powder, and mix with egg white; if the complexion of the man is warm, thus use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is valuable to many men.
Another way of plaster that is valuable for twists: take mugwort and wiszmelve, anoint with X; mirror and balms, anoint with VIII; acacia VI; armenic bolus X, and crush well, and mix with water or egg white, and administer.
Another way of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and alleviates the severe pain, and reduces the swelling of the bone, and the fracture: take a new lancet, and the embers in ash and oil, and place on the patient's body.
These plasters do not restore at first, but they are good for easing hot abscesses, and properly relieving the pains.
Another way to treat fractures that restores broken bones: Take dry fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to treat for the restoration of the bone fracture and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of oats, each a part;
and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are inflamed, mix with moist coriander water, or water, and use.
Another way to treat more forcefully than the first, when an abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of violets, and seed of flax, balusta, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each a part; and crush, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb for restoration more than a certain amount of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and says it should be between two extremes, not too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that one should apply warm dry cupping to the broken member, to restore it, with slightly hot things, like mirrors and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of plastering that is good for injury and pain: Take mugwort and herbs of decocted omes, or pens of bird's wings, and visnaga, and equalize them, and crush them, and make a plaster and apply it to the location.
And then lift it up a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not lift it up with gentle hands. And if pain comes to the location, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, if you hurry, and lift it up, and remove the plaster now;
and take a light drapery, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip it in water, and lift up the location, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is alleviated; Then let the member rest for an hour, then place it on a dry linen cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, so that you are certain of a hot abscess.
and reduce the inflammation of the member, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little bit of emplaster, and do not strain it so strongly as before. and subtly treat it until it is healthy.
And if you see that the abscess has cooled and reduced and pain and swelling are gone from everything, and you have mastery of emplastering and bandaging, then restart it, just as you did initially.
And if it does not come to the member any of what we have said, do not dislocate it further until after 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7. and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the breakage is evident, and approach the adjustment of the flesh above.
then restrain it more than at first, and let its flesh grow, as I have said before.
and if you see the dry limb more than a master is not, know that no nourishment can come to it; apply the warm water therapy, every time you dislocate it, and let it be each third day, and ease the ligament a little;
through this work then correct the nourishment to the limb, and quickly mend what makes the foolish mirror, which restores the twisted limb:
it is bad, and if it is a painful work, and I do not see anything else but to soothe the pain and to open it straight.
There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone breaks all the way to the underlying bone, as if it were shattered or crushed; and because of this it is called this type of bruising "haichure".
Where the spearhead cuts through the bone from above, sense piercing, and is called this type of bruising "absolute";
and it is the wound of these two large or small bruises.
And if there is embedded percussion, or fissure or break in the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
And if he has a persistent bruise, which approaches just near the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
And if the wound that is implanted in the bone as subtly as a goat's hair, and it is the small fissure, and because of this it is called this bruising "capillary";
and if the wound that is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of bone go down, and it is like the joints are when they make them warm, as the braziers do when they strike on the braziers; if between the bone within.
And this happens more to those who have a moist head of bone, like the head of a child;
and there are all these ways of breaking where small fragments are dislodged as if they were shattered. and I will speak of it in its place.
And we recognize all ways of breaks by the subtraction from them, and the inquiry with tension, and by the corrupt flesh that is on.
The similarity of the hairline is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and one rubs against it, then the black break appears.
In the cure of the break, beware of these accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and ague fever, and the eyes issue forth and redden, and other similar things in worse dispositions, so that one cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an accidental wound, and you expect healing, then begin the treatment.
And when the nave comes to you first, and it is winter, then you should open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane under the bone does not become corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
And if the breakage of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you mend the fractured part in this way:
and it is that you take hold of the head of the wounded patient, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and according to the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if a flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess bursts, it is with the help of what is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with soft medicated drapes soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the bursting abscess is calmed, and be assured of a flow of blood. Then begin within the bone to open, and it is done according to two manners of work.
One manner is that you cut at the narrow tail end beforehand, and it is the shape.
And then I use another larger cutting instrument than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse cuttings, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed.
and work lightly, so you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce within, in such a way that you do not administer cuttings with tareres, nor make them too deep lest they penetrate beyond the bone of the thigh, and should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass out of the bone.
and you must have more, if each one returns to its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have tareres throughout the entire test.
and it's the form of the three manners of scarifications:
The quality to perceive through the broken bone is that you put the scarification on the bone, and turn to your fingers as much as you know that the bone is perceived;
then put the scarification elsewhere a little after, and thus do it all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have as if grasping, pinching;
and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the vital spirit.
And when you have perceived the bone and drawn it out, it is fitting that you reassemble the apartness which was separated from the bone to all the other instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tenuous and more subtle than the other incisors;
and if it remains none of the small bones, no nails, if they lightly touch one of the instruments; then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have mentioned.
And another method of surgery is that which Galen described, which is more safe; and it holds very firmly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so when you have discovered that part, then put below the head of this curved incision, which is its form.
And do not cut on one side, and the affected part is on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently shape the entire bone around, and be very careful of the membrane that is underneath;
if it is close to the bone, shape it lightly, for one shapes it well without harm, and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is covered so much by above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to clear the scales with a subtle rasp, which you must have in different quantities, to prepare each location most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the break.
If you rasp with large rasps, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, you must adjust the cause according to its direction;
and it is a thing that is not readily responded to by one who has placed their study in this art.
And if the swelling is discovered, it is necessary that you take a bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled bandage in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first bandage; and make it lighter than you can, so that you do not irritate the swelling, then administer from above another string, and do not constrict it further than necessary to hold the wound sufficiently;
and let it be thus for a day or two, until the heat of the abscess is alleviated, then disbandage it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of vegetables, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things;
and of these things make powder, and put on the wound, and immediately administer Mondelfian's medicine without biting.
and ensure that the wound is immediately clean, so you do not leave it to suppurate, nor allow it to gather in a lump, for when the lump gathers on the membrane of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great evil to the patient.
for when one puts on the wound a biting medicine, it pierces through above. Take warnings therefore, no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if blackening comes from the medicine that one has put on, which has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and mix in the glue, and put it on the wound. then heal the wound with various kinds of cures that are necessary, until it be sound.
Know that some times the two parts of the nose are broken above, or one by the sole, for these are two bones;
and the cartilage beneath is not broken, if it does not make a false swelling or twisting, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must put your little finger or instrument into the nose, and match the break equally with your index finger, and by gentle pressure, so that the nose regains its natural shape; and do it gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the part above the finger, and cannot be brought to the joint, it is necessary that you put it equally at the head of a thick stick.
And if the break is of two parts, do it similarly, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscessed swelling is appeased, then apply to the head of the nose tenderly with a strip of linen, if the break is in one part.
Where you break one, another breaks instead; and let the sutures be so large that they fill the openings of the nose.
And they direct any restorer that one must soften the tents in burr, and change each day. It does not seem to me that it is good, but rather they should be softened with a concoction of egg white and powdered millstone; then leave the suture, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages are hardened.
And no one should put onions or eyes of garlic in place of sutures, and if there is a sweet dressing on top, and it holds the breakage, and soothes the patient within; or do what you see.
And abscesses that come to the nose while you are operating, if you put cerotate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of dyaculum.
And if apostemes (abscesses) come, apply an emplaster made from flour of sisament, and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the nose.
and if the break is small, and it breaks into minor pieces, then it needs suitable instruments to reset it, afterwards sew up the gash, and cure things that are bitter and harsh, suddenly, as we apply suitable plasters and ointments to it.
and if there is no inner wound in the broken limb, then the treatment of tendons, and I put bandages of plaster, until it be healthy.
When the jaw is dislocated, and there is no point of injury outside, and the break is outside so much, and it is not broken in two, except that a little lump forms inside, if one recognizes it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently adjust the break from within, and hold it with the other hand by force, and make it even.
And if the break of the jaw is dislocated inwardly, it is necessary that you administer extension of the jaw in that part, so much that it becomes even.
And if the teeth are dislocated, or loose, then hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on a double bandage. and place on the drapeau a large well-made staple, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and lay it on the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, then dislocate it again on the third day, and then put back in place what is dislocated; and apply a plaster there, of powder from the mill with abundance of egg white or flour of sediment, after that you have removed the crust;
and apply a light plaster there, and if the plasters stick, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy; many times it is healthy in three weeks.
And if abscesses or ulcers come, so manage them as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the null piece of bone that was dislocated; if subtlety of the ostrum removes cumbersome obstructions from it.
And if the wound is constricted, so enlarge it with a flame according to the need.
And when you have gathered all these pieces, and there remains none, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
The fracture breaks many times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three ways:
where it is broken and disarticulated into two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore;
where there is a break with a wound.
And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one touches the shoulder where it feels the broken fracture; and the other stretches out the neck towards the affected part;
then put the break in alignment with your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
And if you have need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity; And stand upright with strength, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put evenness on the fracture, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot straighten the head of the fracture at the back, because it comes in front, it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and put underneath the shoulder a soft cushion, and bend the ministers below the shoulder, until the bone of the fracture is lifted.
And then reduce the fracture to your fingers, and if you find fragmented pieces, it is necessary that you sew them together;
and draw the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any prominence, it is necessary to cut to one of the incisors that you have; but you put beneath the strength this instrument, to guard against the swelling;
and it resembles a spoon, and is not a cheesecloth, and be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the instrument;
and have two instruments, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, according to the routing of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones;
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if the hot abscesses come, apply a dressing with rose oil and in vinegar and wine, and put it on.
The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without injury, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of millet powder and egg whites, and apply light poultices, and put a splint underneath, if you are skilled in this. then take a very wide bandage of a palm's length, then put a double layer of dressing on top of the poultices, and the plaster. then take a subtle stick of three fingers' width and length, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage hangs down. and apply the staple to the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy joint, and underneath the sick joint; and the reset of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the staple does not move on the broken bone, if you reward it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if you restrain it;
and make the patient sit on his back, and place him when he sleeps in a small pillow underneath the joint, to lift the shoulder high; if you alleviate the fracture of the forearm by aligning the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not dislocate it again with bad accidents, until twenty days;
then resume the dressing, if you see that it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it thus, until it is restored;
and it is restored to the best within 28 days, and in less than any other remedy.
of the break of the shoulder
Because the shoulder breaks or dislocates easily when not in its proper place, and one cannot set it right except by touching.
if you adjust according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can.
then put on the limb powdered with mill dust along with abundant egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth. then put on a sturdy and subtle stick, a little larger than the shoulder, and so arrange the stick that it does not bump into any part of the shoulder, if you fill in with a layer of linen bandages, so that the stick is held evenly.
and then bind it all together with a strong bandage firmly, so that the stick does not move from its place, and examine the ligament every day.
and every time he anoints, if he holds steady, and puts equal the handle so it is far from its place, and guides the patient on his side;
and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number is accomplished, if you disjoin, and be careful, for it's not the bone that sets in place lightly.
And if a part of the bone protrudes beforehand, and not beneath the heart, if it swells up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscess hotly.
of the breaking of the foot
The bone is never broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end.
And when it is broken within, it declines to the underside, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks alignment, and suffers, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and the sensation is not good.
And the restoration is that the patient guides himself on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the sides of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to put equal in all the ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
Then put them on emplaisters and stoups above the subtle star of salt, or another light fusion, and envelop it in a drapil, and bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move. and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the treatment, and if it relapses, then hold it firmly.
and if it wants to dislocate, due to corrosion or prickling that comes to the joint, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and dislocate, and scrape off the emplaister, and address what has come from various methods of cures.
Then reset the emplaister, and hold it steady until it is healthy.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the fracture of the ribs does not come forth unless in large lumps after the back, and inside the head, and do not plead unless because they are slippery. and he feels well at the inquiry of the two.
And the treatments are that you make the break even, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery over it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain, and puncturing, just like in pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it reaches a point, and all and vomits greatly of blood, and this is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great effort.
And if there are those who say that they can administer foods that inflate the belly, to soften the fracture by breaking.
We do not make this, because hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived. And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
And they say that some of those whose veins are opened on the back, to suck out strongly, and this seems reasonable; However, there is doubt that the veins do not attract the superfluities on the back due to the weakness of its disposition.
And one must cover the limb with a warm oil in a hot bath, and place tents between the ribs to adjust the ligature inside, then it is cured of the treatment of pleurisy, of food and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone that pierces the membrane, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to open on the back of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to protect the fragile area;
and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then cauterize the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and apply a poultice, until he is healthy.
And if abscesses come, put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and apply them to the affected area;
and treat thus the affected area with what is needed to bring about an abscess, and apply poultices soothingly on the painful side where it ought, until he is healthy.
and also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortally wounded in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one holds them firmly and steadily, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's injuries are cured, so one may put a cure on it.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take heed if the feet are numb, and if the accidents that are in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation;
and when one has been sewn onto his belly, if it bursts with a sudden movement. And when he is swooning on his back and wants to settle, it cannot happen. Know that it is mortal: if he does not labor in his treatment.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightly.
And the treatment is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of rose or oil of May dew, so that it be appeased;
then apply to one of the comforting and drying plaisters, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until it be healed.
And if any bone becomes disjointed, it is necessary to cover over the heart; and reset the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then apply a treatment of ointment, softening the flesh, until it be healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you should put your pouchet in your left hand, and hold it evenly with your other hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the staple above, so you have mastery;
then hold it straight, and if there is a broken bone, fix it above, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Because it happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there is not much loss of amenity at the head; and make a long splint, and adjust it to the patient, and comes to the painful spot on the limb, and punctures, and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, so that you are above the breakage; and he knows what is the fracture and the shape of it;
and if the fracture is in the head solely, set the fracture equally, so that it is in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is too long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture may be facilitated. And when you have set it equally, put it on the plaster, then put it on a straight stick or beam, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move.
and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the binding is equal. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
And if a abscess forms there, do not touch it, until the abscess is appeased, and put on what we have said before. and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, so that there is no bad accident.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joints are those which are between the rib and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods.
where one is to take the full plain of the grinder, according to this form:
And lay the chains on the links, and they are raised high, and thus the patient is seated;
then he throws his broken arm on the log, until it comes to the notch, and has in the middle of a curve of wood, then hangs on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards;
then place the mirrors to the fracture equal with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his haunteril, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands the ministers that one should hold what is on the breakage with his hands, and the others should hold underneath all the joints, and extend each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold the ligature below the breakage, and above the breakage, and extend each of the ministrations to its part.
And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it should be that you place the soft lien underneath the notch, and another towards the cot, underneath the fracture;
and also if the fracture is towards the cot, it should be to place the lien lightly, without pressure, until the fracture is even on the limb, and on the cot;
Then set equal the fracture, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that abscesses do not form there.
And if abscesses form there, do not hold steady less than seven days, and put on a soft cloth in vinegar and rose oil, until the abscesses are softened.
Then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm at the joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
and put the bandage, and hold steady at the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, nothing disturbs it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use a straight line, and put on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers from each side.
Then hold steady on the stiles, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, more strongly and less in aligning.
And if you see the setting of the stiles, and the holding steady, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it stay tied up to seven days, as we have said;
Then look for three days at the bond, that it does not swell in life, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you hasten, as we have said.
And if no such accident occurs, then do not untie it sooner than after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put his hands on his stomach;
and put under the shoulder a cushion full of wool, equally thick, and look every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, nor are the bonds loosened;
If you advise through the power of medicine, and give the meat that we have presented beforehand, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle. and when it begins to recover, it should be thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg are taken in hand for 40 days of entire treatment; and then one must dislocate and administer baths and medicines of ointments to comfort the injured place.
And if the stricture is lazy and numb, it delays loosening for 10 days or 2 months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two twin" ones, where one is small, and it is the one that joins the wrist.
and the other is large, and it is the one that is underneath, towards the little finger.
perhaps the large "foscile" bone breaks solely, or the small one, and perhaps they break together.
When the small fractures are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings;
and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and worse than when they are broken and put together.
If it's a small fracture that is slightly broken, then one must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
And if it's a large fracture, it needs to be pulled stronger;
and stretch it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so the patient does not suffer any strain;
then stretch out the ministrations like arms to the part below his hand, or at the wrist, and another ministration to the other above.
And then he puts his mirrors equal, according to its best shape.
And if it's a break in pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is no disordered part that can be grasped by the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make it like the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; Take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration a suppurating abscess occurs, apply a poultice made from rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and apply the poultice subtly above, until the suppurating abscess is alleviated.
And then remove the wax, and put on an emplaster of powdered millet with plenty of egg white, then apply the staves, and let the stave of the fracture be a little stronger, and a bit larger than the others;
and know that it should have six staves or arms in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and hold more firmly on the fracture than other parts, and tighten less as you go further away, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages be those that are on the fragile and moist areas, and not hard or rough.
and let the bandages be those that are on the fragile and moist areas, and not hard or rough. and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said.
And rewrap the limb and the ligament after a few days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, as if a prick occurs which comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you apply warm water to the limb, until the pricks are soothed.
and let the limb not be restricted from resting.
And then resume the bandaging, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones disarticulated, and similar things, adjust them.
And if you take heed that the nourishments cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, it is necessary that you soften them a little, and let thus some hours pass, until the nourishments can flow in, and then strap it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not unwrap it for 20 days.
where he turns inward, then he bends his hands to his neck, and his neck is even, and beware of movement and jerking, and sleeps on his back.
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Here is the translation:
And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient's arm be crossed, and straightened directly in front of him evenly.
then put his hand on the stretched-out toe, and stretch out the ministers the broken bones, and put them in their proper places, so they are well-jointed.
and apply the plaster and the bandages, lest abscesses come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the injury. and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is in the palm of the hand towards the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken hand. and then bind with a long bandage, and let the splint be of soft leather as big as the plant of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a staple above, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then bind everything together around the hand, and tighten the bandage between the two.
And if the break comes to one of our fingers, it is the puffed up part, set it even, as it should be. and hold with the sole of the foot, and if you see that you put a small straight steel bar to lift the break, and do not move.
and if the break is in other fingers, like in the index finger or one of the others, set it even, and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after. where you bind them together in a holding position, which is worth more, or you put on a steel bar, as if in a puffed up state.
and take care in the restoration and in the disposal of hot abscesses, and suck out what comes from it, as I have said.
The bone of the hip is often broken, and one clearly sees this when it turns in front and behind.
and the restoration is when one lays the bandage on the fracture, and another below. The patient puts it on his face, then each minister stretches out his bandage to its equal part;
and it's when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the hip, so be one of the ligaments towards the thumb, and the other ligaments beneath the break.
And thus it's near the knee, and then the bandages are below the knee, and so is the extension downwards;
then put the mirrors to the bone equally with his two hands, so it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and there, where the abscesses come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down, then return to your work and your treatment; The treatment is done in such a manner.
It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture with a doubled bandage in two or three layers, and removing the superfluity, then twist the leg so that the heels come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above;
Then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the bruise these, and put a staple on the bone of the leg;
Then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make equal the constriction, then begin to bind firmly in three turns or four on the bruise; and when you go further above the bruise, and loosen less;
then you have two heads of thread that you had placed between the leg and the thigh, and bind three of these which are above, then return to the underside at the head of the thread, until you come to the bottom of the foot;
and constrain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that neither an abscess nor a swelling nor another similar thing comes. And if it happens, if he dislocates, and adjust what comes next, as we have said many times;
and if there are fragments of bone that prick, one must extract them, it is possible; and if one cannot, one must break the bone and make a fracture; and the treatment is as we have said, until he is healthy.
And sometimes the hip joint is broken in this way, as in the shoulder and arm;
in any case, in the restoration made thus, it does not bother the patient.
And it is known that the pulse is restored at the same hour, or almost less or almost more, according to the diversity of complexions.
Know that in the groove of the knee joint there is little bruising, but it often bursts.
And if it breaks, it's not just a crack, or a perforation, and it has to do with the whole wound, and feels wounded, and this senses a great pain.
And the restoration is such that one puts back in place what is broken at its joints, until it is assembled as well as one can.
then put on the plaster, and you put a round stave, if you have mastered it, and hold steady as it should be held, then reward all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar things. Here is the translation:
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "tibia" by right and the other is called "fibula".
and there is a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is like that of the equal arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely aside.
And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it is clearly seen. and it turns awry.
Then administer extension, and set it equal, and lay the staples equally;
but always, it is necessary that the break be gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust according to its strength.
And when you have completely finished your work, take two wooden skewers that penetrate the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the ankle.
then wrap it in two leaves of bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this binding the leg cannot incline to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
and anyone who administers the wooden skewers as long as the leg, and it is of wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done, it is in the fracture or where there is a wound.
and examine the leg each day, to see if there is a hot abscess or another accident. if you treat it until it is healthy.
of the break of the bones in the foot
At the villa, there is no break, but the bones in the foot sometimes break and sometimes two pieces, and it does not happen that they are shattered in many dispositions.
And if it happens that the bone of the foot is broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on the shin, where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their places.
Then put the plaster and stoppers on top, and put below the belly of the foot a small table at the flat head, then hold it steady at the foot immediately, then you have enveloped the drapes around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, release the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken, whether dislocated.
And if there are any broken fingers, reset them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand. Then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put below the foot that table I mentioned, and hold it steady immediately.
and if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the table steady below the foot. and let it be standing on top of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken. and search for each accident as it is necessary.
of the break of the bone one should prick
When the bone of the female nature is broken, if you make it sit enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and hold it from behind;
then fill the boil of the female patient with cotton wool, and put as large a quantity as I stood;
then remove the woman, and slowly lift the back part by part, and then jump the cotton wool, until it comes to the entrance of the female nature, and returns the bone with the stick;
and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton wool, and when she has urinated, replace it for her, and do this for seven days or thereabouts; if it will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie at the perforation a chain, and put all the bladder in the nostril; then blow into the chain strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nostril will restore the fracture;
then it should be filled with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healthy.
And when the finger bone of a man or woman is fractured, restore it in this way as we have said for the bone of the thigh;
and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who applies his study and his use, and heeds my book.
For the fracture signifies more than one disposition the right way of restoration: in giving guidance.
In the case of a broken rod, take an eye of a goat and apply it to the rod; then wrap drapels around it, and leave it three days or thereabouts, and it will be quickly healed.
from breaking with wound
It is necessary for one who has broken with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed now, so that the healings we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, if you apply vitriol, and you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come.
And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, so that the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident.
And if the broken bone appears above the uncovered skin of the heart, it is necessary that you put it in place gently with your hands, in slight extension.
And if the extension does not appear to you for putting equal in your hands, then take this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary in the mirror that he takes three or four, according to what he needs in each cure of a breakage;
and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not collapse from the compression on the limb in your work, and let it be pointed beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it requires that the curved head be placed on the apparent bone of the limb; and apply heat at one time, until it recovers, and let one be equal to the other. And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it requires that you shape the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, take the handle of a suitable instrument, whether it is an incisor or a saw, to your power;
then reset what is remaining in the bone of roughness and small scrapes.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
If it does so that it may be in its place, then soften it with a black styptic wine, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put anything on the raw wound or anything else that has oil, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption;
then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the splint;
and many times they have done this foolish glance, and they have brought it to the patient or death or corrupting none. and let the tightenings be more gentle and softer than the other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident has occurred, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, then it does not need to be put on these. but envelop instead, in the limb of these, thick dressings, and bind them.
And when you see afterwards on the third or fourth day, that the wound begins to swell, then remove what you had put on everywhere, and apply gentle healing remedies, as if applying Tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, so that it may be loose and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone is lightly touched.
And if it happens often, and it cannot be put back in place but repeatedly breaks the bone, because there are small pieces of bone, therefore it is necessary that you treat the wound with tension, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in his chapter beforehand.
And when the bone is broken, and opens onto the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar ones of the large limbs, do not treat it, for many times death comes, but let it be until it mends.
perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound, if you can.
and if you cannot, let him leave.
We often come across this after the health of the fracture, especially when it's near the joint, and it is a difficult thing to see the shape of the limb. and perhaps cannot make the limbs perform their natural functions.
Take care then that the nose is fresh: if you administer medicines stippled, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine stippled or with abundant water or with oil; and apply them to the affected area in poultices, and hold it well, and do not dislodge it for many days;
and apply them to the affected area in poultices, and hold it well, and do not dislodge it for many days; and then remove it, and start another, until the nodulations are eliminated;
where you hold steady on a well-made piece of wood; for the property of this stick is that it removes all the swellings from the limbs;
and if the swelling is already converted into hardness like a stone, and it needs to be pierced, then scrape above it, and make the surplus apparent; where you take it to no rasp, until it is pierced, and the treatment until it is healthy.
of a limb which is weak after the healing
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains afterwards in the weak and subtle limbs, it happens for many causes: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and the nourishments could not reach the limb; for a great many abscesses; or for too large movements, not putting it in its hour; or because he has little blood in his body, if it is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and ease;
then apply poultice to the limb, so that the poultice attracts the great nourishment, and the abscess often draws out watery pus, until the nourishment flows into the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
two limbs twisted after the healing When the limb is twisted after the restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not perform its natural function:
do not believe those fools who say one should break the entire limb anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
and these practices are blamed, and great evils come from them, and sometimes death;
anyway, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be risen from warm water, or that soothing herbs be applied, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and mellilot, and similar things;
and you make a mollifying plaster, as if it were well-made dyalilon, and you take the mush of vismalve, and mix it with grease of geese or oil of sisament, and apply the plaster on;
or you take fat figs, and crush them with flour of wheat, and similar medicines that ease the swelling.
And often is the nodulation removed by continually and lengthily rubbing with moist hands. And so establish gentle movement to each limb every hour.
And if the tortured is wrapped and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be freed from the iron, then it requires covering just up to the bone, with subtle and gentle incision. and put cushioning and study in the cure.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary to now reposition the joint in its proper place.
For if one delays, the limbs become swollen, and perhaps by chance one puts it back in its place;
because it does not require that one move it to the hour when it is swollen: many times it brings on spasms and other pains;
in any case, when this happens, if you make the patient healthier, then leave it, until the abscesses and ulcers are appeased;
then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the joints down to the feet.
Sometimes it happens that the jaws are dislocated outward, and the dislocations of the arms are according to two methods: where they are a little bit displaced from their joints, and softened a little; where they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entwines its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through better arrangements.
And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
and in such a way that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and push with their fingers as with a pouch from one of their hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands are stretched out, to put it in place;
and instruct the patient to soften them, their jaws, and move them from all parts. And the fingers make it even, until it returns to its place.
And if the reset is grievous, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are raised by warm water and oil, so that they are reset lightly;
do not delay the reset, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, if you put on moist cloths made of rose oil and wax, then tie them lightly with many ligatures;
and let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be steady between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, nor exert themselves too much, but take light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are knotted.
and then advise him to eat lightly, and not to strain himself by opening his mouth wide to chew and swallow, until the jaw is well-set and healthy.
And if the jaws cannot be reset to their place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural state, then fever and severe pain come, and perhaps a solution of stomach discomfort, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a bad sign; and many times died the one to whom it happened, within 8 days.
The violence cannot dislodge the bone from its place within the continuity of the limb and the foot, and it is often dislocated at the joint, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies comfortably on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then put on the plaster and the bandage, and bind it tight;
and the joint that is towards the hip cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates again, reset it to its place, as we have said;
Then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and thus the same is reset the head of the spine, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the bone to the rear; and the second is to the part in front of the chest; and sometimes it dislocates to the upper part, and that happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate within for the nerves;
and often it dislocates downwards towards the bone, especially to those who have little flesh, for they have a hasty gait;
to those who have sufficient flesh, let them puncture at the points, and re-enter at the points.
And sometimes it happens that some men have a blow or fracture, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated by this.
it is necessary therefore that you test them, as long as you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocations occur when it falls towards the axilla, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axilla touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their breast, nor move with any movements;
and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch;
and this manner of dislocation is not forced to be reset, when it is new, or if the veins are diseased.
And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient up high, then place their fingers beneath the ankle, and lift the joint with force up to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it up high, then place it beneath; if it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister will anoint soothingly and comforting, as with a decoction of wormwood and fenugreek and melilot in warm water, and it will be anointed;
then let the patient be laid on his back, and place beneath the ankle a piece of equal linen, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirror at his heel on the stick, and lift the head of the shoulder vigorously, and draw the hand of the patient.
and other ministers touch the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards; that shoulder returns now, and if you see it set according to this method:
and it is that you make the bone which is more prominent than the patient's; and be straight towards the rib, and push the shoulder down below the patient's seat, and lift the seat up high, so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the patient's hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And set it right in another way:
and it is that you fix the long stick in the ground, so that the head is also balanced as a pestle, and neither too large nor too slender; then it should be placed under the patient, but so that there are soft drapes above, and the patient is standing upright from the long stick;
Then his hand should be extended downward from the other side in a circular fashion, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: Take a stick of two feet in length and four fingers in width, which has the head bent to enter almost into the armpit, according to this form:
Then place the stick thus on the head of the fist draped under, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient;
and stretch out the arm on the stick from afar, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair from afar, and let the hand be extended downward, and let the body hang from the other side: The joint returns to its place now.
And when it is in, however it may be, it is necessary that you put under the axle a sphere of equal wool, then put the plaster made of powder of soft millet, with incense and album of egg, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the axle firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain thus.
And it is necessary to eat little, so that the limb may be comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described in front of this chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are pinched or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation which is towards the thigh, and the buttocks, or behind, if it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another treatment;
and heal until he is healthy.
And if after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowly in movement, so the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the neck
Know that the joint of the bruised side is dislocated at points, and at points it returns;
and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not well set, for one sees it clearly and feels it clearly; and dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the affected joint with the healthy one, if you can see it openly. For the joint is strained, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus, lest abscesses come to life, for if abscesses come to life, it would be grievous to reset.
and perhaps it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms should be expanded, and the hands of gentle touch according to the countenance inward, above and below, and bend the joint to his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fixes at the root of the palm the injured limb which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it, so that it does not move at extension;
then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide;
and when the mirror reaches the joint of his hand, if you anoint with some oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint forcefully, until it returns;
and when it is in its place, if you put a dry plaster on with some egg white, and hold it firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then remove it.
And if the joint is closed in its place, then dislocate the ligament, and let it go.
and if you see that the joint does not close well, then restart the splint and the ligament, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set. then dislocate it.
And if he feels grievous after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, then bathe it well and rub strongly, and press until it is alleviated. where you put on the joint a fat sheep's bladder, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into a bath. and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the bladder on again, and then enter into a bath. and do it two or three times, until it is healthy.
and if you see it, then place a warm compress with butter on it, and hold steady;
if it returns to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints. However, it must be quickly returned to its place, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limb is not swollen, or an abscess forms there.
And the resetting is that you put the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers, and the doctor puts them even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you check if it is well in its place; then put the sick hand with the palm of his hand on a table at extension and resetting. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the mirrors place their hand on the appearance of the joint.
If she returns now, it is good. If not, then strain of emplasters soothing abscesses, and let them thus begin to heal again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
if there is no other remedy than to strain by cauterizing in this case, and by chance it is not worth anything else.
And when the hand is in its place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, then apply warm water, and rub it until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
The fingers of the hand are dislocated at each part, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly;
then reset the fingers, and reduce the dislocation to your pouches as much as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed;
and let it be so on that day, and then make it even on that day;
and do not touch the bed, as we have said, and loosen it from the joint, and make it moveable, and relieve it of the bed;
and make it straight, until it is straight, and do all that, if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy;
and do all that, when it is dislocated from another part.
because of the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations come out with a bad smell, which cannot be held, and often some member is softened, either the two hips or the two arms or one.
And often the spine changes to four parts;
that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez";
The treatment is that you rewound the gibbosity that came from childhood: if there is no treatment or healing of the entire body.
And that which comes from falls or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatments with grand words, where there is no great profit in all.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the chest before, no one is healed;
and also that which comes directly to the ribs, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in an even level, and have a strap beneath him, so that he does not slip;
then stick the needle into the earth in a straight line, and another like feet, and bind a bandage strongly around the patient's joints, and another like thighs, and knees, and ankles;
and two ministers adjust the bandages, one at the head and others at the feet, among the two needles;
and be well closed, the needle as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine in a straight line, until it is revived.
And if it does not revive by this cure, take a tube of three cubits long, and place it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and insert the head of the tube beneath the patient, then put the middle of the tube on the spine; and place the mirrors their feet on the other head of the tube, and press well, until it revives to its place;
and if you see, if you do it to the twisted one which twists to the hand. And it is that you fix two splints to the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet the others, and between each splint, above and below, a palm-width space of a span;
and let there be in each splint a hole, where the twisted one runs, and let the splints be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move;
and between each two splints let there be a twisted splint, where the twisted thread twists, and let there be in the two twisted ones two small splints of a palm-width span, to twist the twisted one;
and then tie the thread that is among the straps to the twisted one towards the head, and the other thread towards the feet at the other twisted one, and each of the ministers twists his twisted one to all the thread, and the masters put the spine straight as we have said.
And when it is even, set upon an emplaster of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then a tablet of three inches long, that grips the limb of the gildedness and the part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient, until they are healthy.
and if nothing comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the tablet that we mentioned earlier; and often one administers it with a piece of plaster, and often the appearance comes in the rear of the spine near the back, and believe that it is a dislocation; and it's the bone that opens, because one must not have false presumption: by chance death may come.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out with dislocations suddenly, not slowly like the other joints;
and the joint of the hip is dislocated in three ways: downwards and forwards, and forward and backward;
and more downwards towards the haunches, and a little dislocated forward and backward.
And the sign of its dislocation downwards is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee at all; and it is the limb that is below the inflamed abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of the one to whom it comes to the fainting, are that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of the one who has it forwards, are that they stretch their leg according to its full length; In every way, do not double the knee sense of pain, and if one wants to make it better, if it cannot be beforehand, and retain its urine, and inflate the ankle, and when it goes, then it passes over the heel.
And the signs of the one who has it behind, it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor bend, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is displaced beneath the ribs.
The reminders of this type of dislocation are that you should rewind if the dislocations are old, and it remains according to its disposition, if there is no effective cure; and it does not seem that he has a good prognosis.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the four manners of dislocation, if you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, it seems that you should strongly bind the limb with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands under his haunches, then tightens with a soft thread on the hip; and another tightens the top of the thread;
and they stretch above and below all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of stretching is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If this does not work, then it is necessary to apply a treatment similar to this.
When the dislocation is in the buttocks, it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the hip, and the limb which is beneath the groin, then stretch the thread above towards the groin, and towards the strength;
then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large limb of the hip that is diseased, and stretch it to its former shape; if it returns to its place now;
and this type of dislocation is less severe than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft cord above the two heels, and above the two knees, so that the affected leg is extended two fingers more than the others;
then let it be suspended from the top of a beam, and let there be above the ground two long arms;
then instruct the minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let there be another minister hanging with the patient, who strongly embraces the thigh, for the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is in the hollow, thus guide the patient, as we have said in the one who has gilbositeit, and stretch the cord properly on the affected leg, and on the peas as well;
Then place two tongs, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix the tongs between the hips of the patient in the form. and have placed moist cloths around, so that they do not touch the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors set equal to his hand at the dislocation.
If she returns, it is good.
If not, put him on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the injured leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the mirror on the surface of the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the injured part downwards, nor lift from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, just as we have said about the positioning on the two hips. and let it be on his face, and the bandage is extended as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table; and it will be a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind it with a strip of cloth, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three days or four, then dislocate it, and apply the plaster on top;
and if you see that they are even, bind it, as before, and let it be for three days;
then dislocate it, and make it move slowly, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: it is to know, inward, forward, and backward;
and do not dislocate at all beforehand.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his knee to his thigh, and if it does not adhere to his thigh, know that he is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your two, then bend the two sides of the knee jointly; and another minister stretches his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it adheres well to his thigh lightly;
and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then release it;
and do not bother the patient to get up, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not at all, if administration is strongly extended, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, so that it be healthy.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the vein is swollen, and stretch beforehand towards the part where it is dislocated:
the reduction is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is slightly numbed.
And when it is dislocated from the entire joint, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and pull gently in the opposite direction through the thigh, above the vein;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and put the foot beautifully in place upwards;
and do it twice, as we have said, putting it in place and pulling the foot;
if it goes back into place, that's good;
If this does not work, we recommence the operation, for it returns;
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the passage firmly on the ground between his hips, and wrap the blankets around him, so that the patient does not move;
then stretch the minister's hip, and another minister stretches out the foot with his hands or at the lien, so that it is placed on the column of the foot; then each minister stretches out equally, and the passage is thus between the hips of the patient to retain the patient when one stretches it;
then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation with his hands, and another minister stretches out the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns hastily.
And when it is at the point, put the plaster and stoppings above, and strain forcefully, and place the foot on the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the vertebrae behind, so that the ligaments are not too stretched;
Then let him stay for two or three days, and hold his limbs steady.
Then dislocate it at the third day or on the fourth, and delay going to the patient for four days; And if he goes beyond that term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses swell up, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of two When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them nicely without exertion, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the two feet or toes, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat floor or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot forcefully, until he recovers;
and when it is even, and there is no opening, then put under the sole of the foot a board at two ends, then hold firmly, and let it stay for three days, then dislocate. and have them rest, until they are healthy.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and do not have long experience, and be pitiful and merciful and slow, not harsh;
and use soothing remedies at the beginning of things for a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, now reset the limb to its place, so that the hot abscess may leave;
and when the limb is in its place, administer soothing remedies for hot abscess, and treat the wound, as it requires, with dry ointments;
and if it is with dislocation to fracture, and often you will not be able to set them straight, even if you try to reduce the bone, do what we have said about simple illnesses;
and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body.
