After I have completed for you O Sons the book which is the ultimate science in medicine with its complement and having reached the end of it from its expositions and declarations, it appeared to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise, which is a part of practical application, that is surgery using hands.
Since surgical practice with the hand has been neglected in our region and our time: until perhaps its science perishes and its trace is completely cut off; and there remains of it nothing but small descriptions in ancient books which have been distorted by later hands, and upon which error and hesitation occur, until its intentions are obscured and its vision prolonged - It seemed to me that I should revive it with the ordering of this Treatise on surgical practice according to the way of exposition, declaration and abbreviation; and so that I may come to know the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of surgery by means of addition in their description and of their necessary preparation.
The reason why a good practitioner of this surgery with his own hand is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long and its author must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy which Galen described until he knows the structures of members and their forms, and how they are joined together or separated; and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and their numbers, and knows how they move, and of veins - both those that pulse and those at rest - and where they emerge.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that a name is great with a name, but small with a deed, and especially in the art of hand surgery.
We have indeed said this about it in the introduction to this book.
For those who are not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy, they will not be cleared of error, in which people are killed; as I myself have witnessed many among them who are trained in this science and boast of it without knowledge or experience.
What happened is because I saw a foolish physician cut a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck and he severed some arteries in her neck; thus the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead between his hands.
And I witnessed another physician who presumed to extract a stone from an aged man and the stone was large. It therefore reached him, and he extracted it with a fragment of bladder. Thus the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had already been called to extract it; and upon seeing the size of the stone, and considering the patient's condition, I knew that he would die.
And I witnessed another physician who was taking a fee from one of the Dukes of our land for his services; and it so happened that a black eunuch, who belonged to him, suffered a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the doctor hastened with his ignorance and bound up the fracture over the wound with plasters and tight bandages, and he did not allow any release for the injury.
Then he discharged him according to his desires. Afterwards he let him go after a few days and instructed him not to loosen the bandage; and he remained like that until an abscess formed on his leg and foot, and it resulted in his ruin.
I was called upon and hurried to release the ligament; thus tranquility ensued, and he escaped his pains.
However, the deformity had already set in firmly on his limb; I was unable to rectify it.
He consequently ceased walking due to the deformity on his limb until it perished.
And I saw another physician, who pierced an abscess filled with cancerous matter; it became ulcerated after a few days until its malignancy was magnified before its owner's eyes.
This is because when cancer is pure and comes from a melancholy humour, it ought not to be approached with the iron at all unless it is on a limb that can tolerate having its entirety cut off.
And for this reason, my sons, you must know that surgical work is divided into two branches: namely, operations which are associated with a cure; and operations where there is risk in numerous situations.
And I have already aroused you everywhere in this book to where the operation involves dread and fear.
It is necessary for you to beware of that and avoid it so that the unlearned do not find a way to speak about it and bring dishonour upon it.
Therefore take the measure with care and protection and your patients with ease and firmness; and go by a better way, leading to healing and laudable succession through God's grace; and abandon those dire diseases which are hard to cure; and remove from yourselves what makes you afraid so that hesitation does not come upon you in faith and gain.
It is indeed more conducive to your glory, and loftier in this world, and ultimately to your status.
Galen has indeed said as much in some of his admonitions. Do not treat an evil disease, lest you be called bad doctors.
I have now divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
Chapter One.
On cauterization with fire and with sharp instruments, systematic and ordered from head to toe, the shapes of the instruments and tools used for cauterization, and everything that is necessary for such operations.
Chapter Two.
On cutting and piercing, bloodletting and boils, wounds; on extracting arrows and the like; likewise ordered and systematic regarding the shapes of instruments.
Chapter Three.
On restoration and dislocations, curing twists and the like; likewise ordered from head to toe and systematic regarding the shapes of instruments.
But before recalling the operations with it, one should speak of its qualities and harms; on which constitutions it is to be used.
I say, therefore, that a discourse on the quality of cauterization and its harmful effects is an extensive, subtle matter, a science, and a hidden secret.
A multitude of wise men also spoke on it, and they disagreed among themselves; for me, a little from their discourses suffices, fearing prolixity.
I say, therefore, that cauterization universally suits all constitutions, whether with or without material; except for two constitutions, which are the hot constitution without material and the dry constitution without material.
However, they disagreed about the hot and dry constitutions with material. Some said that cauterization is beneficial for them. And others said the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for an illness arising from heat and dryness; since the nature of fire is heat, it is unsuitable to heal a hot and dry illness with something hot and dry.
And he who said the opposite stated: cauterization benefits all hot and dry illnesses that occur in human bodies; for when you compare a human body and its humors to the constitution of fire, you find the human body cold.
And I say, from his discourse: because experience has already proven this to me several times.
However, one should not attempt it unless he is already proven and practiced in the last chapter's exercise on cauterization practice, and has knowledge of the variety of human constitutions and the disposition of illnesses in themselves, their causes, incidents, and duration.
Among other body types, there is no need for concern; especially with cold and damp illnesses. For all physicians have indeed agreed upon them; and they do not dissent on the usefulness of cauterization for these.
And know, my children, that from the secret of cure by cauterization with fire, its goodness is superior to that of cauterization with burning medicine; for fire is simple, whose action does not reach unless to the member which is cauterized: and it harms no other member joined to it, save for a small injury.
However, the action of burning medicine reaches that which extends from the members: and perhaps it causes to happen in the member a difficult-to-heal illness, and perhaps it kills.
But fire, because of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless it is excessive.
It has already become apparent to us through experimentation, due to the length of our service and study with this art, and our standing on the truth of things: and I am absolved from the length of my speech because of that.
And if it were not for the fact that it is not permitted to reveal in this my book the hidden secret of fire and the quality of its operation in bodies by means of expelling illnesses, which it demonstrates with philosophical reasoning that would sharpen your minds.
And know, my children, that they themselves disagree on the timing, at which it is appropriate to perform a cauterization, and place greater value on the proper time with truthful reasoning.
And I say that a cauterization is appropriate at any time: for this reason, that the harm of an accident due to timing is submerged in the benefit which is drawn with cauterization. And especially if cauterization is done because of pains arising from necessary injuries, strong and severe ones that do not tolerate delay: for this reason, there is a fear that the worse harm will occur rather than a minor injury caused by delaying treatment.
And do not let it occur to your minds, o sons, that which only the laymen and foolish physicians do not consider, namely that for illnesses which are healed by cauterization there is not always a relapse: they regard this as its consequence but it is not so; for cauterization serves no purpose other than in place of medicine, altering the body's constitution and drying up the moist humours which cause pain.
However, cauterization surpasses medicine because of the speed with which it heals, and its powerful mode of operation, and the intensity of its control; and it is possible that there may be a relapse after some time according to the patient's constitution, and the location of their illness, as well as its severity, and what has been prepared in their body from an excess of humours within them, or what has reached them through acquisition from food, or similar causes unless they fall ill with something which requires cauterization.
A subtle illness in a limb which is caused by an excess of humours and moistness, such as the cauterization of a tooth due to pain, or similar cases may not relapse. But this occurs in few cases.
However, the layman's saying that cauterization is medicine's last resort is correct, but not as they intend it; for they believe there to be no cure which can match medicine or any other treatment once cauterization has been applied.
However, the reality is the opposite of that, and the intent, which is that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, it is not so unless when we apply methods of treatment for some illnesses and those medications are ineffective; then we perform cauterization as a last resort, and it works: from this comes the saying, 'cauterization is the last resort in medicine,' but not according to the intent that the general public and many foolish doctors understand.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the loftiness of its substance; and they said that the site of cauterization does not produce pus. But that is not absolutely true, for I have already proven it and found that it does not do so in some bodies without others.
And cauterization with gold is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you heat the cautery over fire made from gold, it does not indicate to you when it has been heated according to the amount that you desire due to the redness of the gold; and when it quickly becomes cold, and if you add more ignition to it, it melts in the fire and turns into flakes.
That is why the artisan falls short with it for the task; and because of this, cauterization with iron among us is faster and more immediate in terms of preparedness to perform the procedure.
And I indeed have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to topics, and I have arranged it from head to toe so as to facilitate the search for whoever wants something from it.
Head, second degree.
This cauterization is applicable to the dominance of moisture and coldness over the brain: which are two causes of headaches, and the multitude of fluid flowing from the head towards the eyes and ears, and the abundance of sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain: and universally for all illnesses that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, fainting, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The method of cauterization is to instruct the patient to first evacuate their head with a cleansing, dissolving medicine for three nights or four, according to how strong the patient is, and his age, and what he is used to.
Then instruct him to scrape his head with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands in the shape of a square so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that place with the cautery.
Then fire the olive oil cautery, which is of this form.
Then place it over the marked spot with the cautery, pressing down in a manner that your hand becomes constricted gradually, and you roll it around. Then remove your hand quickly, and look at the spot.
If you see that an amount of bone the size of a chickpea or the size of a stinging nettle has already been burnt away, then lift your hand up. If not, repeat with your hand using the same iron, or another one if this one has cooled down: until you see the bones I mentioned to you.
Then take some salt, dissolve it in water, soak the dressing in it, and place it on the wound: leave it for three days.
Then place the soaked dressing on butter, and leave it on until the fire-wound scab is destroyed. Then treat it with the four-herb ointment until it is healed.
They already said that the more a wound remains open, the more it discharges pus: which is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said to cauterise the skin down to the bone: and hold the cautery there until something thick from the bone burns.
Then scrape after what has been burnt of the bone, then treat it.
And others say that one must reach with the cautery to the end, until it leaves an impression on the bone like a seal stamp: or a tool that women use for putting small letters; and they believe that vapours of the head will escape from this place, and the wound should be left open for long time.
Then treat it until it becomes solid.
But to me, these two types of cauterisation seem suitable only for some people with a tendency towards fear.
And letting it be, in my view, is better for their health.
For the head becomes weak due to the dissolution of its inherent continuity; as we have witnessed in other body parts; especially when by nature an ill person's head is frail; and I find the first type of cauterization safer and better, so I use it; therefore work with it for healing.
Head: Three.
When a prolonged chronic pain occurs all over the head; and it is treated with herbs, leeches, clysters, oils, and embrocations. And especially if it has already been cauterized once with the type we described and none of those treatments help; then consider this. For if the patient's head is of a strong build by nature and not weak, but feels excessive cold; then cauterize it with another type of cautery underneath to a lesser degree. Then cauterize it over the entire horn of its head with a cautery that does not penetrate through the skin and reveals an amount of bone as we described. And cauterize it with one type on the occipital bone of its head, in a place called vas, which is where the windpipe is located; and raise your hand here, and do not reveal the bone. For the patient feels a severe pain from it, different from the pains of all other types of cauterization of the head.
And I will call this the Cautery of its Place; and it should be a cautery that is finer than the one used to cauterize the horns of the head and its occipital bone when cauterizing its centre.
Chapter Four.
When there is pain and swelling on the head, or when the pain extends to the eye, and it is evacuated with cleansing medicines for the head, and the rest of the treatment that I mentioned in the sections on diseases does not help completely; then cauterization of this condition should be done in two ways: either by cauterization with burning medicine, or with an iron.
Cauterization with burning medicine is done by taking one alum, scraping it and cutting off its ends on both sides. Then cut the painful spot at an opportune time with a broad lancet until there is made in it beneath the skin a place into which the tooth can be fitted.
Insert it into the skin so that it is hidden; then bind over it with a compress of suitable tightness and leave it for fifteen hours; then release it, take out the tooth, and allow the wound to rest two or three days. Afterwards, apply to it, an ointment soaked in butter until the spot forms pus; afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do it with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on caustic medicines.
Cauterization with an iron is done in this way. With the cautery fire whose form is thus:
The clavicle is so named because the shape of its head is like that of a nail, which has a certain curvature, and in its middle there is a small eminence.
Then place it on the site and hold your hand; you roll the blade gradually with speed, and let the amount that is cauterized by its thickness be like half of (the skin). Raise your hand so that the artery below is not cauterized, for a bleeding will occur.
Then soak a compress in salt water and place it on the site for three days; then apply a compress with butter; afterward treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this temple with the second knife-like extremity of the Cauterium. And beware of cutting an artery in this temple, not one that is old.
On the method of cauterizing an old temple.
When treating a temple with what we have said from the previous treatment and what we mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and the treatment does not work; and you see that it is insufficient for the illness what we previously stated about cauterizing with medicine or cauterization by fire, then it is necessary to use the knife-like Cauterium until it whitens after you mark on the site of pain a line whose length is half a finger, or something like that; and remove your hand once, and press it until you cut the artery and reach the bone.
However, you must be careful to avoid the continuation of the jawbone, which moves during chewing, lest the side or the nerve that moves it be burned, causing a spasm.
And remain above the cost, and take care of the arterial blood flow, which has been cut off. Indeed, its cutting off is feared, and especially by him who does not know what he is doing and is neither studious nor experienced; and he abandons the operation with him first.
And I will come with the recollection of the treatment for accidental arterial blood flow according to its manner and in this book's place.
If you see from the illness that it is not sufficient for him with this cautery, and you see the patient's body tolerate the cautery in the middle of the head, as we described, treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we said in the chapter on extracting an artery with a cautery having two knives. This cautery is better and more effective.
On the method of cauterizing for ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with solutions and other treatments we mentioned before, but the pain does not go away, then cautery by fire; this is called a puncture whose form is as follows...
Then puncture with it all around the ear as it revolves; or all around each one if pain is present in both simultaneously. And extend yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear for a short while, after you have marked the places with the encaustrum; and let the amount of cauterization be ten points in every ear, and so on.
Then care for the places until they heal.
The way of cauterization in Torture.
Chapter 7.
The torture which is cured by means of cautery is only of that kind which happens through the phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
And turn aside the cautery from that kind which happens through drying out and a nerve spasm.
When you treat this kind of torture with ipecacuanha, emetics, and gargles but your treatment does not work then it is necessary that you cauterize the sick person three times; once at the root of the ear, and a second time just below the tympanum, and thirdly where the two lips meet.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the sick part. Because softening does not occur unless it happens on that part which appears to be healthy.
And the form of the cautery is such that you cauterize with a cautery the upper end of the ear under the horn of the head slightly, and another on the tympanum; whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And leave your hand with the cautery until half of its thickness has been burnt.
This is the form of a cautery, and it is made from a lancet with the aforementioned shape; however, it should not be too delicate, as you can see, and there must be a little superfluous thickness to the blade.
Then treat the wound as described previously until it is healed.
The method of cauterising an old stroke.
When an old stroke is treated and you have taken care of it as described but your treatment does not work, and the patient has no fever, then cauterise them with four cauteries on each corner of their head, one in the middle of the head, and another at the back of the head, as explained previously; apply cautery according to the method outlined above.
The stomach bone is also treated with cautery, which is generally the final step in treatment.
Afterwards it should be treated as previously described.
Chapter 9.
The patient must first be given fresh drinks and pills to cleanse the brain.
Next, shave the patient's head completely and apply to their occipital bone a plaster of mustard seed as described in the section on plasters; repeat this several times.
This is the method of cautery; apply it as previously described with the same order.
If they heal through this method, then that is good. If not, then make three cauterizations on the back of their head, which are descending from the top of the head down to the bottom part of the eye; and leave a finger's width between each cautery.
Then treat the cauterization, along with what has preceded it.
If however you wish to add more and the patient is able to tolerate it: then make a cauterization on the middle of the area. If you wish to add more, then cauterize it above two corners.
Then treat it until it is healed; let the cauterization be anointed with oil according to the form which has been described before.
A paragraph on the method of cauterization for paralysis and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleansing of the head with hyssop, and with what we have said.
Then shave the patient's head; afterwards cauterize it with a cautery on the middle of their head, and a cautery above each corner of their head, and a cautery behind them, and three over the vertebrae of their neck.
If however you need to soften the patient's body with more cauteries, and they are able to tolerate it, and their illness is severe: then cauterize them with four cauteries over the vertebrae of their back, and the last one with a cautery until most of its surface blisters out of their skin, and lift your hand upwards. Then treat it until it is healed; anoint the cauterization with oil thusly.
The method of cauterization for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless their epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary that you first clean their brain with hyoscyamus, and with the rest of the treatment we described in the division: when the patient is strong or tolerant to accepting medicines.
But if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then give them mouthwashes and chewing cleansers for the brain, before that on many days with good food.
Then shave his head, then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, as preceded in the method: and another on his occipital bone, and over every horn of his head. If the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize them with the cauteries that I mentioned for one having paralysis, and a softening of the body over the cervical vertebrae and dorsal vertebrae: and let the cautery be olive oil according to the method which preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then place a fine cautery, according to this method.
The method of cauterization for melancholia.
When the cause of melancholia is corrupted moistures, and thick phlegm, then cauterize them with the cauteries that we mentioned for one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholia is an excess of black bile towards melancholia, and the patient's body is moist, then give them to drink what cleanses their brain, as preceded in the division: then shave the patient's head, and afterwards make a decently made linen cap like a circle.
Then place it on the middle of the head: and let the patient sit square and be held from every part.
Then present the ointment. And it is more worthy from old egg butter. And warm it over the fire with tempered heat to the extent that a finger could bear when inserted into it. Then evacuate it onto the middle of their head in a circle, and leave it until it cools down.
Do this for the patient once every week with the rest of their good regimen until they are healed.
Or if you wish, cauterise it by making many small holes in it, except for what you hold with your hand holding the cauterising iron: and let [the patient] be fasting.
For this type of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place over it a poultice soaked in butter, or chicken fat.
A way of cauterising that descends to the eye in water.
Chapter 13.
When you ascertain that water is coming from the eye through the signs I mentioned above, then begin and make the patient drink with something that will clean their head.
And protect them from all moisture, and make them sit in the bath, fasting for a few days.
Then instruct them to shave their head, and cauterise it on the middle of their head. Then cauterize it over the two temples with two cauteries if there is an onset of watery discharge from both eyes simultaneously, or from one side if there is watery discharge from one eye; and cut through all veins and arteries that are under the skin with the cautery; and let the cauteries be as long as the width of the temples: and beware of a flow of blood.
If you see anything coming out of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I will come with wisdom regarding the extraction and cutting of arteries, and caution against a flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two extremely hot cauteries.
The method of cauterizing for excessive weeping.
When the tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and they appear over veins and arteries that are visible on the exterior of the head, it is confirmed that this is due to an excess of cold and phlegmatic humours; then cauterize with a single cautery as I have described for the onset of watery discharge, with one cautery in the middle of the head, two cauteries over the temples, and two cauteries on the neck under two bones. And if you require additional treatment, then cauterize it on every side of the eye with caution, at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
The method of cauterizing for nasal odour.
When you treat it with what we have described for the division of treatments, and treatment is not forthcoming; then proceed swiftly, and give him a decoction made from crushed garlic in broth three times at night: thereafter shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized searing iron heated with oil. Then cauterize it with two clavicle-shaped cauteries, above the eyebrows slightly beneath the hairline.
And guard against the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the shape of the clavicle cautery.
On the method of cauterizing a softened eyelid.
When the eyelid of an eye softens due to disease or moisture, then you should cauterize the softened part with one cautery, using this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the eyebrows slightly with two cauteries on each side; let them extend beyond the temples by a little bit and make every cautery of the same length as the eyelid; do not remove your hand holding the cautery until one-third of the eyelid has been burned.
On the method of cauterizing an eyelid with reversed eyelashes that irritate the eye.
The cautery in this case is of two kinds; either a fire-cautery or a caustic-medicine cautery.
For the fire-cautery, instruct the patient beforehand to remove his hair if he is one of those who cleanses himself by shaving until it grows out and becomes even in length. If, however, they irritate him at the root, then bind his eyes with a cloth so that they do not move until new eyelashes grow in their place.
When they are born and equalized, then place the patient's head in your lap; next, mark above the eyelids of his eyes with cautery, a mark that is shaped like a myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the mark be near the eyelashes.
Then place over the eye a poultice soaked in egg white; or use a mucilage of psyllium.
Then apply fire with the following instrument.
Then cauterize gradually over the shape you marked with many touches of the iron, until the skin surface which appears just like a myrtle leaf is completely burned away.
And you will know your work is healthy when you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting, and the eyelashes rising at the wound of the eye.
Therefore lift your hand then; and let him go after three days.
Then place over the patient a poultice with butter until the scar is removed. Then treat him with an ointment until he is healed.
If any of the eyelashes grow back after this time and the eyelid becomes soft again; then repeat the cautery on that spot as you did at first.
However if the eyelashes are on the lower lid; then cauterize it until it is lifted to its normal place and equalized so that the lashes do not poke the eye.
Advise the patient to leave the hairs [after an operation], until they grow back and become even. Make a piece of cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Take an ounce of known soap and the same amount of un-soaked lime; then grind them together well, and do this quickly so that it doesn't get cold. Then spread some of it on the piece of paper you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one or both eyelids. Place a soaked poultice, dipped in egg white, under the eye; and let the patient's head rest on your lap.
Put your index finger on the medicine and press it gently. And move your finger whenever the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine; for its sting is like fire.
While you persist with this which the patient finds stinging, then stop applying the medicine and move it away with your finger. When the stinging sensation subsides, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Then observe if you see the eyelid swelling like it does when exposed to fire or cut; and if not, then repeat on it some medicine in an area where the medicine hasn't yet been applied and isn't discoloured, until your procedure is even and the eye contracts.
Then place on it a poultice with butter until the burnt skin is removed. Treat it then with diaphanicon ointment, or another, until it is healed.
And during the procedure, you must take care to protect the patient's last barrier [i.e., eye], lest any of the medicine falls into it.
If the eyelid softens after a few days and something irritates the eye from the eyelashes, then repeat the medicine on that place which is softened by its own eyelid, as you did initially. Treat it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And you should be aware that human eyes vary in size and smallness. Therefore, according to that, let your consideration be thus: the path of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing a tear duct fistula.
When you treat a tear duct fistula with what we said in the divisions of ailments, and your treatment does not bear fruit, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap and have an assistant hold their head between their hands so that it cannot move or be shaken.
Next, place a sponge soaked in alum, or in psyllium mucilage on their eye; then take up the cautery with this shape.
It should be hollow like the shape of an eagle-feather quill at one end, with which the cautery is done; and if you want it to penetrate all the way through to the other end, or upwards, then temper it thus.
Indeed this bowl is better for your purpose.
Next squeeze the abscess, if it is open, and extract its foul matter, then dry it out; but if it isn't open, then you must open it, and extract its puss.
Then place over it the hot cautery iron.
And hold your hand for a moment over the cautery iron from beyond the eye, towards the nose, so that you don't miss with your hand nor disturb the patient; then place the hot iron on the eye's fat and destroy it.
If therefore you make an incision with your cautery iron right down to the bone then all will be well. And if not then repeat the cautery once or twice as you need; and remove the iron after three days.
Then place on it a poultice with butter and care for it with drying ointment until it is healed.
But if after forty days it is not healed then place on it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone shows; and shave it according to what came before in this chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for abscesses which certain ancients have described. Note the position of the abscess and find it; then place into its crack a thin rod, that is, a fine cannula, whose form is thus: [shape follows]. And pour into it a drachma-sized quantity of molten lead; and hold your hand with the cannula securely, so that the patient doesn't move at all, lest the melted lead run or reach his eye.
You should place a poultice infused in egg white over the patient's eye, or in water.
For lead burns the area of the fistula, and heals it with a wondrous cure.
If the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good. And if not, it is necessary to administer a nasal passage, and redirect the fistula towards the path of the nose, according to what will come to its proper place.
On the method of cauterizing fissures on the lips.
Fissures often occur on the lips, which are called cracks, especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures as we have said in the section on illnesses, and it does not provide a cure, then apply a small cautery knife with fire, according to this form.
And let it be hollowed out like the sharpness of the knife.
Then place this ignited [knife] swiftly into the very fissures until you reach the depth of the cracks with the cautery.
Then treat it with a caustic [ointment], until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing an oral fistula.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gums or on the palate or at the roots of teeth: it then causes pus and breaks open; later, it heals over, but still runs with pus, thus forming a fistula; you treat this, yet no cure takes place, so you must apply a cautery ignited according to its size such that it fits within the fistula. Insert the heated iron into the hole of the fistula and hold your hand there until the hot metal reaches its deepest point and end; do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards with what we have said about treatment until it is cured.
So if the pus is drained and heals, it will be good. And if it does not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what comes at its head.
On how to cauterize in gingivitis and softened teeth.
When the gums are softened due to humidity and the teeth move and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then place the patient's head on your lap.
Then use the fire cautery whose form will come later so that you place the cannula over the tooth and quickly insert into it the heated cauterium: and hold your hand a moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire has now reached the root of the tooth.
And raise your hand; then repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
Then let the patient fill their mouth with saltwater solution and hold it for an hour before spitting it out.
For the loose tooth is made firm, the softened gum tightened and dried up, and the corrupted humidity healed.
On how to cauterize for toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, either there is actual cold or worms, and treatment with medicine does not help, then cauterization on the tooth itself is performed in two ways: either cautery with butter or cautery with fire.
The cautery with butter involves taking fresh butter and boiling it in an iron spoon or a small pot. Next, take a woolen cloth and wrap it around the end of a stick or probe. Then immerse the cloth in the boiling butter and quickly place it on the painful tooth, holding it there until it cools. Repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
If you wish, you can also dip the wool or cloth in cold butter and place it on the aching tooth, then put a heated iron on top of it until the heat reaches deep into the cavity of the tooth.
The cautery with fire involves using an iron or brass pipe. If the pipe has a thick wall, this prevents the sharp heat from reaching the patient's bone.
Next, apply the cautery with fire to the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery cools down.
Repeat this procedure several times; the pain will be removed either that same day or on another day.
The patient should fill their mouth with good butter after the cautery mark and hold it there for an hour before spitting it out.
And this is the form of cautery.
Scorch with whatever end you wish according to what is possible: and this is the form of the cannula.
On the method of cauterizing with hot irons.
When hot irons are affected by phlegm and cold dampness, and do not respond to treatment with medicines, and you wish to rapidly facilitate their resolution: then use a concave cautery of this shape.
Which has two tight ends so that the smoke escapes from one end of the cautery: and place it alight on top of the swelling once, and a second time if you need to, until you reach the bottom of the swelling.
But if the swelling is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling.
Then leave it for three days, and apply to it lard infused with vinegar until that which was burned by the fire is removed.
Then treat it with tooth-powder ointment until the form of the cannula is restored.
On the method of cauterizing with hoarseness of voice, and tightness of breathing.
When dampness is affecting the bronchial tubes, and especially when it comes with a cold constitution, then the patient must first be cleared out by means of liquefying medicines.
Then scorch it at night close to the base of the throat in a hollow place: and be careful not to reach with the cautery into the throat itself or anywhere on the skin except that spot.
Then cauterize it with another cautery near the neck joint at the last of his vertebrae ending here; and let this be a claw-shaped cautery according to the method, which preceded earlier.
Then treat it with what has been done before until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to cold humours, and the patient has no fever or consumption, nor an old illness: then cauterize him with two cauteries above the collar-bone in hollow places, gentle, empty ones. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let this be a pipe-shaped cautery according to the form which preceded earlier.
And if you wish your cauterization to be by pricking with a cautery called 'The Point', whose form preceded earlier for piercing ear pain: and let the points be from thirty up to almost forty in number.
Then treat it with what has been done before until it is healed.
And now let this be a three-branched cautery according to the following form. Why is cauterization lightened with it when you do three cauteries together as one?
Chapter 27.
When the head of the humerus is dislocated due to moisture, and it does not return to its place at once, until it gets used to returning, then it is dislocated by a slight motion which happens as we have already shown; then you ought to reduce the dislocation first of all. Then the patient should lie down on their back or on their healthy side. Then lift the skin that is inside the armpit upwards with your left hand's fingers: and if the joint is dislocated towards the inside.
Then have a cauterizer over fire with two sticks. Whose form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the shape of the cauterization will appear with four cauteries.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three sticks, which results in a shape of six cauteries: and the thinness of the sticks must be considered.
And this is the form of a three-stick cautery.
And sometimes one more is added to this method, which results in eight cauteries.
Then place crushed leeks with salt on the cautery. Then ensure that the patient remains calm so as not to move their limb until they are comforted.
And if the dislocation is upwards, which rarely happens, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a key-like cautery or multiple punctures.
For the joint is strengthened, moisture removed, and the patient heals.
On cauterizing the stomach:
When there are excessive cold and moisture in the stomach, failing to remove it from its constitution, with catarrh forming frequently despite continued treatment, one must place the patient supine on their back with legs and arms extended. Then cauterize with three cauterizations: one thumb-sized sub-conchoidal chest cautery, a clavicle cautery, and two additional cauteries on either side of the single one below, until the arrangement forms a triangular shape. And space them apart so they do not join when forming pus.
The depth of the cautery should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
The arrangement of the cauteries should follow this form without addition, and if you wish to cauterize with a large one in the center of the stomach following this form: use a cautery instrument shaped like a circle as such.
Cauterize the stomach by applying this frightening cautery after marking it with a hot iron in the spot and size you desire; then cauterize that mark, followed by treatment as before until healed.
On cauterizing a cold spleen:
When there is pain in the spleen due to cold and moisture, or thick wind, until it leaves its natural constitution by excessive discharge, and the patient is treated with what we have said above without improvement; one must place them supine on their neck, then mark with a hot iron three cauterizations like this shape, and of equal size below the spleen from the hypocondria where the tip of the elbow reaches. The space between each should be the width of a finger, and the length of the cautery that of an upright body; do not press heavily with the cautery.
And let its quantity be such that it is burned due to the thickness of the skin; the quantity should be half of what was added, and the patient must stand on their own feet.
If the patient is not standing, then let them lie down with their legs already extended and arms raised.
This is the shape of the caustic/cauterizing iron.
And indeed it is possible for you to use these caustic irons like a surgical knife when you have skill and caution in the art.
And take care not to proceed too far in the cauterization and burn through all the thickness of the skin, for it will thereby burn the entire body as well, and reach the intestines; since the skin there is thin, know this.
On the method of cauterizing liver abscesses.
When it happens and you wish to know whether the abscess is in the liver's flesh or in its membrane, then if it is in the liver's flesh, it afflicts the patient with a weighty pain without sharpness; but if it is in the liver's membrane, there is pain along with severe acuteness: and now you see that its treatment has tired out his doctors.
It is necessary, therefore, for the patient to lie down on their neck/nape. Then sketch the place of the abscess with a red-hot cautery; then take up the fiery iron, which resembles a rod. And this is its shape/form. And cauterize it with one cautery until the entire skin is burnt and reaches the bone, until all pus comes out; then treat it with the treatment of discharging [pus], until it is healed.
And one need not use this type of cautery unless they have an extended study in the art of medicine, and these illnesses pass through their hands with some experience; then indeed will they dare to perform such operations.
But as for dismissing it, in my view, it is better.
[Section title] On the method of cauterizing in cases of pleurisy.
The ancients said that the root of Aristolochia (birthwort) should be used as a cold cautery for pleurisy in this way. And it is necessary that you take from the dry roots of Aristolochia (birthwort), one longer root which can be found inside, and this should be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil; and light it on fire over the flame. Then cauterize with one cautery where it is between the fork of the collarbone and clavicle (furcula), and two small cauteries somewhat sloping downwards towards the side that lies under the jaw.
And two more cauteries where it is between the fifth and sixth ribs, sloping towards the back somewhat; another on the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And three more from behind: one where it is between the two scapulae; and two on either side of the chest, with the lower cautery lying between the two scapulae.
You should not squeeze your hand with the cauterization iron; instead, it must be held in a way that allows you to smell the patient's skin clearly.
Some ancient authorities have stated that there are individuals who use an iron cautery similar to a radius; they ignite it and insert it into the space between the ribs until they reach the abscess with the hot iron, and pus emerges as we described for liver abscesses.
But this procedure of puncturing with the cautery carries a risk that either the patient will die immediately or develop a fistula at the site which cannot be cured.
On cauterizing the head of the spleen: Chapter 32.
When you treat a spleen disorder as we have described under the section on diseases of the spleen and your treatment is not effective, then cautery can be employed in three different ways which are all correct.
One method is to make three or four cauterizations by drawing a line along the length of the spleen in the same shape as the cautery marks for the liver described earlier.
The size of each individual cauterization should be that of a finger's breadth or more/less than this depending on the particular case.
The method of carrying out the procedure should be as we described for liver cautery: evenly spaced out.
Do not squeeze the patient's hand with the cautery iron; instead, let him lie on his back with you at his side.
Another method of cautery is to ignite a two-pronged iron which we described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; raise up the skin that lies directly over the spleen where the patient's left elbow reaches when extended; and elevate it sufficiently so that you stretch the skin across his body so that the prongs fall along his length.
Then insert two very hot sticks until you pierce the skin from the other side; then withdraw the cautery instrument; thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with another cautery instrument having three prongs.
Then treat the cautery instrument after you remove it, letting it discharge pus for many days; for it is more effective than all that has gone before in terms of treatment.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of dropsy.
The cautery instrument must not fall on the dropsy unless it is properly covered with an asclit.
When you treat a case of dropsy with the methods of treatment that we have described above, and it does not respond to treatment, then it is necessary for you to cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another on the liver, one on the spleen, two cauteries behind the back between the vertebrae, one straight over the chest, and another straight over the stomach; and let the depth of the cauteries be approximately equal to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cautery instrument open so that it discharges pus over a long period of time.
And you will not discharge the patient from treatment after the cautery with it: for which two intentions must be joined to it; and healing will come speedily, by God's help.
The form of the cautery instrument with which you cauterize the belly should be a nail according to what has gone before in its shape; and that of the one with which you cauterize the back should be olive-shaped, according as its previous shape was.
On the method of cauterizing the feet and legs.
When blisters form on the dropsy patient and fill with yellow fluid, you must cauterize above the back of the foot at night, in the place which is between the auricular and ring finger; raise your hand holding the cautery, and do not twist it; then lift your hand, and do not repeat it at all.
The yellow fluid will flow out, and the cautery should be like this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be made with a knife-shaped end; and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other below that, about midway down the leg; and over the entire hip, two cauteries; and leave the open cautery untreated for a long time: so that some water flows out of it; then treat it with the rest which we have said.
On the method of cauterizing for abdominal pain.
Chapter 35.
When there is abdominal pain due to cold and dampness, until it weakens the retaining and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines; and it is treated with methods of treatment but does not heal; and you see the patient bearing a strong cautery, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach, as previously described for stomach cautery with a ring cautery, and four fine cauteries around the navel with a fine nail-like cautery; and one large cautery above the pubic region or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize it with a large cautery on a comb, and use the cautery on all of that area; perhaps you may also add two small cauteries near the stomach.
For it is a successful treatment whose aid does not go astray.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or just one, and they arise from thick, cold humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with what we have said in division, but the treatment does not work: then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower vertebra of the back slightly triangularly under the waist, and a single one below the navel about two fingers' width.
And if you think that their stomach is chilled and their food is not being digested, and you see their face breaking out in spots, then cauterize them with a large cautery on the stomach as previously described; also cauterize over their liver, and another over their spleen, with a nail-like cautery; leave the open cautery for some time; then treat it until they are healed.
Chapter 37.
When you excise an ulcer, then ignite the cautery which resembles a spoke. Then insert it while ignited into the excised ulcer; and your last hand [i.e., as far as your hand will reach], until you reach the opening of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice.
If therefore there are many carbuncles, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described. Then treat them by applying to them from among the ointments that which is appropriate until they are healed.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery on an alkatin, this is more effective for relief.
On the method of cauterizing fistula-in-ano.
Chapter 38.
When the patient does not obey treatment by incision and operation as we have described in its place, and is terrified of it, perhaps he will be healed with a cautery.
When therefore it happens to someone that fistula becomes old, and is neglected, pus runs from it, and corrupted moisture. It is therefore appropriate that you should examine it with a thin probe. Then ascertain the depth of it by means of the probe.
Then light a cautery which is similar in size (to the fistula). Then introduce yourself, when it is lit, into the fistula, and that part which the probe entered.
And repeat upon it the cautery, until they burn all those corrupted parts, once or twice or three times, according to the necessity of your situation.
And guard yourself against burning the nerve if it is there or the great vein; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not perform it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place; and you consider that it is not penetrating.
Then treat the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed, and materials are cut off from it, and this remains for a long time; then know that it has now healed completely.
And if materials are not cut off from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted bone deep inside it, or like one of those: the mention of which will come in its place.
On the method of cauterising kidneys.
When there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or thick windiness, and it diminishes because of that weak body, then you should cauterise them over almethenem above the kidneys themselves, with a clavicle cautery on each kidney, which has been previously mentioned.
And perhaps we cauterise it a second time at the almeidatu itself. Why will three lined ones come? Thus, they shall be more useful at the end.
On the method of cauterising the bladder.
When there is weakness and softening in the bladder due to cold and moisture, until the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterise it at the lower part of the suminis above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, with a right sumin cautery on one side, and another on its left; and let the length of this lateral cauterisation be equal to the size of the thumb's knot; and cauterise it with a lower back cautery, or two if needed: and let it be according to the previously mentioned clavicle cautery.
The method for cauterizing the womb.
When cold and moisture occur in the womb, and it is prevented from becoming pregnant, and her menses are corrupted, and their onset is delayed, and she experiences pain at their arrival, then she ought to be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with one cautery below the back over the alcatim, or two: and let the cautery be a clavicle.
The method for cauterizing the anus during dislocation.
When the moisture of the mucous membrane spills into the hollow of the anus, and becomes a cause of its exiting from its place: and its sign is that one leg extends beyond the other when they are compared to each other: and the site of dislocation will be found in it as empty.
One ought therefore to cauterize the patient above the anus's hollow with a similar circular cautery: after you mark with encausticum around the hollow as it turns: and so that the hollow itself falls into the middle of the circle.
If you do not have this cautery available, then cauterize it with three cauteries, using a large olive-oil cautery: and let the cautery's depth be according to the thickness of all the skin.
Then treat it until it heals.
The method of cauterization for sciatica.
When there is pain in the hip joint, and its cause is cold and dampness: and if treating the patient with what we have said earlier does not help and the condition persists, then it is necessary to rid the patient of gross humours with fetid pills or artificial pills and similar things. Then cauterize him/her.
And the method of cauterization on it is according to two methods: either a cauterizing agent with adhering medicines or a cauterizing iron with fire.
A cauterizing iron with fire is according to many methods.
One of which is that the cauterizing irons are placed over the hip joint in three triangular shapes, according to this form: [drawing not included] And make them of good or bad depth. And let the space between each cauterization be the size of a fingertip, and let it be an olive-oil cauterization.
Sometimes there is also a cauterization in the middle, right on top of the hip joint. Because there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose shape previously appeared in the cauterization for hip dislocation, make it so that the circle contains the entire hip.
And burn away all of the thickness of the skin.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is attached to the hip itself and does not extend down into the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauterizations over the hip, over the place where the patient indicates pain is felt, and with your own cautery over the shinbone four fingers away from the outer side: and let the cauterization be done with a knife.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends near the toes, then cauterize it where they indicate with a single-point, three-point, four-point or multi-point cautery, as needed.
And if they indicate pain beneath the knee towards the leg, then cauterize it there with a single knife-point cautery.
And be careful in all your cautery procedures not to press down hard enough with the cautery that you burn nerves or a large artery, and thereby cause harm to the patient through severe damage or contraction.
And I myself have seen one and another among those who cauterized over the shinbone and pressed too hard in their cautery procedure, and the leg became swollen until the swelling reached the foot, and it ruptured entirely, and the entire foot was destroyed: then there occurred an abdominal hernia, and death soon after.
If the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise men have said about the cautery of the shoulder that this is its method. Make a similar iron cup with a diameter of half a palm's width: and let it be at its opening the thickness of a finger's core or less by a little bit: and inside this cup let there be another third cup.
And there should be the space equivalent to that between every finger according to the quantity of the knuckle of the thumb; and they must be open on both sides; and their height ought to be that of a knot, or two knots; and make for them handles out of iron, decently fitted into the scoops.
Then it is held in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks; then place it on a jar of vinegar with the affected limb resting weakly on the healthy side. Scorch him therefore with three round cauteries at one sitting.
Then leave it alone for three days. Afterwards plaster with butter; and leave the wound open many days. Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says of this kind of cautery, my sons, we have made little use because of the fearsome look of it; and also because there are few whom we find will await its application.
Nevertheless it is among the good cauterizations for him who suffers it; and he will find its place useful.
But if the cautery is to be used with medicinals then you should make two scoops having a perforated band which descends into the hinge of its door from brass or iron, as long as the wall; and their height ought to be that of two knots, or like themselves.
And there should be the space equivalent to that between each other according to the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they must be open below and above; and it is such as will contain one another, according to this shape.
Then place it on an anchor jar, with the patient lying on their healthy side. And press your hand firmly over the anchor jar. Then pour between the two circles some hot water, heated with fire for a while, and keep it there for a time equivalent to an hour; let the patient bear its bite and burning, for they find its bite like that of fire until the biting ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument, and wipe away all hot water from the anchor with fresh water; then leave it for three days.
And place butter over it until the burning blackness is removed; then leave it for a few days, and there will be pus coming out of it. For this is the final part of the treatment.
Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg: make for them a statue containing water where it is affected by the pain, just as you did for the anchor jar equally.
And this is how hot water should be used; I have already written it down in the book of pharmaceutical corrections. Take equal parts of alkali and unslaked lime; grind both, then place them in a new pot with its lower part pierced by one small hole according to the size that would fit a radius bone inside it: place under the bottom of this pot another worn-out pot: pour over the alkali and lime fresh water until they are submerged by an inch. After which you press it firmly with your hand; leave the pots as such until cold water comes out from the lower part of the worn-out jar.
Then pour all that water onto another lime and cook it until it becomes new again.
It will then be very strong caustic that is used in many medical procedures and in cauterizing other body parts. Because it produces the effect of fire itself.
And they are among the medicines with which the ancha is cauterized; also like tesisie, and wild honey, and lime mixed with soap so that both are combined.
And indeed Galen told about the treatment of an ancient man who was cured of pain in the hip and sciatic vein; and he praised it as being very effective. He said that he did not require any other treatment and was healed with a single application of the medicine until he reported that perhaps he entered a bath while carrying it, and left already healed.
And it is to be taken from green setaragi; and if you cannot find the green type then use a dry fresh one instead, grinding it with some fat and applying it to wherever there is pain in the hip, leg or thigh; bandaging it for three hours or as long as the patient can bear the burning sensation. Then place him in a bath.
When his body is damp, place him on a couch. For the pain goes away and he heals.
And you should know that no one should use an iron cauterizer with these medicines unless after the body has been evacuated.
And Dioscorides who said that goat dung, when it is used to cauterize the sciatic vein, benefits it; and it becomes a caustic agent in this way. Wool should be taken and soaked in old oil, then placed on the deep spot located between the big toe and the one next to it.
Then take dry goat dung and ignite it in the fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place [the charcoal] on top of the wool and leave it there until it is extinguished. Then repeat this process. Therefore, you should not cease doing this until sensation returns to the affected area via movement up to the groin, and the pain is alleviated.
And this manner of cautery is called the 'Goat Cautery'.
Concerning the cauterization for back pain.
At times, pain occurs in the back due to many causeseither by accident or impact, or due to superfluous evacuation (of bodily waste), and similar occurrences caused by an influx of cold and moist matter: and cauterization is not suitable except for this one type, which results from the influx of cold matter.
Therefore, after the patient's evacuation with foul-smelling pills or similar, three lines should be drawn across the back where there is pain according to the width of the patient's thumb, and once marked with encaustic [paint], five cauterizations (or more depending on the quantity that results from the tolerance of the patient's strength) are applied along each line; and this cauterization should be done using a cautery needle.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a clavate central cautery, according to this form.
On the method of cauterization at the beginning of a hernia.
This illness often occurs in small children.
And the sign of its beginning in boys is: when it happens to him as a tightening with shortness of breath during exertion, and movement; and you find at the lower end of the spine and its knobs, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When you see it like this and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery according to this form.
And let the cautery cover all parts of the vertebra equally; and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a two or three-pronged cautery, and let the prongs be close to each other.
Then treat the area until it heals with what we have said.
And beware of using the cautery on a hernia that is caused by a spasm of nerve.
On the method of cauterization for podagra and joint pains.
When joint pains are caused by cold humidity that overflows to any part of the body, then when they happen to the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it podagra specifically.
When gout caused by cold is treated with the methods of cure and the pain does not go away, then the cautery removes it.
And it is necessary that you cauterize him after evacuation at the joints of the feet with many cauteries; and let the cautery be olive-shaped.
And if you need to make a puncture over the surface of the foot, then use the dot-shaped cautery. If the pain rises up to the knees or other joints, and this happens frequently, then cauterize it over each knee with three cauteries, or four on every side, using the same Claw-shaped cautery.
But if more of this cautery is necessary, then cauterize it. And do not plunge your hand with the cautery, but let it be about as thick as the skin.
If the pain rises to the knees and back, then apply what we have said from the cautery in its chapter.
If the pain is only in the hands, then make a puncture around the wrist where two lines meet and diverge.
But if there is still pain in the fingers, then make a puncture on each knuckle and also over the palm of the hand.
If the pain rises after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each on every side.
And you do not discharge the sick man from good regimen or from taking medicines. If a good diet is maintained and the phlegm is evacuated, healing will occur by God's help with this caustic.
On the method of cauterizing ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and the intestine descends or the bag comes close to the testicle, then you should advise the patient to forgo food for that day. And he should take something laxative so that his stool descends from the belly.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back; and tell him to hold his breath until the bag or intestine comes out.
Next, bring it back with your fingers and mark it with caustic under the rupture on the pectineal bone, making a sign whose end is like half a circle towards the upper body.
Then use a fire to cauterize it with this shape until it becomes white and flakes fall off. Next bring the intestine or bag back to its cavity. Then let the assistant put his hand on that place so that the intestine does not come out: and you have opened between the patient's legs, placed a pillow underneath him, and one servant is on his legs, another on his chest holding his hands.
Next put the caustic on that mark with your hand held straight. And hold on to it until you reach the bone with it; or repeat with it a second time if you have not reached the bone with it the first time.
And observe with caution from the exit of the intestine during your cauterization, lest you burn it, and thereby upon the patient befall either death or great harm.
And know that when you do not achieve with the cauterization of the bone, your operation is not helpful.
And it should be that the cautery for infants is delicate, according to their measure.
Then take care with the other ointments until it heals.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you provide nourishment for the duration of their treatment, which soothes their belly; so that the intestine does not leave during strain and defecation.
Then when they wish to rise after forty days, then apply a strap made poorly, and let them wear it for another forty days.
And they should be lessened from work, and fullness of food and drink, and loud voices.
For when one follows this regime, they heal with complete healing.
And I shall say the treatment of ruptures with incision in its own chapter.
But when ruptures occur in the rest of the belly, and they are beginning, and you wish that they not increase, then cauterize their rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let what is burned be like one third of it. Then treat it with what we have said; and it will not increase.
And now some of the first [surgeons] said: that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular shaped cautery like this.
After it is sealed with wax, and a line placed which runs across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with the pointed cautery.
But the first [method] is easier and better.
On the method of cauterization for pains caused by falling or being struck.
Chapter 48.
When there is pain in some limbs caused by falling or being struck and the pain persists over a long period of time without healing with medicines, then it should be treated with the pointed cautery.
And the size of the cautery should be appropriate for each limb, taking into account its size, weakness and strength, as well as the location of any twisting or pain.
If it therefore heals with the first [treatment], that is good. If not, then repeat on the same spot.
For it is customary of these pains to move from the limb to that which is closest to it. Which is why you must follow them with the cautery until the patient is healed.
On the method of cauterization for leprosy.
Leprous people sometimes benefit from being cauterized greatly. And especially the type of leprosy, which arises due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; when you wish to cauterize it, therefore consider this.
If therefore the leprosy is in its beginning stages and you have treated it with what we said earlier in our division but it has not descended or stopped; and you are afraid that corruption will overcome his entire constitution: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the scalp, and a second below this towards the front near the end of the hairline, and two on each temple area, and one behind on the back of the neck.
And finally hold your hand with the cautery there briefly until it imprints a small impression on the bone and some of its layers are dislocated so that you alleviate the exhalation of thick vapors from him; and cauterize also over his spleen, as we mentioned previously.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the afflicted and is clearly apparent then it behooves you to cauterize him with those same cauteries which we mentioned for the head; and also a cautery on the tip of his nose, and two cauteries over both jawbones, and two cauteries over the vertebrae of his neck, and six over the vertebrae of his back, and one large one on his coccyx (tailbone) and one above it in the gluteal area; and two over each hip: that is to say one over each hip bone and two over both knees: one over each knee and two over his shoulders, and two over his elbows, and two over the tenderness of his chest: and cauterize him on every joint, from among all of the finger joints of his hands and feet; and cauterize also over all the heel bones in his feet and the palms of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are above the back of the heel, so as not to burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery over the breastbone, and another over the stomach, and another over the liver.
And know that the more you apply the cautery, the greater the benefit and the more effective it is.
And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people do, because their body has already become numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of different sizes and widths according to the limbs and joints, just as was stated previously regarding the types of tools.
Then treat the cautery with a paste of herb flour mixed with honey, and continue with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing for stupor (loss of sensation).
When any limb becomes numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but does not heal, then cauterize the affected numb limb with cauteries according to the size or smallness of that limb.
Let your cautery penetrate into the thickness of the skin just slightly. Then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized for a type of numbness that occurs in the hand and foot, at the vertebrae of the back near where the nerves emerge which move that limb; and the numbness is removed.
Indeed, one must not presume to do so unless they are wise in the anatomy of members and the emergence of nerves that move the body.
Chapter 51.
When you treat Albaras and do not add anything to it from the art of medicine: then cauterize over it with a deep cauterization to some extent, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its colour changes.
Then treat it with a mixture of herb flour and lentil flour with rose oil, arnica leaves, pigeon blood, and swallow blood: let there be one part of each; mix all these together, lay them on a cloth, and attach this to the place until it is healed.
On the method of cauterization for cancer.
When cancer is starting, and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cauterization around its circumference, as it revolves.
The wise have said that one should cauterize with the final cauterization in its middle.
That does not seem right to me, for I fear that it may ulcerate; and indeed I have seen this happen several times.
And it is better that one be cauterized around its circumference with a circle, as we said; or with multiple cauterizations.
On the method of cauterization for adobelatis.
When someone has a swelling that is slow to mature, either due to the excess of humours causing it or because of the age of the patient who has little blood and is decrepit, or because of time constraints, and you need to hurry up the maturation of the swelling, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by puncturing. Then leave it alone. For itself will hurry up with the maturation.
But if you want to perforate it with the cautery then heat up a cautery that is of this shape: [shape inserted in original prompt]
And place it in the middle of the swelling until it penetrates the skin and let the patient be treated with what follows to alleviate the course of purity.
Then treat it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing an ulcerating sore.
Chapter 54.
An ulcerating sore is nothing other than a corruption walking on the limb and consuming it like fire eats dry wood.
If you see an ulcerating sore in a place that can tolerate being burnt with fire then burn it with many fires, small and large nails, according to what is appropriate for the location of the ulcer.
Then burn it from all sides until you uproot the entire corruption so that nothing of it remains whatsoever.
Then leave it alone for three days and put ground sulphur mixed with oil on the places that have been burnt until all scabs and corruption are eradicated.
Then treat it with flesh-generating salves.
If therefore you see that after three days flesh is born of healthy constitution, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on that which remains of the corrupted areas.
And corrosive medicines are sometimes treated with sharp medicine. For it arises in the place of the cautery.
However, the cautery with fire is of swifter aid: and indeed I have already said its cauterization with sharp medicine in the division: so take it there when you need it.
On the method of cauterizing in claws and warts.
Section 55.
Many times this illness occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a thick, filtered thing that harms the foot.
And indeed the cautery on them is according to two methods: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
As much as it is with fire, make the cautery bowl similar to an eagle's feather: which shall be made of iron, according to the size that contains a nail on every side: and let it be thin at the edges.
Then place it burning over the claw. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the claw, until you reach the depth of the claw: and leave it for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply plasters made with crushed mulberries, mixed with salt; leave the plaster on overnight. It will be eradicated from its roots.
Then treat the place with an emollient for newborn skin until it heals.
If they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on hands and feet: then apply a hot iron cauterization to them; take a copper, iron or vulture feather pipe and place it over a nail or charcoal ember. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the pipe; hold your hand and rotate it with finger pressure for a while so that the edge of the pipe touches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to reach deep down to the root of the nail: have the patient wait a little over the hot-water cauterization for about an hour.
Then leave it be, for the nail will be eradicated along with its roots.
Do this to each one after another until you have treated all of them on the body.
Then treat them after they are eradicated with something that generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of tremor cauterization:
When someone has a tremor from cold nerve damage or from quartan fever or some other cause: then you should cauterize them with four to five hot iron probes over the vertebrae and between each vertebra with one probe; on their chest with another, and over their stomach with yet another.
For tremors are calmed with olive oil cauterization, and healing is hastened for ailments that are cold.
In the way of cauterization by Albucasis.
Chapter 57.
Sometimes bad humours, that is boils, are expelled from the body which arise from corrupted gross matter.
Therefore it is necessary that when they first appear, the boils should be cauterised over their entire head with a fine myrtle wood stick whose end has been lit by fire. Or with the root of long aristolochia. Or with a bean-shaped iron cauterizer.
And sometimes they are cauterised at the beginning of their formation in this way: and they do not increase: and the superfluity that makes them is broken apart, and they are cured of it.
However it must be done after evacuation by bloodletting.
On the way of cauterization for bleeding from an artery into a wound.
It often happens that there is bleeding from an artery which has been cut at a wound, which occurs externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or member cauterization, and similar to these: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
So when it happens to someone, then quickly place your hand over the artery opening, and put your index finger on top of it: and squeeze it a lot, until the blood is blocked underneath your finger, and nothing comes out from it.
Then place on the fire small olive oil-based cauteries and several large ones; blow upon them until they become very hot.
Then take one of these, small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery has been severed, and apply the cautery to the vein; then remove your finger quickly and hold the cautery in position until the bleeding stops.
If it is expelled as you raise your finger from the artery opening and the cautery goes out, then quickly take another cautery from those already prepared on the fire.
Therefore do not stop applying one after another until the bleeding stops.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, lest another evil happen to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop it unless by one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or by extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends contract and the bleeding stops. Or it may be tied with a strong ligature. Or place on it some medicines which have the property of stopping blood, and bind it with a suitable compress.
He who accomplishes the stopping of blood by means of a ligament and a compress, or by the application of burning substances and the like, should never apply them to him completely except rarely.
If it happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine: then begin with the placement of the index finger on the vein's opening, as we described, and its strong compression until the blood is blocked from the upper part of the wound and above the artery. And the finger should not be removed from it but placed above with very cold water until the blood clots and thickens, then cut off.
And meanwhile consider what it requires from cauterization or medicine.
On incision, perforation, and bloodletting with regard to wounds and similar issues.
We have already spoken in the first chapter about every illness that requires a burning cautery and medicinal fire, along with its opportunities, causes, instruments, and types of cauterization.
And I have placed there chapters from head to foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same path so that the seeker may find what they are looking for.
And before I begin that, my sons, you must learn that what is in this chapter regarding fear differs from the first chapter on cauterization.
And because of this it is necessary for there to be greater caution, since in the operation which is described in this chapter, there frequently occurs an evacuation with blood, together with which stands life at the opening of a vein or incision on a boil, abscess, wound, arrow extraction, or stone cutting, and those similar: from all of which arises trembling, fear, and death falls upon many.
And I advise you not to fall into uncertainty over that which is doubtful, for sometimes such kinds of people come before you with such kinds of ailments. For amongst them are those who become angry when suffering from illness and for whom death is a light matter because of the severity of what they experience through their ailment and the long duration of its evil. And when illness arises from fear that signifies death.
And amongst them is he who offers you his flute-player, enriching you with him in the hope of health, while his sickness is destructive.
Therefore, it should not be that you agree with him who comes to you from amongst them whose manner is such. And let your caution be more severe than your greed and avarice. And do not presume about anything concerning him unless after certain knowledge which verifies to you that for which his worthy lineage has arrived.
And use for the treatment of all your patients prognosis and indication regarding that which is appropriate for health.
For in it lies your aid regarding the achievement of fame and glory, memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His understanding and not withhold from you guidance and inspiration, for that is in His hand.
And indeed I have arranged this Chapter by dividing it into chapters as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization from the neck down to the feet so that your search for what you wish and need out of it may be lightened.
The treatment for water accumulation on children's heads.
Chapter 1.
You should know that this condition often happens to children at birth or when the midwife grips the child's head without caution.
And whenever it happens, there is also an unknown hidden cause that cannot be known.
Indeed, I have not seen this sickness anywhere but in children, and among those whom I saw all rushed into death; for that reason, it seemed to me best to abandon any treatment of such a condition.
And I have seen a child among them whose head was filled with water and his head kept growing every day until he could not sit upright due to the size of his head; moisture kept accumulating until death.
And this moisture may gather either between the skin and bone or beneath the bone above the skull.
And for the treatment of this condition, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision on top of the head running across its width; let the length of the incision be about two finger widths until the moisture drains out.
And this is the shape of a spatula.
If then the moisture is more accumulated, and the abscess is larger, you should make two such incisions.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and its sign is that you see openings on top of the head from every side; and water is pressed down when you press it with your hand towards the inside, but it does not hide itself: then you should make three incisions on top of the head like this.
And after making an incision, extract all moisture. Then close the wounds with cloths and plugs. After that, anoint it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and treat the wound with sutures and ointments.
And do not fail to keep the head bound tightly with its counterpart. Feed the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Another method of incision is to note where the swelling appears large and water collects.
For sometimes it is greater at the back of the head, or on the forehead, or to the right, or left.
Thus ascend with your incision to where the swelling and water collection appear, then split it as seems best to you.
Take care not to cut an artery, lest the patient bleed out and die from that evacuation of moisture.
### On Incision of the arteries found behind the ears.
Chapter two.
When someone has catarrh to the eyes or chest and it is not relieved by medicinal treatments, then this ultimate cure remains only for them - incision of these two arteries.
When you wish to make such an incision then the patient should lean their head back. Then rub the spot with a rough cloth to make the arteries visible. Then the patient should tighten their neck with each of their cloths. Then consider where the vein pulses. And the places of both (veins) are the sunken areas behind the ears: and it is rarely hidden, except in some people.
Then mark with encaustic on both (veins): and cut both (veins) with spatums on either side using a needle, the incision reaching to the bone: and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatums under the artery, and cut it above with an upward incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which jumps into the interiors with frequent leaps.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you should measure from the ear a space of three fingers' breadth. Then mark with encaustic, and find (the artery) until you reach the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, and perhaps you emit more or less from it. All of that according to the amount which appears to you of the patient's strength and the fullness of their artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if anything of it remains reaching to the bone, then cut that, so that a hot abscess does not occur: then bind the wound with linen cloths.
Treat it then with ointment until it is healed.
On the extraction of arteries which are in temples.
Chapter 3.
When a person suffers from an old headache or acute catarrh due to acrid moistness and heat in the arteries of the temples, or from old, severe, or similar sodden humours: And if it is treated with medical remedies but does not yield to them: Then we have found in these ailments that the extraction of arteries from the temples or their cauterisation is efficacious as we have described.
And the method of operating on such an extraction is for the patient to shave off the hair which is on his temples and concentrate on the artery which appears therein. For it shows itself to you by its pulse; rarely is it hidden except in very few people or severe coldness.
If it is hidden from you then the patient should bind his head with any cloth; afterwards rub that place with a rough cloth. Or bathe the place with warm water until it appears to you clearly. Then take the spatula which I formed just now. Afterwards scrape with it the skin gently until you reach that artery. Then throw into it a hook and extract it upwards until you have extracted it from the skin; then make it escape out of any garments which are underneath.
If however the artery is thin; then wrap it with the tip of the hook. Then cut away a portion of it according to the extent by which its ends extend, and they are pulled back without causing any loss of blood. If it is not cut, nor if it is severed, the blood does not stop flowing entirely.
Then extract six ounces of blood from it until three remain.
If the artery is large, you should tie it in two places using double-threaded silk string or strong chords of aloe wood so that corruption does not quickly set into its substance before wound healing and blood loss occurs.
Then cut away the superfluity which is between the two ligatures. Do this at that hour or one hour later.
And if you wish, cauterise it with the knife-shaped cautery until reaching its bone, so that its ends may be excised and it will remain at this same place.
And the outcome is better unless the patient has fever or they have a hot constitution. Because the cautery is among those things which help to end moistness. Therefore it helps more effectively.
And after the removal of arteries, the place should be filled with old tallow and decently made crumbled poultices placed over it.
And after the discharge, it should be treated with drying medicines which promote flesh generation as well as dressings until healing occurs.
If in the meantime while operating a flow of blood from an artery occurs, then hasten to sever it with the cautery or fill up its place with egg white and squeeze your hand until the blood is severed. If none of these are present to you at this moment, then place your finger on the wound until the blood freezes. Wet the place with ice-cold water until the sharpness subsides and it tightens as needed.
And for that which is lighter and easier to remove by means of the artery, you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives; and let the sharpness of the two knives be similar to that of almagdate. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they were sharp like two knives, it would hasten both the cold; and they wouldn't cut into the flesh quickly. Since there is a bit of thickness to them, some heat from the fire is retained within them, and they cut through flesh quickly; with this it's best to use this approach for every operation that requires speed, ease, and gentleness.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
And let the space between the two knives be a thickness equal to that of your finger, after you mark both places with encaustic; and place each one red hot until they reach the mouth, and cut into the vein in two spots: so as to lengthen what is between its ends. For it doesn't fully consolidate with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
On the treatment for frequent sharp pain in the eyes.
When tears are frequent and their course is from veins that are on the outside of the head; and you have not tried any cure with medicine or remedies, and see that the patient's face has now turned red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead like ants crawling: and their eyes are exhausted, moist, so much that already their lashes are corroded by corrosion: and their eyelids are heated from the sharpness of tears; then the ancients required this operation for their cure, and named it *a cura cum ensi*, or "treatment with a sword".
And it is essential to advise the patient to shave the hair from their forehead. Then make three incisions on the forehead, evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead; let the length of each incision be about two fingers long, and have one incision equidistant from the nose in the center of the forehead, a second along the length slightly away from the movement of the eyebrows, and a third on the other side. And beware that you do not cut any arteries on either side, and stretch your hand out from the connection of the two jaws, and let the entire space of the incision be equal to three fingers put together: also have for yourself a piece of prepared sponge or many dry cloths with which to dry up the blood.
Then insert a spatula of two sharp ends, whose subsequent shape is as follows: [diagram not included]. From the first incision near the temple to the second incision, scrape away all skin that lies between the two incisions, along with the bone above the eye socket. Then do likewise from the middle incision to the second one. Then withdraw the spatula, and reinsert another tool into the first incision, which is called a sharp knife, blunt on one side but sharp on the other. And this is its form: [diagram not included]
Position the sharp side of its edge towards the attached flesh and skin, and the blunt side towards the bone; push it in until you reach the middle incision, and sever with it all those vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except for what continues with the incision up to where skin is visible.
Then do likewise at the middle incision down to the other one.
After some quantity of blood has drained out evenly, squeeze those places from pieces of clotted blood.
Then put linen rags soaked in old wine on every crack, and place over them little pads moistened with wine or oil, or vinegar. See to it that no hot abscess occurs.
On the third day, loosen the bandage and apply plenty of wash with warm water. Then treat it with healing ointment of basil and other things that are used to heal wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of sharp pains in the eyes, also of catarrh from an internal head cold.
When someone has severe, sharp and persistent catarrh and you see their eyes tired, small, and the sight of them already weakened; and the eyelids ulcerated, with hairs falling out from them, and deep in the head there is a sharp, painful sensation followed by sneezing: then take from these symptoms that those substances [the discharges], and catarrhs do not come except from numerous veins.
And the best treatment for them is this: And it is that you prescribe to the sick person to shave his forehead. Then make in it one crack in the middle of the forehead or slightly across its width and start with the fissure from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; and stretch out your hand from the muscles of both temples which move when chewing until you feel the bone: and dry all blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the wound with a swab of old linen, or with strips of new linen. Then compress from above with swabs; and moisten the swabs with wine and oil, so that a hot abscess does not occur.
And when you uncover it, and see that the hot abscess is now diminished; then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that makes flesh grow; for example, take two parts wheat flour and four parts colophony, prepare a plaster from them, and apply it to the birthplace of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment for that which falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral substance, or similar to stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, like chickpeas and beans; or it is a liquid, such as water and vinegar, and things like them; or it is an animal.
When therefore a stone or stony substance falls into the ear from among those which are not added to and do not grow within the ear, expose the ear to the sun; if you then see that it is a stone, then instil into the ear some of either violative oil or sesame oil. Then apply the procedure for extracting it and make them sneeze with mustard seed; plug their nostrils as they sneeze, after you place around the ear a pad made of cloth or wool, and stretch out the ear upwards.
For often it comes out with this treatment.
If it does not come out, then perform its removal with a gesture, that is, with delicate pincers; whose form is this.
If it therefore comes out with the gesture, it is good.
And if not, then perform its removal with a delicate blind hook of little curvature.
If therefore it does not come out through that, then make a copper tube, and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole deeply, and apply what is in the circumference of the tube with soft wax softened with oil, so that there is no way for the wind except through the tube; then extract it with your strong attracting breath.
For many times indeed it comes out with that which we have narrated. If however it does not come out this way: then take from helkalimbat, or from viscum, that is, prepared glue, with which birds are caught, a small amount: and place it at the end of a stick after you wrap around it a piece of skin positioned eccentrically: then insert it into the ear hole easily, after you dry the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then hasten to cut it open, before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the mode of the cut is such that a weak flea first bites on the head: and extract from it blood according to the measure of its strength. Then make the weak one sit between your hands, and turn its ear upwards, and find a small cut in the root of the ear near its fat in a depressed place on it: and let the cut be moon-shaped until you reach the bone: then remove it with what is possible for you from instruments.
Then sew up your incision with speed and tend it until it is healed.
If an object has fallen into the ear due to one of the grains that grow and swell, then administer its removal.
But if it does not yield to your extraction, then take a thin, fine spatula like this:
And administer with it the removal of that type of grain which falls into the ear and do not attempt it when you think that the grain has already been softened by the vapour of the ear until you have tried many times; then remove them with hooks, or with a thin probe, or with suction, as we have said, for their extraction is facilitated.
In the case of water which enters the ear, the patient must use sneezing as treatment at first; and already he has filled his ear with some old oil; and he is lying on that ear in which there is water. Therefore if it comes out by itself, it is good.
And if it does not, then take many pebbles the length of a finger, thin and soft, and warm them with fire for a while, and let the patient introduce one of these into his ear-hole: and let him jump on one foot from that side, striking with another pebble against the pebble which is in the ear. So do not cease doing this with pebble and pebble until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out to such an extent that you may take a straw or a reed and introduce one end of it into the ear; and light the other end with fire until most of it is burnt. Repeat with another reed and do so many times until all the water comes out; then extract it along with the tube as mentioned before for the stone.
When extracting an animal that has entered it, if it is a small body, such as a flea, and similar to it, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it is a large body that can be felt: then carry out its extraction with forceps and hooks; and its removal is easier than all those things which are held in the ear.
When extracting a worm born in the ear, when you treat it with what we said in the division and in the treatise of distillations, and your treatment does not succeed; then you must look at the ear in the sun. If something of the worm appears there, then extract it with forceps or with fine hooks.
But if nothing of it appears there, then take a tube whose form is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top; and introduce the fine end into the ear as much as the patient can tolerate; then suck hard with it. Do so many times until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to come out, then apply some wax around the tube with a wick, as I said for the stone.
If they do not come out with what we have said, then carry out the distillations which the ancients have already experienced in killing worms; and you will find it in the treatise of distillations.
And your infusion which you pour the oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. You can see that it should be made from silver or bronze, with the lower part narrow and having a small hole, the upper part wide.
Let it therefore be made of bronze, off-centre to the part that is inside the cavity of the tube. And if you wish, take a stick and wrap around its end a little cotton with an appropriate number of windings; then pour oil or juice or whatever remedy you like from among these medicines into the tube; let it be in the ear; next insert the stick with the cotton above it, and express it by compressing it with your hand using moderate pressure until oil is forced into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels it inside; and let what is poured into the ear already have been warmed up a little with fire: and beware that nothing which is distilled into it be very cold: for remedies do not tolerate that.
Chapter 7.
### Treatment of the Accident of Earwax ###
Sometimes children come out of their mothers' wombs unpierced.
And it also happens that earwax accumulates in some people due to injury or the growth of flesh there.
And this earwax sometimes forms deep inside the hole of the ear, beyond sight; and it occasionally happens near its outer edge where vision can reach it.
That which occurs deep inside the ear, beyond sight's reach, is difficult to cure in many cases.
And for that which vision can reach, you should place the patient's ear in the sun and look inside; then if you see any visible wax, open it with a fine probe of this shape, whose end has some width with one part sharp; and let the rest of the probe be two smooth sides: so as not to hurt the ear.
If the obstruction is born of flesh within the ear canal, then grasp it with a fine hook and cut it away easily until all the flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is deep within the ear, take a fine, soft rod and heat it slightly over a flame; then insert it into the ear canal.
If you perceive the obstruction along with what the patient describes as a heaviness of hearing, attempt to open it easily; and take care not to injure the ear's nerves.
Then place in the ear a linen plug according to the size of the opening you wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure the wound is healed.
Or take linen and soak it in rosewater, then sprinkle over it some powdered frankincense, and use this.
If you see the ear starting to fester, then remove the linen and leave it with another which you wrap in a poultice made from oil and rosewater until the abscess cools; then treat it until it heals.
If there is bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear; and use the remaining treatment which stops blood flow as described previously in the section on distillations.
On treating sore eyelids.
Chapter 8.
These sore eyelids which occur on the eye, sometimes are wet and sometimes dry.
So you must hold them with forceps; or with a hook, and cut them away with a spatule from their roots. Then place ground galbanum on the wound.
If any of them ooze blood, then cauterize them with a fine lens-shaped cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after the operation. For they often recur when some of their roots remain. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not recur.
On the treatment of eyelid cysts.
Chapter 9.
It often happens that something occurs in the eyelids which resembles a cyst in its strength and hardness, and on account of this it is called a cyst; and it is a collection of thick moisture in the upper or lower eyelid.
The operation for them is as follows: you should then consider whether the cyst which appears from the eyelid and moves in all directions is proceeding in it; and its consistency is soft.
Therefore, make an incision above it across the width [of the eyelid]. Then scrape it out from all sides with ease until it comes out. Then snatch it away with a hook, and tear it off.
But if its tearing away is not prepared for you unless after you penetrate the eyelid with an incision to some extent, then it harms the patient in some way.
But if the incision is large, then gather it with a suture; and treat it until it is healed.
If it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For the ointment restores it and fleshes it out.
And if the hailstone is sloped towards the inner surface of the ear, then turn over the eyelid and hook out the hailstone with a crochet-hook; besides which you must make an incision and press it from every side.
If the eyelid is stretched by means of an incision, that will not do any harm.
Then wash the eye after removal of the hailstone with salt water; and treat the place with something that fleshes it out until the patient is healed.
On the treatment of eyelid swelling.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is the fat that forms under the eyelids; it happens most often to children. It weighs down their eyes and causes them to have morning cataracts, so they cannot look at sunlight because tears run into their eyes. That's why you see them lying on their faces all the time and sleeping with their faces downwards: the moisture from their eyelids runs beneath their eyebrows, which already are swollen; Axirnath is a protuberance that appears in the eye, and when you press it with your fingers you feel Axirnath between your fingers.
The mode of treatment is that the patient should put his head on your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare some lint within it; make out of this lint a circle to the size that matches Axirnath from every side. Place him on it and press with your fingers from all sides so that the navel gathers at the center of the circle.
Then find at the center of that moisture with a spatula striking cracks across its width, and let no crack be larger than that which forms during deep phlebotomy.
Or you should split the skin entirely until you reach the navel because in many conditions the navel proceeds from a crack according to the shape of a white piece of fat.
Extract it therefore with a cloth that you have moistened between your fingers towards the outside and rotate your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed: take care not to add any into the crack lest you reach the eye with the spatula and injure it.
But if the navel does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack then you should add a little gently into the crack until the navel proceeds from it. Then extract it as we have said.
Submerge the cloths in vinegar and water then place them on the site and compress it with pads.
There are people who rub salt into it and place it in the hollow of the crack so that what remains of that moisture melts away.
Then treat it until it heals.
But if a hot abscess should occur then treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.
On the ways of eyelid drooping, that is when the eyelid softens so it creases improperly.
Chapter Eleven.
When there grow on the eyelids of the eye extra hairs beyond the normal course underneath the natural hair, and they become too long: then these harm the eye, and cause ailments to occur such as frequent tears, softening of the eyelids, and whiteness, until it becomes a cause for destruction of the eye.
Ataxmir's eye indeed is cured according to four methods. Or by fire-cauterization. Or with an acute medicine, as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization. Ataxmir is also cured by incision and suture. Or with tubes, as I will explain.
It is necessary to place the patient's head on your lap. Then turn the eye's eyelid with your left hand.
If it is turned then that is good. And if it is not turned: introduce the needle into it with a thread attached from its lower part of the eyelid and make the needle penetrate together with the thread from above, and have that be near the hair itself, that is, near the edge of the eyelid where the hair grows; then pull the thread upwards along with the eyelid, and turn it back using a rod.
Then find the inner part of the eyelid underneath the extra hair using an incision from the larger lacrimal to the smaller one.
Then extract the thread and place a small piece of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid; then mark over the eyelid with cauterizing iron in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the shape be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid; for this varies already among men.
For some of them require that a large portion be cut from the eyelid according to the size which is softened by the eyelid.
Then when you have placed the spatulate end over the two lines which you marked, begin from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct and let there be one incision near the natural hairs, like the thickness of a spoke.
Then introduce the hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then scrape away all of it. Then bring together the two lips with a suture, using a needle and fine woolen thread; wipe away any blood, and make adhere that which is superfluous of the threads over both eyebrows, with some sticky substances if you wish to do so; but if not, take no care.
Then leave the suture and threads for three or four days; afterward tend to it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without suture, and tend to it with something that dries and contracts. For the eyelid is raised at the wound's sealing and its bringing together; yet it will be better still.
This method of treatment ancient physicians taught to Ataxmir.
However there is concern for the patient; and it is of good skill; nor is fear within him.
And there is another method to Ataxmir also; it is that you mark upon the eyelid a shape which is like the form of a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or combined hooks, following this form, then cut away the excess with small scissors, following this shape, with equal cutting.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not even out: then take a needle in which there is thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure; and insert another thread near the larger lachrymal, and a second thread near the smaller lachrymal: and gather together between your fingers the threads with equal force.
Then raise your hand with an equal elevation; and lift the skin over which the tumor is marked, as we have described.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture; and take care of it until it heals.
But if an abscess occurs near your incision or your opening, subdue that abscess with a poultice and similar things, from soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelid as well, that its hairs turn inward.
It is therefore necessary that you use on it what we have said about incision; but suture is more of an art.  On the treatment of Ataxmir with reeds.
And it is necessary that you turn the eyelid back, and split open the opening which is inside, as I have described. Then make two reeds or two slender sticks with art, whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than a spatula; and you have already cut at each end from both sides where you hold the threads.
Then gather each [part] with precision over that which protrudes from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the two tubes from both sides with a strong ligature, and leave it for several days. For the skin will die, darken, and rot until it falls off by itself.
Therefore if you delay, then cut it with scissors. Then treat it until it heals.
When therefore it is strengthened, lift the eyelid: and do not pluck out the hairs.
And this is the form of the two tubes, which you will make according to this figure, and size in length and width.
Chapter 12.
On removing hairs that irritate the eye with a needle.
The operation in this case is that you take a fine needle, and insert into it a thin, soft silk thread. Then gather its ends, and tie each one with a very fine knot; and let the length of the threads be one palm's width.
Then tie underneath it another fine thread that is short, and knot its ends if you like.
Then have the patient place their head in your lap, and let it be close to the sun so that the operation may be revealed; for this is a precise or delicate operation.
Then insert the needle with its thread into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract from above a natural hair.
Then draw out the needle above the splint; and introduce into the splint that needle; be it one or two or three, no more than this.
Then draw out your hand with it until the needle emerges from the eyelid together with the natural eyelash.
But if the splint is drawn and the needle does not emerge with it; draw out the splint downwards, with the thread you have attached to it, until the splint comes out of the upper opening, and see it with your eye: then draw out the splint and the thread, close up the eye and leave it shut for two or three days, until the eyelash adheres in its place and flesh grows over it.
If the eyelash is short then either attach to it a long artificial hair and raise that with it; or leave it alone until it grows longer, and only then lift it up.
Chapter 13.
When this abscess happens to the eye, it is called leporina.
And this abscess is either natural or accidental.
An accidental one forms from the congealing of a wound or incision, or a burn, or something similar to those.
The method of treating it is to open up the congealed material and separate its lips; you should then put between them a little flaxen wick and bind it until it heals.
And you must not use in its treatment things that dry and constrict; for if you do so the abscess will return worse than it was before: rather use things which soften it, such as fenugreek; and an ointment mixed with water in which marshmallow has been cooked, flax-seed and diaquilaon which has been liquefied with some oil: bind this on with a wick and treat with it.
The treasure of your treatment lies in ensuring that you consider every type of mind so that it does not solidify into the same form as before.
This operation we described is simply a correction of the Alxatrata so that the form of the place does not return to what it was entirely.
On treating Alxatrata which occurs on the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 14.
This condition which occurs on the lower eyelid is truly called 'Alxatrata'. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
It occurs accidentally from a wound or tear, by burning with a hot iron, or similar things.
The way to operate on it is to take a needle with double thread and dip it into the flesh; then make it pierce from left to right of the tear duct until the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
Then raise the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it through lengthwise with a wide lancet. If then the form of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good.
If not, take a splint and place it in the tear; then turn the eyelid with it. Make two incisions on the inside of the eyelid between its two corners so that they meet to form an angle like this: [draws ]. When joined together, their shape is the Greek letter lambda ().
Then remove that flesh in an amount equal to the acute inferior edge of his eye from what follows the eyelid. Then join together the separated parts, suturing them with woolen thread.
Then treat them with what we have said about softening medications and linen dressings until they are healed.
And if an abscess occurs from a split or suture, or from cauterization, then you must open the split with a plain scalpel under the eyelashes, likewise what has preceded. Then separate between the two lips with linen as we have said.
And the main point about treating an abscess when it is above or below is to carry out that operation as prepared according to the form of the abscess.
For it has many varieties of form: and a prudent practitioner prepares his skill according to whichever mode is possible for him until he restores the figure to its natural shape or close to it, and himself being infirm as befits him from the operation and the instruments in most arrangements.
Chapter 15.
On adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Sometimes this adhesion occurs to many people such that the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye and prevents it from its natural movements.
You should therefore introduce the end of a needle under the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a hook; then cut through the adhesion with a blunt spatula that is not sharp like spatulas usually are but rather somewhat dull: so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and for the spatula not to be removed and injure the eye with its sharpness; and let your incision be like you would scrape off that adhesion gently until when the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the whole adhesion is healed.
Pour some saltwater into the eye and wash it out with water; or drip onto it a mixture of saffron dissolved in water distilled from sieved henbane.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye using a strip of linen; place over the eye some wool soaked in the white of an egg; after three days use henbane and poultices until it is healed.
On the excision of ingrown nails and flesh mounds on the eyelids...
Chapter 16.
Know that an ingrown nail is of two types. It may be horn-like; like hard, thin potsherd. Or it may be non-horny, like white frozen moisture; when this touches iron or you try to pick it up with a hook, it breaks and is not pierced by the hook.
And neither type begins except from the larger eyelid, gradually growing until it covers sight and hinders movement of the eye.
The method for excising it is as follows: have the patient put their head in your lap. Then open his eyes and lift up the eyelid with your hand. Then gather the nail using a double-pronged hook, extending it upwards. Next, take a needle and insert into it some horsehair, cattle hair or goat hair; let the thread be strong, double over the needle's end somewhat, then fasten it to the middle of the nail; pierce through with the needle, tie up the nail with the thread, extending it upwards: scrape away the side of the nail that follows after the pupil, as if you were plucking it with hair all the way back.
Then make an incision into the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal sac with a thin spatula or with small scissors; and leave the natural lacrimal flesh untouched so that you do not cause, as a result of its incision, a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the claw is extended with only one hook; or with thread, as we have said. Then scrape it with a gentle spatula that looks like this [shape].
And be careful not to let the spatula touch the corneal layer so that you do not cause a rupture in it, and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, throw into the eye some ground salt or something made from zinjar and leave it there until the next day. Then take care of it with what is required until it heals.
If the claw is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle into it or hook it, then this type of claw is often treated with medicines and heals as I have described above.
If you want to incise it, then open the sick eye and take a thin spatula that is gentle and blunt, with this shape [shape]. And scrape away the claw above with a razor very carefully. If you see that it becomes thinner and breaks under the razor, then drop into the eye from your vessel something made from zinjar or red medicine or ground salt; and bandage the eye until the next day.
Then repeat this procedure on it until all of it is removed. If there is no pus in your eye and it is warm, then leave it alone and treat the inflammation until it heals.
Then repeat the procedure on it with the same method until it is healed.
However, if the bulging tear duct flesh is causing significant harm to the eye, it should be suspended with a hook and cut from it its portion; do not go beyond this incision lest there be damage to the tear ducts.
Then put drops into the tear duct of red saffron, or made from cornflower, until it is healed.
On the incision for Al-Guaradi's disease and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
Sometimes a red flesh grows or forms in certain human eyes until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or contracts above the eyelids; and is like a wild pomegranate.
And there is also an operation for it: the patient must put their head on your lap. Then open his eyes and gather all that flesh with appropriate hooks; hold it with a pair of forceps or pincers.
Then cut the flesh first until its entirety is finished with a scalpel. Beware of the eye during this operation so that you do not harm it; let your cut be either with a knife or a chisel, which we mentioned in the nail incision: or with small scissors like those used to trim hoofs according to what will come after this chapter.
When your incision is complete and all of the cataract has been removed, fill the eye with crushed salt; or distill into it red powder, and similar corrosive medicines; then place on top of the eye a fresh sheep's bladder (inside out), so that it may be sealed from the hot pus.
If there is any cataract remaining and you have hot blood and fear a hot pus, then leave the eye alone, and treat it with something that will ease the swelling.
Next, operate on it again until it is healed.
Do likewise with additional flesh that may happen to occur in the eye from this kind of injury.
However, when it comes to treating any eye disease that occurs naturally or accidentally and requires an iron instrument for surgery: do not put your hand into any of these operations until you have seen whether the member can endure such a procedure.
On extracting Sebel from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Sebel are red veins that grow on the eye, impeding its sight and weaken it over time.
You must first determine whether the eye with Sebel is strong and otherwise healthy apart from these veins; then collect its Sebel.
And it is right to instruct the patient to lay their head on your lap.
Then lift the veins with one hook or two according to your judgment; let the hooks be fine and doubled over like this form, or two joined on a single body as here.
Then carefully collect with fine scissors those veins, and wipe away the blood every hour until you see those veins move out of sight and dissolve; be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the forceps.
And let your procedure be done at midday in the sun, and be very firm in your operation; so that you cut only those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye either green or red ointment so that its sharpness may dissolve what remains of the sebaceous matter.
But if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then apply to the eye a plaster with something in it to relieve the pain; and leave it there for several days until its pain is settled; and let it be bound by a warm poultice; afterwards repeat on it the same procedure until it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors.
On reducing arietta to the nose.
Chapter 19.
Physicians call Arietta a fistula which you treat with the cautery or with caustic medicine according as its history may have preceded.
And if it is not healed then there is no skill in it unless you make an incision over the abscess at its origin and extract all of the moisture that is in it along with the pus until bone is exposed.
When therefore bone is exposed and you see on it signs of decay or blackness then scrape it with an instrument whose form is this:
And it is called asperation of the bone.
The tool should be made of hardened iron, and its head should be round like a whetstone, marked with fine grooves either by a file or an engraver's tool; place it on the damaged bone.
Then roll it between your fingers, and press your hand for a moment until you feel that the damage has been smoothed away; do this several times.
Then restore the area with drying, astringent medicines.
If the area becomes firm and flesh grows there, and the course of the infection is cut off, and it remains so for forty days without any renewal or swelling, nor does anything untoward happen to it; then you may know that it has now healed.
And if not, then there is no other treatment except to bring the fistula back out through the nostril, following this pattern.
And it is done by exposing the second bone with a sharp iron or medicine; and when you have exposed that bone, take an auger like this one, its tip being of iron, triangular in shape; and its wood should be like a pyramid, tapering to the end as shown here.
Then place it over that bone, close to the tear duct; and extend your hand a little away from the eye. Then turn your hand with the auger until it penetrates the bone and feels weak; through this you will know that air is escaping from it when they hold their hand over their nose.
So then restore the area with astringent drying medicines as I have taught you.
When flesh grows and the area hardens, then any matter that used to escape outwards now returns to the nose; so it is lighter over the weak spot.
The treatment for a protruding eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye bulges with all its parts and there is no damage to vision or diminution of sight, then one must cure the weak person by first bleeding them; afterwards place cups on their neck without scarring but using suction.
Then apply to the eye a poultice made of acacia, aloe, frankincense, and storax. After that compress the eye from above with many soft feathers.
And the method of applying the feathers is as follows: take many soft cloths and fold each one four times; make a stack of these then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye requires; finally, secure them firmly with a hard cloth bandage.
And repeat the cups with suction without scarring.
After that remove the cups and leave the eye bandaged day and night.
But if the bandage softens again then it must be tightened repeatedly; afterwards remove the bandage after a day and night as I've said.
When you see the eye has returned to its proper skin it's good; if not then repeat the poultice and feathers and bandage and cups until cured.
The treatment for a cut of the skin's membrane.
Chapter 21.
When there is a rupture of the membrane of the skin and it protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat, disfiguring the appearance of the person and requiring an incision to be made then surgery on that is as follows, which I will describe: you should insert a needle at the base of the membrane from below towards above.
Then insert another needle into which is placed double thread from the tear duct side, and make it penetrate; and remove the first needle according to its position.
Then cut the place of double thread and tie it to a portion of the eyelid around the needle; then tighten it greatly.
Then extract the needle and place over the eye wool soaked in white of egg; then leave it until the thread falls out with the eyelid.
Then treat the eye with that which strengthens it until the wound heals.
And sometimes the eyelid is tightened from all sides with a circle of cloth until the eye becomes greatly prominent.
Then the eye should be pierced with a fine spatula that reaches down to the depth of the eye; let moisture run into the white of the eye and the eye shall return in immediately; then tighten it until the wound heals.
On the cure of alcomania.
Chapter 22.
This illness which is called alcomania is nothing but pus that accumulates in the eye, like water running down, and it itself is not water.
And the manner of operating on it is to make the patient sit on a prepared seat or upright.
Then take his head in both your hands and move it until you see the pus reach below his eyes. Then it is tied up so that it does not fall and the eye is cleared; and the patient sees things as he used to see them: and if it has not fallen below, know that it is water.
If, however, the descent of pus is not prepared with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a thin spatula, and scrape with it over the hard crust for a little while near where the connective tissue joins the hard crust until pus appears.
When it appears, then drop into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey; or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; then treat with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
On the treatment of water that descends into the eye or cataract.
Chapter 23.
We have already spoken about the types of water in the section, and what is suitable for boring; now take that same according to health.
Then you must make the patient sit square between your hands opposite a light near the sun; and tie his healthy eye shut, pulling it tight; then with your right hand hold down the eyelid of his eye if it is the left eye that has water in it; or with your left hand if it is the right eye.
Then take in your right hand an almond if it is the left eye; or in your left hand if it is the right eye.
Then place the end of the almond near the edge where the white of the eye appears around the size of a spoke; then push with force on the almond; and you turn your hand with it until it penetrates the white of the eye: and feel that the almond has now reached an empty space.
And it is necessary for the length of the needle to reach the depth [of the wound], and its width should be from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the iris. You will see them in the pupil itself due to the clarity of the cornea.
Then place the needle up to the spot where the water is. Then press it downwards with force, one after another.
If the water then descends immediately, the patient will see what is opened before his sight and the needle in his eye.
Then rest for a short while. If the water descends again, then remove it for a second time, except that the needle is withdrawn.
When it stops moving, but doesn't rise, then extract the needle with ease, and you turn your hand little by little.
Then dissolve some clear rock salt in the water, and wash the eye thoroughly with it. Then place over the eye a whole piece of linen cloth or woolen material steeped in rose oil and white of egg; bind the sound eye with it.
We, however, and those of our time, place over it powdered cumin with white of egg.
If the needle doesn't yield to you in entering the eye because of its hardness; for it is made of iron, whose eye [i.e., sight] is very hard; then you must take a spatula called an *alberid*, which has this form.
Pierce therefore only its joint, and do not push your hand into the hole; it is enough to make a path towards the almond-shaped spot.
Then introduce the almond-shaped instrument as we have described.
And when your work is complete, prepare for the patient a decently made bedroom in which they can sleep on their back in a dark room; prohibit any movement or coughing; provide them with food that soothes their nature; and ensure they do not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage remain in place according to its arrangement for three days.
Then loosen it in the dark room and test his vision; make him see things. Then replace the bandage until the seventh day.
It should not be done at the time of treatment or immediately after the incision; instead, it must be avoided because water rises quickly through a strong current.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then you should loosen the eye before the seventh day; and treat it with something that will calm the abscess until it is calmed; then restore his vision and place an eye mask over his face to regulate his sight for several days while he remains in the dark room.
Then they should leave the house gradually and return to their homes.
And you should know that a student is not exempt from vision training at the zaltea; for then he will dare to perform operations.
And now a certain person from Alayrach has reached us who said that there was a woman in Alayrach with a perforated stomach from which water is drawn.
But therefore I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this; nor have I read it in any of the books of the ancients: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of appearances from a woman, as she stands upon it who is ignorant of it.
Let them be made from pure brass; and their ends should have the same triangular delicacy, with an acute point.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of nasal polyps.
Sometimes there grow in the nose various polyps, one of which resembles a many-legged scorpion; and from this arises a polyp that is hard like a stone, dark coloured, cancerous; and from it also arises one that is soft, not dark coloured.
For the soft polyp, which is neither deceitful nor cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, and open his nostrils; then throw a hook into those polyps; next draw them out, and cut what you have seized of them with a thin sharp scalpel on one side until you know that all the flesh is now removed.
But if anything of it should remain which cannot be removed; then shave it with one of the delicate instruments with ease until nothing remains of it. If blood dominates you or a hot abscess develops, then oppose it with what is necessary: if it is one of the malignant abscesses, proceed to cauterize it until the blood stops flowing and all flesh is removed.
Then after the incision, vinegar should be thrown into the nostril followed by water or wine. If the nostril opens up and moisture begins to come out of it all the way to the palate, then you will know that they are already healthy again.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should then you will know that flesh has grown within its depths around the upper nasal bones which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
You should then introduce a piece of linen thread of a certain thickness with many knots along it and leave between each knot the length of a finger or less: and have the sick person put one end of the thread in their nose as far as possible after you make it similar to an arrow: and they pull on its smell until it comes out at their throat.
And many children do something similar to this as a trick in school: and it is an easy thing for whoever wants to do it.
Then take the two ends of the thread: one that comes out over the nose and another which remains within it. Then take the flesh clamp and fix its teeth to the knots on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now attached to the knots of the thread.
Then pull out the thread and put into the nose after washing away the blood lint that you have soaked in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days or more until all of the remaining flesh is eaten away by the ointment.
Then place a lead pipe in the end of the thing into the nose for several days until it heals.
If however it requires treatment that dries it up, use this.
For making the nasal douche with which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it out of silver or brass; let it be similar to a small lamp, open like a seashell; and its nozzle likewise.
And if you wish make the pipe closed, like a cane.
And the small seashell of the instrument for making a nasal douche should be full and open: it should have a handle at its end with which you hold it when heating oil or whatever liquid in it that you want.
Chapter 25.
Many times there appears at the end of the nose a polyp that grows larger with time until it disfigures its appearance.
And because of that it is necessary to attack it at the beginning of its appearance and eradicate all of it. Then put over the place either a caustic substance or a burning medicine that stays in its place.
If therefore you delay its excision until it grows larger, then consider whether it is of stony hardness and dark-coloured with little sensation; then do not touch it with the iron, for it is a cancerous ulcer.
Many times I have seen someone who cuts out such an ulcer and a great harm befalls the one who had it.
If the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that incision is possible throughout it, then evacuate the patient's fluids, and make the incision without fear or hesitation: treat the area with a drying and constricting agent until it heals.
Chapter 26.
On sewing together the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when there is a break of continuity in one of these cartilages, surgery will not be of much help, except in some people.
Therefore, when something like this happens to someone, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood; and then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture; afterwards treat it until it heals.
And if the lips of a break in continuity are already separated and each side has healed over, then you must scrape away all the tissue down to the bleeding flesh. Afterwards bring the two lips together with a suture and tighten them; sprinkle over it powdered dragon's blood and ground frankincense; put on top of these powders a piece of fine wax plaster, and another of the harder consolidating plasters; leave this bound up for two or three days. Then remove the bandage and change the dressing; leave it until the threads come away by themselves. Afterwards treat it with an ointment until it heals.
The method of sewing is that you bring together the break in continuity either with needles as we described for the abdomen; or bring it together using thread as I have made you aware.
Chapter 27.
On the extraction of lip nodules.
Hard nodules resembling grains of grass often occur for many people on the inner parts of their lips; some are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, you must turn back the lip and cut above all of its nodules; suspend it with a hook and then slice through it on all sides.
Next fill the place after incision with ground gallic nettle until it stops bleeding.
Afterwards it should be washed with vinegar; the wound site is to be treated with an astringent until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
On the excision of excess flesh over the gums.
Many times excess flesh grows over the gums; this is what the ancients call abuluss.
It is necessary to hook it or grab with forceps and cut at its base; allow blood (or pus) to run from the wound.
Afterwards apply ground gallic nettle or other drying astringent powders to the wound.
If this flesh returns following treatment, as it often does, then cut away a second time and cauterize; for it will not return after being burnt.
Chapter 29.
On tooth extraction with an iron tool.
Sometimes rough, ugly layers of enamel accumulate on the inner and outer surfaces of teeth and between the gums; sometimes they darken and become yellow and green until corruption reaches the gum from it, making teeth foul-looking.
Therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands and rest his head on your lap; then scrape away the enamel as well as any part of it that looks like grit in a millstone; do this until no trace is left, and treat blackness, yellowness and greenness similarly until they are cleaned off.
If you remove the cause of these conditions early on, that's good; if not, repeat your treatment every day for two or three days until finally you reach where it is you want to get at.
Also be aware that you will need scalpels of different shapes and sizes for preparing the tooth before your treatment; since the scalpel used to scrape off its lower surface is not the same as the one used to clean between teeth, given their differing forms.
And have these various types of scalpel ready for use as you see fit.
Chapter 30.
On toothache extraction.
You must relieve the tooth of its pain with all your skill, but be slow to extract it. For once it is extracted, there can be no replacement; so significant a thing is lost; unless there's simply no other option but to extract it, then you should strengthen and reassure the patient about the offending tooth when forced to pull it out.
Frequently, pain deceives the sick person, and they think that the ache is in a healthy tooth and pull it out; then the pain does not subside until the sick tooth is pulled.
For we have already seen this from the practice of blood-letters.
So when the sick tooth is certified by you, then it is necessary that you sacrifice at the vicinity of the tooth with a spatula having some virtue, until the gum is loosened from every part; then move the tooth with your fingers or with thin forceps especially little by little, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps in a good position there, and put the head of the sick person between your knees; which you have held well so that it does not move; then draw the tooth according to its straight line so as not to break it.
If it does not come out then take one of those instruments and insert it under the tooth from every part gently, and try its movement as you did before.
But if the tooth is perforated or corroded then it is necessary that you fill that hole with cloth; and bind it with the end of a thin stick so that it does not break at the time of your tightening over it with forceps.
And you must take great care with the scarification around the gum from every part.
And guard your strength so as not to break it and leave a part of the tooth which will return to the sick person with an evil pain greater than at first.
And beware of doing what ignorant blood-letters do in their haste and boldness over pulling it out, besides administering what we have narrated.
They often inflict upon people serious injuries that are difficult to treat; either because some or all of the roots remain after it is broken, or when they remove it along with certain jaw bones - we have witnessed this many times.
It should then be boiled after its removal with wine or vinegar and salt.
If there is any bleeding from the wound (which often happens), grind some zegi and fill the wound with it; if this does not work, cauterise it instead - unless you do not have any zegi available.
The handles of the dental forceps should be long and short-handled, with thick heads so that they do not bend when pressed against a tooth; you can make these thicker at the handle to prevent them from crossing over each other as you close them: make the ends of the handles broad as well, such that even if you clamp down on them very hard, they will not cross over or damage one another. The ends should be made out of good iron and not cheap steel; the heads should have teeth which lock together tightly without slipping when clamped down with force.
And sometimes the heads of the handles are made in the form of a bird's beak, like that of a stork, with a strong, firm grip.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth, and extraction of fractured jaw bones.
If any fragments remain after a broken tooth is removed, pack the site with butter for one or two days to soften it; then insert either an alum plug or forceps whose ends are shaped like a stork's beak into this softened area and extract. This is the form of the forceps.
Their ends should be made like a rasp inside; or like the claw of a cat.
If therefore it does not obey you at the exit with these forceps, then it is necessary for you to hollow out over the root, and remove all of the flesh, and insert the instrument which is named small Palanca, whose form is this.
Let the end be short, somewhat thick; and let it not be sharp so that it does not break.
If therefore the root exits through it, that is good; and if not, you should help with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first is triangular at its end, on which there is some thickness.
The form of the second is triangular at its end, but thin.
And with other instruments and tools that have been mentioned previously in relation to teeth.
There is also assistance with this instrument which resembles a large hook, of this form, twisted triangular end, on which there is some thickness so that it does not break; and let it be blunt so that it does not sharpen.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth; and similarly the other instruments are not counted, and a wise craftsman, skilled in his art invents by himself an instrument according to what is indicated by the operation itself and the illnesses themselves.
Because for diseases to which the ancients did not say any instruments, due to the diversity of their species.
If a bone of the jaw or any other bones of the mouth breaks or becomes infected, then examine it carefully where it is located and use whatever tool suits its extraction from among the instruments and forceps that I mentioned in the section on tooth extraction; this one has the following form.
Place a thick material in it gradually so that the bone is clamped or held fast and does not fall out or slide until the bone comes out; then restore the site with suitable medicines for such an injury.
If there is some decay on the bone then remove it along with its decay; treat it until it heals.
Chapter 32.
On the removal of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth grow out of their normal path and direction, it becomes a deformity; especially when this occurs in the case of women and girls with fine features.
Therefore, one must take into account the following... If a tooth is born after another and does not have its own place, or if it cannot be extracted or filed; then remove it instead by cutting into it with this instrument...
It is like a small beak; its end is made of hard iron, very sharp.
And let your incision on it be over many days; this is due to the hardness of the tooth and so that others may not be shaken out by it.
If the prominent tooth is exposed to filing then file it with this iron file; its form is as follows...
The tooth shall be removed entirely with a tool of gold; its handle should have fine points like the file used to make needles - which is how it will gradually reduce the tooth over many days easily so that the tooth isn't shaken and falls out, then ease it gently and finally scrape it with small scalpels.
If it is a tooth from which part has broken and damages the tongue, then you must also file it until its roughness from that break is removed and becomes even; smoothen it, so that it will not hurt the tongue or corrupt speech.
Chapter 33.
On removing teeth with gold wire.
When the front teeth suffer from concussion and shaking due to a blow or fall; and when the patient is unable to chew on them for fear of losing their food; and if you have treated them with astringent medicines without success, then it's time to bind these teeth together using gold wire. Silver will turn green and rot within days, but gold never changes.
The wire should be of a thickness and thinness according to the size that fits between teeth.
The technique is to take the wire and insert half of it between two healthy teeth; then weave its two ends among the loose tooth or teeth until you reach with your thread up to a sound tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weave until you reach back to where you started; and tighten your grip with skill and wisdom so that it's not at all removable: your tightening of the wire should be at the roots of the teeth so as not to come out.
Then cut off the excessive gum with scissors: gather both together and turn them over with forceps; hide them between a healthy tooth and one that has been moved so as not to harm your tongue, then leave the thread tight while you do this.
If it loosens or is cut, tighten them with another thread and this will keep them in place during the whole process.
And this is the arrangement of teeth, showing the positioning of two healthy teeth and two moved teeth as you can see.
And sometimes it happens that one or two teeth return after falling out and are retained in their places as we have described; they remain like this unless the skilled and experienced dentist removes them.
And sometimes some bone splinters are fitted and made into the shape of a tooth; it is placed where the missing tooth was located and secured as we have said before; it remains like this for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Sometimes this ligament under the tongue is either natural, with which one is born, or accidental from an injury that has already healed.
The procedure for this is to open the mouth of the patient and place it in your lap; then lift their tongue; next cut through that sinewy ligament until the tongue is freed from its restraint.
If there is any hardness or knotting within it and this comes from the healing of a wound; then thrust a hook into it and move it sideways until you cut through the ligament and free up that knot.
And take care that there is no fissure deep within the flesh, and you do not cut into an artery there, causing a flow of blood.
Then it should be washed around the track of the incision with rosewater, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue lint from linen that the patient should hold through every night so it does not heal a second time.
If, however, there is a flow of blood, then place on the spot ground ginger. If blood prevails over you, then cauterise the spot with a lunar cautery suitable for this; afterwards treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes there happens under the tongue a boil resembling a small frog, hindering the tongue from its natural movement; and perhaps it grows so much that it fills the mouth.
And the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth towards the sun, then examine the boil.
So if you see it is dark or black in colour, hard and without sensation to the patient's touch then do not touch it for it is a cancer.
And if it slopes towards whiteness with some moisture then thrust into it a curved hook and cut it out with a sharp spoon-shaped instrument and remove it whole. If blood prevails over you during your work then place on it ground ginger until the bleeding is checked; then return to your work until you remove it and all of its covering.
Then it should be rinsed with vinegar and salt: and treat it with any other suitable treatment until it is healed.
On the treatment of an abscess of the two tonsils.
Chapter 36.
Sometimes there occur between the throat and jaw, that is, glands which resemble cotton, which happen outside; and they are called two tonsils: when you treat them with what we have said in the section on division, and they do not heal, then consider this.
If therefore it is a hard abscess, of a dark colour, with little feeling: then do not touch it with the iron.
And if it is of a red colour, and its root is thick: then do not touch it either with the iron, fearing an outflow of blood, rather leave it until it ripens. And then you will either pierce it through; or it should burst by itself.
And if it is of a white colour, round in shape, and its root is thin: then you must cut into it.
And the operation on it is, that you consider before its treatment, if the abscess has become quiet while warm and complete, or diminished to some extent: then make the patient sit facing the sun, and let their head be in your lap; and open their mouth, and have someone take this instrument between their hands and press the patient's tongue down with it, which is of this shape.
It shall be made of silver or brass, which should be thin like a knife.
When therefore you press with it on the tongue, and the abscess is shown to you, and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it into the tonsil, and draw it out as far as you can towards the exterior, except that you do not pull anything of the tunic with it.
Then cut it with an instrument that has this shape which follows. It resembles scissors; however, its ends are curved so that the opening of each is at a right angle to the other and is sharp; hence ensure it is made from iron or hardened bronze.
If however this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatuli whose form is thus. It should be sharp on one side but not sharp on the other.
And when you have cut one tonsil, cut the other in exactly the same way.
Then after cutting, have the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
But if there is bleeding have the patient gargle with water in which boiled gallnut bark; or myrtle leaves and similar astringents until the blood flow ceases; then treat it until it heals.
And sometimes there appear other abscesses in the throat besides the two tonsils. Cut them then as I have said for cutting of the two tonsils equally.
For my part I have treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat which was causing difficulty breathing and loss of sensation to the point that her throat was almost closed; and she could only breathe through a narrow opening, and was already unable to eat or drink water: and by now would have died if left another day or two.
The abscess had risen so high that it had sent out two branches until they came out at the top of her nostrils.
I therefore hurriedly made a stitch with one of those hooks. Then I pulled it out, and a large portion came away from it.
I then cut that off where I found the hole of the nose.
Then I did to it what came out from the other nostril.
I then opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue; and afterwards I fixed a hook into the abscess, then cut off part of it, and no more came from it except for some blood; so the woman's throat was healed, she immediately drank water and then took food.
Therefore I did not cease cutting out from the abscess many times over a long period; and an abscess would form in place of that which I had cut away, until it was extended too far and along with her.
I therefore devised something, and I cauterized the abscess between the throat.
I therefore refrained from adding anything further; then I went away from her side, and did not know what God would do with her after that.
On cutting out an abscess of the uvula.
Chapter XXXVII.
When a catarrh descends to the uvula and becomes abscessed and elongated, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it forms on the lower part of the uvula as a thick, round mass, then it is called a "tuba".
When you treat it with what we have said above and the treatment does not take effect; and you see that there is an abscess which has gone away from her heat but remains soft; then you ought to cut this out.
And if it has formed a round mass and there is no length to it, and its colour is red or dark brown or black, and it lacks feeling; then you should make an incision in it. For there is fear over the sick person.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have described regarding its colour and length, you should make the sick person sit facing the sun; then press their tongue with an instrument as previously mentioned; next, fix a hook into one ear and pull it downwards; finally, cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising two tonsils.
And you should not cut anything from it unless what is added beyond the natural end without being included.
For if you cut more from it, you will damage their voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we described for incising two tonsils; and treat it until it is healed.
However, if the sick person is afraid of the incision, then you should use skill in cauterizing it without fear or anxiety.
The method of cauterizing it does not involve anything but cold water; you should place the sick person's head in your lap. Then press their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned earlier. Next, take some of the water that I told you about in the chapter on cauterizing, and make a paste with it using unquenched lime; ensure it is neither thick nor thin, and fill the hollow of this instrument with it, which has this shape:" (at this point the original text includes an illustration).
The end of it should have a concave shape, like the concavity of the handle of a spoon.
Place the instrument with the medicine on top of that wound; and let the patient lie on their side so saliva flows out from their mouth away from the medicine inside it so nothing runs down into their throat to hurt them.
Then hold your hand with medicine in it. And keep it there for half an hour until you see the wound turning black and the medicine calming down from its initial agitation.
And if you wish to use a plug then wrap it with lint around the end of the radius and dip this lint-plug into medicine before inserting the radius (with lint-plug attached) into its tube until the lint plug adheres well onto that wound.
Do this many times over until you achieve the desired degree of cauterization for that wound. Then let it be; for within three to four days it will dry up and fall off by itself.
If you need to apply more medicine then do so; and after the cauterization has been done clean around that wound with a lint-plug soaked in butter and wipe off any remaining medicine from its surroundings, then wash it all down with cold water.
It should be treated from outside by means of poultices as well as internally with mouthwashes until it has completely healed up.
This kind of treatment is healthier than cutting (i.e., the lancet) as well as less frightening to be around.
And sometimes a wound is even healed by means of something finer than either cautery or incision; it is healed with the aid of fumigations in this way. Take calamentum, hyssop, oregano, rue, seah, chamomile, abrotanum, and similar herbs; gather all of them or some of them in a pot, submerge them with vinegar, and boil; the pot must be glazed with decent clay; there should be a hole in the middle of the pot on top of which is placed an instrument shaped like this.
It shall be made of silver or bronze; the end with the pomegranate design is to be inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the small bowl above the tube until the bowl becomes very cloudy.
Then repeat over it many times until it dries.
And beware not to make this cure at the beginning of an abscess's appearance. For it often adds to the abscess; one should not do this unless at the decline of an abscess's warmth.
If this tool is not available to you, then take a tube and place goat skin at its end so the patient's mouth will not get burnt as the goat skin prevents the vapor from burning; this is an excellent cure with success.
On extracting splinters and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Often there gets stuck in the throat bone, or fish spine, or another object.
One should therefore extract what is visible of it above that which falls on sight after you press the tongue with an instrument towards the sun and identify to yourself what is in the throat.
And if it is not apparent to you and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps it will come out through vomiting.
Or the patient should swallow a piece of turnip, or a lettuce root, or they should swallow a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dry, soft sponge seaweed and tie it up with thread before swallowing. Once it reaches the place where there is a thorn or bone, and it comes out, then it will be removed.
If therefore, it does not come out with what we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form.
It should be thicker than a spoke by a little bit and at its end it should have a curve that can easily be inserted into the throat when their head is raised upwards.
And be careful not to touch their epiglottis so that it does not cause them to cough and push the bone or thorn with it, or let the doctor insert it by hand.
However, it is better for the patient to insert it themselves because of their knowledge about where the object is located; and they should push downwards or pull upwards with their hand while holding the instrument until it comes out.
On extracting leeches.
Chapter 39.
When a leech is treated with what I have mentioned in the section on treatment using medicine and it does not improve then look at the patient's throat in front of the sun or towards the sun after you press their tongue down with the instrument that I described to you.
If your sight falls upon a leech, remove it with a small hook or with thin tweezers deftly.
If it is not possible with these [tools]: then take a hollow tube, and insert it into the throat of the patient close to the esophagus; next, insert into the cavity of the tube a red-hot iron with fire. Do this several times, and let the patient refrain from drinking water all day.
Then he should take a cup filled with cold water and open his mouth into it; let him gargle his mouth with it but not swallow any of it; then move the water around in his mouth once an hour for another hour with his hand. For the leech will immediately drop off when it senses water.
But if it does not come out with what we have described, then fumigate the patient with bedbugs or leeches with the instrument I mentioned for fumigating a cold.
Do this several times, since it will fall off.
And the method of operating with fumigation is such that you take a pot containing live plums over fire; and let this pot be covered by a lid where there is a hole in its middle, and let an end of the instrument be fixed into it.
Then direct the fumigation and let the patient put his mouth on an end of the tube and close his mouth so that no smoke escapes until you know that the smoke has reached the leech. For the leech will immediately drop off.
If it does not fall out, then repeat fumigation many times.
And let the patient bear thirst, eat salty things, garlic, and onions, but not drink water.
It is necessary that he depart with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is removed from the throat, when it falls upon it with its eye.
It is like a pair of forceps, as you see; except that it has this curve which is inserted into the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is the roughness of a file; when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
### Concerning the opening of abscesses, their incision, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many types of abscesses, of many forms, according to the manner in which they come about; this will be discussed further when we treat of one kind herein; and there are differences as regards the manner in which they should be lanced or opened with two methods.
One of these is of the kind of abscess within itself which contains moisture.
The second method concerns the places on the body where they occur.
Since an abscess occurring on the head is different from one that occurs in the anal region; and since an abscess in soft tissue is different from one which arises at a joint, each of these requires its own judgment as to treatment.
And from inflammations are those which should not be punctured unless after the maturation of pus in them and its completion; and among them are those that must be punctured while they are raw and do not mature according to their completion.
Such as inflammations that are near joints.
Because an inflammation when it occurs near a joint, and its duration is prolonged until what is inside it putrefies, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted; this is the cause for the closer proximity of the contraction of that limb.
Or it is an inflammation in a principal limb; because if you delay its puncturing until it matures, it will harm either that limb or the principal member.
Or it is near the anus, therefore puncture it while it is immature; and you should not puncture a raw inflammation that has not completed digestion unless it is near the anus so as to prevent the putrefaction of its depth and prolonging towards the interior of the anus, and for there not to be a fistula or non-healing in its termination.
You must know the time of puncturing an inflammation that has matured according to its completion; and this is at the relief of pain, reduction of fever, and decrease in redness, throbbing, and sharpness of the head of the inflammation; as well as other signs.
And you must make the same puncture at the lowest point of the inflammation and its most prominent peak; and let the puncturing go along the length of the body if inflammations are in parts of hands or feet, and places of forearms, cords, nerves, arteries, and finally all equal locations that do not have a reflex.
Go with a suture along that member according to its perforation.
When however the abscess is in fleshy parts: then it is better that you leave its opening alone until its discharge has been completed as we have said according to what follows.
For if you open it before this, the course of the pus from it is prolonged and there is much dirt and nastiness, and perhaps its lips will harden and its depth increase.
And some abscesses are opened according to the width of its body for what is needed or according to that part which requires it.
And it is necessary that you make a small opening for small abscesses and a large one for large ones or several cuts according to the size of the abscess.
And there are abscesses in which it is necessary to cut away the skin and incise when already formed like a cloth and has reached its limit because now it is dead such as happens with many ulcers and swellings.
And of these some are incised by an incision having three angles. And there is one of them which is incised in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like an abscess of the groin.
And among them there are those in which you make a round incision or a lunar one and incisions similar to these.
That which has no head like soft superficial abscesses must be opened by a superficial or flat incision only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, and you puncture it, do not rush to extract all the pus at that moment; instead, remove only a portion from within. Then neglect the abscess until another day. Then extract something from the pus again.
Do this many times in stages until it is gone; especially if the patient is weak and feeble, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old decrepit man: for frequently the animal spirit of one animal dissipates along with the discharge of pus; and perhaps the patient may die without you realizing.
Therefore, exercise great caution in this chapter.
And after your puncture of the abscess with this instrument, you must clean the wound; and take note. If the wound of the abscess is small or it is a flat cut, then apply lint made from linen, or old cotton. But if the abscess is large and there are many punctures, then you must insert lint into each puncture until they meet one another.
And if in the abscess you have cut away a piece of skin or you have scooped it out around its edges, then you must fill this with old cotton, or like when you weave cloth, or scrape with linen wool without moisture; and bind it tight until the third day.
Then wash it clean and take care of it with whatever ointment is required until it heals.
If there is a flow of blood during your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after soaking a cloth in them; place it on the bleeding site multiple times.
If the bleeding persists, you must apply a diet, treatment, and powders that I have described in many places throughout this book and its sections.
If it is winter time and the site of abscess involves many nerves; then you must apply small poultices made with warm wine and oil on these areas.
And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy; then you must apply poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, making sure everything is cold. Keep doing this until the third day, as mentioned before, then you must open the abscess, clean it and apply treatment suitable for it until it is healed.
This, therefore, is what is necessary for the general knowledge of abscess treatment.
Following the path of this book's structure, I have already described every type of abscess and how to treat each one in detail.
Chapter 41.
## On the treatment of abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
Abscesses that occur on the skin of the head are small and similar to nodules; they contain cysts which resemble chicken pouches.
And there are many types of these abscesses.
Among these are the fatty tumors; and among them are those which contain moisture resembling mud; and among them are those containing moisture like mincemeat and poultices; also such as resemble these; and there are among them hard stony ones.
And in the operation on all these growths, and their removal there is no danger provided that during the operation upon them the artery does not present an obstacle.
And the operation in their excision consists of exploring them with an instrument whose form is given below and which is called a trocar until you know what they contain.
For if it contains moisture then cut it open by an incision lengthwise along the surface in this manner.
And begin the incision from line b to line g. When therefore the moisture is evacuated then scrape out the cyst which contains that moisture and do not leave any of it behind.
For it frequently returns if any part of it is left behind.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is available; and if not then in water and salt; and fill with it the wound, and leave it till the next day. For it eats away what remains of the cyst.
Then repeat over it the Egyptian ointment a second and third time; and if you require it then continue till you are confident that there is no part of the cyst remaining: then treat the wound with any sort of ointment until it heals.
But if the abscess contains a fatty tumour then cut it open in this form with an incision having the shape of a cross; and throw hooks between the lips of the incision, and scrape it out on all sides: and endeavour your strength at extracting the capsule which contains it.
If however the artery presents an obstruction to you, then do what I shall tell you after this.
And do likewise for an abscess if it is of the stony type, by incision and cure with the same treatment as we have said.
And the incision above a stony abscess is easier because there is little blood or moisture. And sometimes there are certain of these abscesses which occur on the head in some people where moisture is completely absent.
This is because I incised an abscess on the head of a woman, an old lady, and found that the abscess was like a solid hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken; indeed if anyone struck it with their finger they would wound themselves.
However, with other types of abscesses occurring on the head except these types that occur on children's heads and at the roots of their ears, the incision should be a shallow one for all such cases.
Or make the perforation of them always from their lower part so that you may ease the course of the pus downwards.
Then cure it with whatever is suitable to their treatment.
On the incision of goitres on the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often occur on the neck, under the shoulders and hips, but sometimes they are found elsewhere in the body too.
Those of this type which occur on the neck can be a single growth or several; they breed from one another and each goitre among them has its own membrane like a skin just as is seen with knots and abscesses in the head, as we described earlier.
There are many types of these tourniquets. And some of them are made of stone; others contain moisture; yet others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, for that one among them which you see to be of a good disposition on touch, whose colour is close to that of the skin, and it moves with every part, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck nor to the muscles nor to the artery, nor does it lie deep: it ought to be cut by a superficial incision from the upper body to the lower body along the line b. to g., and scrape it all over; and stretch out two lips of skin with a hook or many hooks if you need them, as we said in head abscesses, and extract it gradually.
And caution must be taken not to cut into any veins or nerves.
And let the knife be not too sharp, so that it does not give you difficulty in cutting and disturb the patient and cut into what is unnecessary.
But if you cut into a vein or artery and it prevents you from operating then apply to the wound some caustic rubbed down to powder, or certain powders which check blood, and bind up the wound and let it alone until the severity of the abscess has subsided, and the wound softens; otherwise it begins to decay.
For blood is checked by caustic substances; so return to your operation until you have finished it.
Then feel with your index finger whether there remains anything of the other small tourniquets; therefore cut them and clean them.
But if there is a large vein at the root of the tourniquet then you ought not to cut that tourniquet from its root but rather you should tie it with strong doubled thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without causing harm.
Then fill the wound with cotton that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat yourself.
If the entire strophulus is cut off, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them immediately once you see that there is no more superfluity remaining.
But if you see that there is superfluity remaining because of the size of the strophulus, then it's necessary to aim at cutting its root and extracting it, and then administer the suture we described.
And for those strophuli that contain moisture, pierce it with a shallow puncture so its maturity site becomes apparent to you; and place the puncture below what follows from the body, as we described.
Then administer lint dressed with ointment and similar to it after the puncture, so that what remains of the corruption is corroded away until you see the wound now cleansed; then treat yourself with generative flesh-forming ointment until it's healed.
Chapter 43.
On the excision of the epiglottis from an abscess inside the throat that occurs.
The ancients called this excision of the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it; and here is their description of the operation.
In those with synanche, the excision of the epiglottis should be avoided as it is of no benefit due to all the veins and lung being compromised.
However, for those with a hot abscess in the mouth or throat or on both tonsils but without illness of the gullet, the excision of the epiglottis should be performed to escape destruction from suffocation that may result.
We should therefore, when we wish to do so, cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small incision across its width, at the point between two circles in length, which is an incision into the soft tissue and not into the cartilage; and this indeed is a suitable place for the incision, since it lacks flesh, and blood vessels from there are distant.
If the physician is timid, he should then stretch out the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he should slit the skin until he reaches the canal; let him avoid blood vessels if he sees any of them there.
Then he should cut the soft tissue as described; and the incision of the canal is indicated by the flow of phlegm that comes out from it along with what has been ruptured, and the loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When therefore the hour is removed at which suffocation is feared, bring together the two lips of the skin wound and stitch it solely by itself without the cartilage.
Then apply medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Albucasis says so. The sum of this speech we have related is not an explanation unless they see that one of these abscesses has already filled the throat of the sick person; and the patient is raised up to death, and wishes to be cut through in his panting: they proceed to cutting the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe on the place of the wound with a certain breath, and may be saved from death. And for this reason they have ordered the leaving open of the wound until the malignancy of the illness is consumed; and its malignancy is three days, or almost itself: then therefore they have ordered to stitch the wound, and to cure it until it is healed.
And what I witnessed was that one female servant took a knife and thrust it into her throat, thereby cutting through a part of the pulmonary canal.
I was called to treat her, and I found that she was moaning like the moan of a dying person.
I therefore examined the wound and found that very little blood had come out of it. I was therefore confused because she had not severed the vein or artery: yet air was coming out of the wound.
I therefore prepared some warm water and cleaned the wound until it was healthy; and nothing happened to the female servant except that she had a hoarseness in her voice, and after several days she returned with an improved condition.
From this I say therefore: there is no fear in the incision of the epiglottis.
On cutting an oesophageal hernia.
Chapter 44.
This abscess named Oesophageal hernia is a large one, according to the colour of the body, and it occurs much more frequently in women.
It occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
Certainly it is not natural genius.
It is accidental, however, in two ways: one of which resembles fatty lumps. And the other way is similar to an abscess that forms from arterial pulsation. And it carries risk, and one should not presume to operate on it with an iron instrument, unless for a minor procedure; and you must first try it out, and investigate its interior using the introducer. If you find it similar to a fatty tumor and not suspended by any of the veins, then cut it out as tumors are cut; and remove it together with whatever contents there are from the cyst, if it is in a cyst; or otherwise, then explore its entirety. Then treat the site with what is required for healing, until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
On excision of superficial tumors:
There are many types of tumors and I have already said all their types in the classification; it is necessary for me to explain here the difference between a tumor and an excrescence since this causes doubt.
I say therefore that when there is an excrescence, there is heat and fever, with violent pains until the boiling overflow of corruption subsides and is completed; then indeed do the fevers and heat subside.
But with a tumor there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains; and they are contained by a cyst or sac which is their own case, and is of the color of the body; and its inception is like a chickpea, and it becomes like batecha, and is both larger and smaller.
And they are of two types: either fatty; or containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the classification.
You must therefore, when you come to treat a tumor, examine it and probe it first with the instrument called an introiterator, according to which its form will come in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of probing abscesses and all tumors is this: take up that instrument and insert it into the moistest spot, which you find in the abscess; then turn your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has now penetrated through the skin. Then measure out your hand according to the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw the introiterator and consider what comes out in its track.
If, therefore, moisture flows out of it, whatever its colour may be; then dry it by a shallow incision, as I have said about other abscesses.
And if no moisture comes out in the track of the introiterator, then know that it is a fatty tumor; therefore dry it by an incision having the form of a cross, like this one, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and scrape off the skin all round gently: and keep a poultice over it if you can to draw out the disease with the tumour.
But if the poultice is burst at the operation and it is not possible to draw out the whole of the disease, which often happens, then cut away every bit of it till there remains nothing more of it.
For if any part, small or great, remains, the tumour returns for the most part.
If it gets the better of you and there still remains a bit of it; then fill up the wound at its close with some sharp corrosive powders: bind up the wound, and put on what sits over the abscess warm, and treat it by the rest of the cure till it is healed.
If it is a large cyst, then its two lips, and treat it with that which causes flesh to grow into it.
But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein opposes you, then hurry and fill the place with pitch that has been pounded; leave it tight for two or three days until the wound becomes rotten and the boiling of blood subsides; then return to cut what remains of the cyst.
Chapter 46.
The instruments necessary for cutting and piercing.
Among them are probes, which are of three types.
Of these, there is one large, another medium-sized, and the third small.
They should be made of iron wires with square tips to facilitate their entry into the abscess.
These are the probes, that is, piercing instruments; and one of them is called beris, that is, the piercer, which is also of three types.
Of these, there is one large, another medium-sized, and the third small.
They agree to be used to investigate abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and buboes by that which is made of bone among them.
Others are made round, smooth, and soft like large needles with which cushions are stuffed: that is, from leather or brass or iron or silver.
And the best of them are those made from leather.
Probes are also made of black lead for use in exploring fistulas with rough surfaces to gently rub against those surfaces.
And there are again three types. Because from them there are long ones, from them medium ones, and from them short ones, according to the quantity of the length of the fistula and its stricture.
The form of splints, and they are of many types.
Because from them there are simple ones, that is to say those which have one curve; and they are of three types as you see, large, medium, and small.
And from them there are blind splints; and they are of three types.
And from them there are hooks having two curves, and they are of three types; and from them there are hooks having three curves, and they also are of three types; and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut open and skinned; and they are of three types, because from them there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Their cutting ends are sharp and their other ends are not sharp; and they are not applied like this unless with them help is provided in the skinning of nodes for fear of incision into a vein or nerve; and so that the sick person may be healed by means of them, and find some relief from the burning compared to what he finds when the abscess is skinned.
They are made of copper, and they are like a tube with which spirits are made; and at the wide end there is hidden a needle's point; and in it runs within to without as you wish, as you see.
The shape of splinters hidden between the toes due to the ulcerated perforations: and they are not perceived by the patient; these come in three types, large, medium, and small.
Shapes of tourniquets with which the flow of blood is cut off; they are three types: large, medium and small.
They shall be made of brass or bronze, rounded, slightly elongated as you see; they should be thin.
And you should have these types of tourniquets with you in large and small sizes; so that you can quickly stop the blood flow when needed, especially when no medicine is available.
However, do not use them to stop blood flow from any part of the body; only in fleshy parts such as the calf of the leg, hip, forearm, breast, abdomen, groin and similar fleshy, moist areas.
Sometimes small instruments are made in the same shape from thin strips of wood resembling almond shells; with which blood is stopped when it flows out of a phlebotomy site or after an incision into a vein or artery. Sometimes they're also made rounded like this.
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of male breasts resembling those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell at the completion of sleep (that is when they begin to ejaculate during sleep) until they resemble those of women; and they remain ulcerated, ugly and sore.
Therefore he who is disgusted by it should cut above the nipple with a crescent shaped incision in this form from b to g; then scrape off all the fat. Then fill the wound with incarnative medicine. Next, bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and take care of it until it is healed.
But if the breast droops downwards and softens because of its size, as happens to women: then it must be cut in two on its upper sides with two similar cuts in a moon-like shape, each one containing the other at either end, so that there is a larger line enclosing a smaller one, like this form from line b. to line g. Then scrape away the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sutures and powders which are necessary for healing until it is healed.
But if you cannot complete the incision of what needs to be cut because of the patient's distress or bleeding: then you must fill the wound with a piece of corrosive ointment and leave it until it has eaten away any remaining fat. Then take care of it until it is healed.
On the perforation of an abscess which happens under the armpit.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses which happen under the armpit are hard in nature and contain a collection of pimples or contain moist humours.
Those which are of the moist type must be cut open with a moon-shaped incision like this form from line b to line g. When all the pus has been drained from the abscess then fill it with an old piece of cloth and leave it until the next day.
The wound should then be cleaned and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
If the abscess is of the type known as strophulus, then it should be lanced over its surface, as we have said in the chapter on strophuli.
But if the wound discharges pus, a caustic should be applied to it, as we said above.
Chapter 49.
On the excision of an abscess which occurs between an artery and a vein.
When an artery is torn and the skin above it heals over, an abscess often forms; likewise with a vein, so that an abscess and swelling may occur therein.
The signs by which it can be recognized that the abscess and swelling are due to an artery and a vein are these: when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and deep in the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, there is almost a crepitation.
And that which is due to the vein is round on the surface of the body.
The incision of this abscess is a mistake, especially that which occurs under the armpits, groins, neck and in many places on the body; it is extremely dangerous. It should therefore be treated without the use of the knife, and even those which are on extremities or the head ought to be avoided.
In that which is due to the swelling of an artery's orifice, make an incision lengthwise on the skin. Then open the incision with hooks, afterward the artery: and free it from its sheaths until it is uncovered.
Then introduce beneath it a needle and make it penetrate to the other side; then ligature the artery with double thread in two places as I taught you for extracting two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood which is there comes out and the abscess is discharged.
Then apply a treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall off; afterward treat it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
If the abscess is due to a vein having been cut then you must hold with your hand as much of it as possible together with the skin. Then introduce the needle under that place which you held with your hand and make it penetrate; and let there be on it double thread until you withdraw it from the other side. Then ligature the abscess with it by means of a good ligature; as I told you for single ligaturing, from two sides with the two ends of the thread.
But if you are afraid that the thread will be withdrawn then introduce another needle with another thread beneath the whole abscess near the wound of the first needle; press and ligature your threads at four places.
Then slit the abscess down the middle until all that is inside comes out; then cut off the superfluous skin and leave what has been ligatured from it as it is.
Then put over it a poultice which you have steeped in wine and oil. Then administer the treatment, which is done with bandages and ointments, until it heals.
Chapter 50.
The abscess that occurs from nerve torsion.
Just as an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves; this happens when they are struck or due to excessive effort, and similar things; it most often occurs in the regions of the assistants' [muscles] or calves, and in every place where joints move: and it is a severe abscess.
Its colour is similar to the rest of the body, and it appears in multiple shapes without pain; and when it is squeezed with force, one feels in it a numbness like giddiness.
And it is not an abscess collected deep within the body, but under the skin; and it moves to every side, and does not go forward or back towards the front, nor backwards towards the rear.
What then arises from them in joints should not be invaded with iron [a knife or blade]. Perhaps contraction will occur.
However, for that which is from them in the head or forehead, lift up the skin with a spatula. So if it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps, and cut it away from its root.
And if it is large, then lift it up with a hook and scrape it; afterwards remove it, and collect the wound with a suture; then treat it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the abdomen.
There occur to some people frequently in their bellies and other parts of their bodies swellings which are called 'fungus', on account of their likeness to fungi.
The root of which is fine and their head is thick, and their lips are inverted. And there is some that are small; and there is some which grow to an extraordinary size.
And indeed I have seen a man in whose belly were two swellings which more resembled fungi than other things: there was no difference between them except that the one had a white root and was smaller; and their lips were inverted and they discharged pus, and moisture flowed from them continually.
So I cut them out and found that one weighed about ten ounces and the other six. And when operating on them you should note that if the patient is moist of constitution and the colour of the swelling is white and it has a moist fine root, then you should cut it with a spatulate knife an inch wide; and have ready some cauteries in the fire.
For frequently much blood is discharged when it is cut into; so if the bleeding gets the better of you, then cauterize it at once.
But if you see the patient fearful and timid about being cut with an iron knife, then take a thread well made of lead and bind it around the swelling in the manner which I have described; and leave it on for two days.
Then add some caustic powder to the binding of lead. So do not cease binding with lead whenever it bites into the swelling until it falls off by itself without further trouble.
If, however, the root of the tumor is large, then there is some fear and dread associated with making an incision into it; this is especially true for tumors located in the abdomen.
However, it is possible to cut it in half. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Treat the wound until it heals.
Also be careful not to rush into cutting a tumor that is dark in color, has little feeling, and looks ugly; for it is indeed a cancerous abscess, and I shall come back with a reminder of Cancer later on.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia forms for many reasons. It occurs either because of a tear in the fascia above the abdomen through which protrudes an omentum or intestine, depending on what happens in other hernias. Or from blood that flows out of a vein or an artery, as has been mentioned before. Or from air trapped within it.
If it is due to a tear in the fascia and has an exit for feces, then it is the colour of an abscess-like body and is soft, pain-free, and appears at various sites. And if it is due to the exit of an intestine, then its location will be of a more violent variety, as we have described above. When you therefore press it with your fingers, it disappears; then it returns and is perhaps accompanied by a sound; and it grows greatly upon entering the bath and with violent effort.
If it is due to moisture, it is soft; then it is not concealed when you press it with your hand, neither constricted nor added.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs an abscess appears blackening the skin.
If however it is due to born flesh: then it is a grave abscess, large, hard, and swelling according to its quantity.
If it is due to moisture, then its touch is soft.
And the operation on it is, as you should then consider, if the navel's swelling is due to arterial blood, venous blood or moisture: then you ought to be restrained from its cure. For in it is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I spoke of abscesses due to arteries and veins.
If the navel's swelling is due to intestine or stomach: then you ought to advise the patient to hold their breath and stand stretched out. Then mark with caustic around the navel's whole circumference. Afterwards instruct them to lie on their back between your hands on their back. Then surround with a broad spatula around the navel on the place you marked with caustic. Afterwards extend towards higher parts from the middle of the abscess with a large hook. Then bind him around firmly with strong thread or a silk cord: and let the knot of the binding be slack.
Then open the middle of the abscess, extending above the ligament. If you therefore find it already grasped by the ligament: then extract the ilex hook and insert your index finger into it, pushing the intestine towards the interior of the belly; and if you find a cecum, then take hold of it with a hook, and cut off its superfluity.
But if the artery or vein is facing away from you: then grasp it firmly. Then return to your operation. Take two needles and thread a strong thread through each; then insert the two needles into the circumference you made around the abscess, arranged like a cross, ensuring they penetrate [the skin].
Then draw the abscess together at four points above the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles, leaving an open area until the extended flesh becomes necrotic, and it falls away of its own accord; or cut it away when it is softening and becoming necrotic.
Then treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the umbilical hernia is made of flesh with an opening into it, or if it's fluid-filled; then you must make the abscess concave as we described above. And extract any blood or fluid that you find inside it.
Then treat the hernia with what is appropriate to solidify the area.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have already discussed the different types of cancer and how to treat them with medications; and we advised caution when treating it with iron instruments so as not to cause an ulceration; and we spoke about cancers that originate in the uterus and precautions against treating them.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is located in a place where its eradication is possible; such as cancer found in the breasts or hip, and similar locations on parts of the body which are easier to remove entirely; especially when it is small and just beginning.
When however it has become old, and is large, you should not approach it.
I myself could not heal anyone of it; nor have I seen any other before me who has reached it.
And the treatment for it, when located as we have said, is to proceed with purging the patient of black bile several times. Then perform bloodletting if you find it with clear engorgement.
Then prepare the patient for treatment, which should be done with care.
Then apply hooks to pull out cancerous tissue. Next, scoop it out from all sides with the skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and allow blood to flow without cutting quickly but by squeezing the areas and wiping off thick blood with your hand or any other suitable tool available.
If however the flow of thick blood from an artery or vein presents a problem, then cauterize the vein until the blood stops flowing. Then treat it with the remaining treatment until cured.
On the Treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter 54. Now we have described in the division of types of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water occurs: and all signs of each type, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of ascites; and it does not approach with iron for types tympanitis or hyposarcum, for this is mortal.
When you have been already treated this type of dropsy tympanitis with medicines, and it has not yielded to your treatment, then consider. For if the patient has already developed weakness, or there is another illness besides dropsy, such as a cough, stomach problems, or similar; then beware of treating them with iron, for it is to be feared.
But if you see a patient with abundant strength, no other illness besides dropsy alone; and they are neither young nor old: then the method of treatment is for you to lift them up while standing between your hands, while an assistant behind them presses on their stomach with their hand, forcing water downwards.
Then take a sharp spine, shaped like this. It should have two pointed parts, be long, with the point like that of a spine. Yet let there be some shortening along it gradually so you do not pierce through to the intestine during treatment and injure it.
Then consider... For if the dropsy has originated from the intestines, then it is necessary that you make an incision three fingers long below the navel, leading downwards towards the pubic bone.
If the cause of hydropsy is disease of the liver then your cut should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
And if its cause is the spleen then your cut should be on the right side and it must also be on whichever side the patient wishes to lie, so that superfluities do not flow towards a weak place.
Then pierce the skin entirely with an instrument. Then insert into that incision and raise your hand with a spatula between the skin, and scrape as if you are flaying it; and let what is scraped off be the size of a fingernail or thereabouts.
Then pierce that which has been scraped until the spatula reaches an empty space; this is a place of water. Then extract it and insert into the hole an instrument that is shaped like this: [diagram of an instrument]. And it is like a cannula; it is made of silver or brass or gilded bronze, soft and clean; there is a small hole at its lower end, and on its sides are three holes, two on one side and one on the other: and its end is cut in such a way as to resemble the incision of a reed, as you see; at its upper end is an annular ring.
For when the instrument reaches water then it immediately sinks on top of the instrument; so evacuate from the water at once half a measure [of liquid].
Because if you evacuate more than is necessary then perhaps at that moment the patient will die due to loss of his animal spirit; or he will suffer a swoon which approaches death.
Indeed, evacuate from it according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the dispositions of the patient indicate to you regarding the strength of their pulse and their good health.
Then extract the instrument, and retain the water.
This is because it is kept immediately next to the skin which retains the hole that is over the fistula: of which I have spoken, so that you may bore it according to that manner.
Then repeat the use of the instrument on the second day, if you see that the patient can tolerate it: and also remove a small quantity from the water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself against error: until there remains of the water only a small amount.
But if you fear for the patient, and let out a large amount of water: then treat it with burial in hot sand, and much sweating in the bath and the sun, and allow them to suffer thirst: and treat it with drying medications until they are healed: and cauterize over the stomach, flanks, and spleen after the extraction of water: according to what I have spoken about previously.
On the treatment of children who are born with their urine passageways unperforated.
Chapter 55.
When any child emerges from their mother's womb, and the head of their penis is unperforated, or has a narrow hole, or is in the wrong place...
It is therefore necessary to assist with its perforation immediately upon their birth using a very fine spatulam, in this form... [sketch omitted]
Then place a fine leaden peg in the hole and tie it; keep it there for three or four days.
When he therefore wishes to emit urine, let it be removed, and let him urinate. Then bring it back down.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the site will not allow it to close up.
He however whose hole is tight is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days until it becomes enlarged.
But those in whom the hole is not in its proper place suffer harm. This is because in those who are born the hole is at the end of the shaft; therefore they cannot urinate forwards until they raise the penis upwards with their hand. Nor is he able to generate offspring because the semen cannot reach the womb by going straight; and this is a very nasty disease.
And the method of operating on him is for the patient to lie prone on his back. Then stretch the head of his penis with your left hand by a strong pull, and cut off the glans from the shaft at the junction with the frenum, either with a lancet or a sharp knife; as is the cutting of a reed, or like when you pare something so that its middle comes level with the glans; and so that the hole falls in the middle where it ought to be.
And take care during your procedure not to suffer from a bleeding. It often happens indeed. Object therefore to him with that which cuts off the blood, and take care of the wound until it is healed.
 Of phimosis that occur in the foreskin and glans penis, and of their corruption, blackening, and adherence.
Chapter 56.
These phimoses often occur on the penis and there is an ugly flesh bump.
And from this some are malignant, and others not malignant.
Therefore the non-malignant one must be hung up with a fine hook and cut it off until you clean all of it. Then place over it a poultice steeped in Egyptian ointment. Take care of it afterwards with Dyaphygin ointment until it is healed.
But if the phimosis is malignant, ugly-colored, you must apply a caustic to it after its excision and scraping.
If however the phimosis is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised person, and part of it is inside, and a part outside; then you must remove that which is inside first until it heals up, then treat what's on the outside: because when you heal both together, the foreskin will not be healed without being perforated.
And these things happen also with the testicles, blackening and corruption of the foreskin. It is therefore necessary for you to hollow out all that has already turned black, or what is about to be corrupted, and what is already corrupted.
Then sprinkle on top of it after that with honey which has already been shaken up with flour from pomegranate skins and herbs that have been crushed and sifted.
Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
But if there should be an outflow of blood, then apply the caustic with a lunar caustic, according to this form.
The caustic is indeed useful for two conditions at the same time, namely an outflow of blood and a wound when it becomes corrupted.
But if the head of the rod becomes eroded and is completely destroyed within an hour, then you must insert into the penis a lead tube so that the patient can urinate over it.
In the case of an adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the rod, and this kind of adhesion only occurs in someone whose foreskin is healthy and does not need circumcision; and when there is an adhesion due to a wound or swelling: you must therefore scrape it away using a blunt spatulum until the ligament is loosened and the head of the rod is freed on all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish these with precision, then you must scrape away a little from the head of the rod and also from the foreskin. This is because when the foreskin is thin it may be perforated quickly on account of its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and head of the rod with a fine linen cloth which has already been dampened in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with styptic wine until it is healed.
Chapter 57.
On cleansing children and curing them from error occurring to them.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like the rest of wounds; but since it is from our action, by our will, and its use is proper for boys, it is necessary that we mark this operation with an improvement and lead to health via an easier path.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws and it is only something we acquired through experience.
This is because I found that most craftsmen and bloodletters use cleansing by cutting with a knife or scissors; they apply alfechi (a type of medicine) and ligature with thread, and incision with an unguis (nail tool).
I myself have now tested all these methods, and I did not find a better cleansing method than using scissors and ligature with thread.
Because in cleansing with a knife the skin often escapes (i.e., is not properly treated). Because the foreskin's skin has two layers; therefore, perhaps the upper layer is incised and the lower layer escapes (i.e., is not treated), necessitating another incision and causing pain. And with cleansing that is done with alfechi, i.e., a finger-like tool which shoemakers use, the incision of the tip of the male member is not secured because it may enter its opening (and cause damage).
In cleansing with an unguis (nail tool), perhaps the iron slips and spoils your operation; moreover, a boy's skin is naturally short (i.e., small) and they are often born in such a way that they do not need circumcision - I have seen this myself.
The process of excision with scissors and tying the wound with thread proved to be a good experience for me because the scissors are proportionate to the incisions; therefore, as their sharpness above is also sharp below. When you place your hand on the above-mentioned premises, the two sharpnesses are proportionate and make incisions according to one operation at a given time; thus creating compression of similar form containing skin on every part of the rod with which there is no possible mistake.
The way to perform this operation is that you make the boy, especially one with some intelligence, understand that you are doing nothing other than tying his thread around the rod and will let him go until another day.
Then make him enjoy and rejoice in every possible way from the fact that he understands it. Then make him stand between your prepared hands and not be seated; hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy does not see them nor any other instruments at all.
Then insert your hand into his rod and blow on the skin; pull it upwards until the head of the rod comes out. Then clean that part from any dirt that has gathered on it.
Then tie the marked place with double thread. Afterwards, tie below that another slightly looser one according to what is needed. Then hold between your thumb and index finger the lower place with a good grip; make an incision in between both threads. Then lift the skin upward quickly and extract the head of the rod. Then let the blood run out gradually (for this is better), and put powder on it; then upon the powder a cloth spread with reduced veal broth in which has been stirred rose oil of good quality, bruised with fresh roses; leave him thereon until another day, and treat with remaining treatment until he is healed.
The shape of the scissors used for cleansing (wounds) is as follows:...
Let there be two sharp points at the ends and let them intersect; lest an arm of the nail jut out on these; and let the length of both cutting edges be equal to the length of the two handles.
However an error occurring in cleansing is this: for perhaps the whole of the inner skin has escaped, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore you must stretch it back from your hour with your nail before the application of the styptic; and cut it equally.
But if you cannot hold it with your nail then extract it with a hook and cut it.
But if three days have passed and that which is under the swollen rod remains an abscess; then let it be, until the abscess sits warm, and scrape it with ease, and cut it as prepared for you: and beware of the head of the rod. For it will not harm him.
Treat it therefore with that which consolidates wounds from the powders we described in the treatise on powders; and if it is cut out of the skin beyond measure and escapes upward, neither will this harm him either.
Take care of it with what we have said until it heals.
Chapter 58.
On the extraction of retained urine from the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs from an occlusion caused by a stone, or by congealed blood, or by pus, or by flesh and things similar to those that we have described among the ways of treatment in this division.
And if the urine does not loosen and you see that its retention is due to a stone which has already reached the neck of the bladder; then it's necessary for the patient to be positioned bent over his knees. Then his feet should be arranged on his back and he should stretch out his belly from the upper part of his spine; and the patient should draw in his breath as far as is possible for him. Thus the neck of the bladder is forced towards the back for the ejection of the stone; therefore, urine is evacuated.
But if this does not resolve and the matter is severe for the patient; then it's necessary that you perform its extraction with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form Let it be made of silver, and let it be fine, soft, hollow like the quill of a feather in fineness equal to a ray, long about the length of one palm: let there be a fine nozzle at its head.
And the way of urine's exit through it is, take a doubled string and tie at its end wool or cotton, a good ligature: and insert the end of the string into the lower part of the syringe; and cut with scissors if anything superfluous remains from the wool, but insert [the filament] into the nozzle gently like a plug.
First grease the syringe with oil or butter and the white of an egg; then make the patient sit on a seat, and swab the fistula, and anoint his member with moistened lint and olive-oil and tepid water.
Then introduce the syringe into the member gently until it reaches the root of the member.
Then tie it with two threads above, on the part of the belly.
Then push the syringe inside it until you reach the bladder and feel the patient has now reached emptiness; and this does not happen according to this order unless because the passage, where he enters, is one of twists and turns.
Then draw out the thread with wool gradually. For what you seek will follow the wool.
Then extract it and make what you seek run through the urine passage; then repeat with the syringe and do not cease to do this until the fistula is emptied and the patient finds relief.
On the quality of bladder irrigation with a syringe.
Chapter 59.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder or blood is congealed in it, or pus is confined there and you wish to pour water and medicines into it; then use this instrument which is called a syringe, and this is its form.
It is closed, that is to say deaf. And it has three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
The hollow place where the piston is located should be of a size to accommodate it without any additional space; as long as when drawn back, some fluid adheres to it and when pushed forward, that same fluid is expelled outward like a force pump discharging Greek fire (naphtha), i.e., during the battles of Mars.
When you wish to discharge fluids into the bladder, immerse the end of the pump into the fluid and draw upwards on the piston; for the liquid will be drawn up into the hollow of the pump.
Then immerse the end of it into the rod, as we have described for the syringe. Then push the fluid with the piston; that very fluid reaches the bladder immediately so that the patient feels it.
Design an enema apparatus by which to give an enema to the bladder.
It should be made of silver or latten; its head to be higher than the small alcam and beneath this a hollow into which falls the ligature.
Take the bladder of a ram and put into it whatever fluid you wish to administer as an enema to the bladder. Then tie it between two hollows with a strong ligature of double thread, and warm that fluid somewhat over the fire.
Then immerse the end of the enema apparatus into the rod; afterwards press your hand over the bladder containing the fluid with a gentle pressure until the patient feels that the liquid has reached his bladder.
If the bladder is not available to you, then take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; then perforate it throughout its roundness. Then introduce a strong thread into those holes as they revolve. Then assemble the circle as you would a wheel: after placing on it what you want of moistures and oils and waters.
Then tie it to the instrument; and do with it as you did with the bladder from an expression by hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
 On the extraction of stones.
We have already spoken about the types of stones and their treatment with medicine; I have explained the difference between a stone formed in the kidneys, bladder, and its symptoms overall; I have described a stone that requires surgery using the hand or cutting; there is also a stone formed specifically in the bladder; and one fixed to a rod. I am narrating all this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say therefore that a stone formed in the bladder occurs most often in boys.
And from its symptoms are that the urine comes out of the bladder like water due to its thinness; and there appears white sand in it, and the patient rubs his penis, labours with it, and hangs down frequently. Then he rises up, and the anus comes out with him in many of them.
And healing is easy for boys until such time as they reach fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. Among young men it is moderate; for those whose stone is larger, cure is easier; if it's smaller, the patient's condition worsens.
When we reach the stage of treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, which will extract all the feces that are in their intestines; for this very thing sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
Next, the patient should be taken by their feet and shaken, and moved downwards; so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or jump out from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands, prepared; and let his hands be under his hips, so that the bladder becomes completely sloped downwards.
Then examine him, and feel him externally.
If therefore you perceive the stone within an area, then hasten immediately with an incision over it.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must cleanse your index finger with oil of the left hand if the patient is a child; or the middle finger if they are an adult; and insert it into their anus, and feel for the stone until it lies steady beneath your finger: and turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and push it to the outside towards the place of incision which you wish to make; and instruct an assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and direct another assistant to lift the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with his other hand, to remove the skin that is beneath the testicles on the side of the place where the incision will be made.
Then insert the scalpel, cutting with one which is shaped like this: And make the incision on it which lies between the anus and the testicles, but not in the middle, towards the left buttock: and let the incision be made over the stone itself; and your finger should be inside the anus: and make a transverse cut, so that the exterior cut is wide, while the interior one is narrow, according to how large it can be for the exit of the stone from there not to be larger.
Perhaps the finger compresses the stone which is at the anus during the operation, and it comes out without difficulty.
And you should know that because of its corners and edges, a stone is something from which difficulty arises during its removal.
And if it is smooth, like a gland, and round: its exit becomes easy.
Therefore for those with corners and edges, add it to the wound.
If it does not come out like this, then you should use a lever on top of the stone; or squeeze above it with an implement whose end is curved like the moon, that squeezes the stone and does not slip from it; or insert beneath it a slender instrument with a curved end.
If you cannot do so from above, then widen the hole slightly. If anything of blood overcomes you, cut it away with the knife.
But if there is more than one stone, then push the larger towards the bladder's mouth first. Then cut above it. Afterwards push the smaller one after that; and do likewise if there are several, in twos.
If the large one is very big, it is ignorance to cut above it with a large incision. For the patient either dies, or is troubled by constant dribbling of urine; this happens because the place does not heal at all.
But give him the instrument of discharge until it comes out; or insert levers into its fracture with forceps, until you extract it in pieces.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood; compress it, and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: to settle the hot abscess.
Then turn the patient onto their front over their neck, and do not remove the bandage until the third day. When you remove it therefore, bathe the place with water and lots of oil.
Then treat it with daphne ointment and royal ointment until it is healed.
If however, a hot abscess develops on the wound and it becomes ulcerous, and other similar things happen; such as if blood freezes in the bladder and prevents urine from coming out: this is known by the passage of blood with the urine. Insert therefore your finger into the wound and draw out that blood. For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; and apply to it everything that is suitable for its cure until it is healed.
And it is necessary throughout the whole time of healing that you bind together the two thighs and attach them; for the sake of medicines which are placed on the place.
If however the stone is small and it is in the channel of the penis and becomes fixed there, and prevents urine from coming out; then treat it with what I have told you before you resort to cutting. For many times will you be excused from the operation by this cure; for I have already proved it.
And it is necessary to take a perforator made from iron or steel, which has this form, with a triangular tip that is sharp and fixed into wood.
Then take some thread and tie it to the rod so that it doesn't return to the vesicle with a stone underneath.
Insert the piercing iron into the rod with ease until it reaches the stone; then turn the piercer with your hand on top of the stone gently and gradually, attempting to make that hole deeper until you break through from the other side.
For urine is immediately released.
Then push your hand down on what's left of the stone from the outside part of the rod. For it will break apart and leave with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
But if this cure is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from happening, then tie a thread underneath the stone and another thread over the stone. Then cut above the stone on the rod between the two bindings. Then extract it. Afterwards, untie the binding and clean the frozen blood that forms on the wound.
And it is not necessary for the thread underneath the stone unless to prevent its return to the vesicle; and another binding over the stone unless so that when you untie the thread after the stone has left, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound. And that's why you need to raise the skin upwards when tying the upper thread so that it returns upon completion and covers the wound as we've said.
Chapter 61.
The removal of bladder stones in women.
Bladder stones occur less often in women.
If bladder stones occur in any of them, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited due to the many complications.
One of these is when the woman in question is perhaps still a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who will expose herself to a doctor when she is chaste or among those having husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman who has sufficient knowledge of this art, especially the surgical procedure with their hand.
And the fourth is that it is far away from the stone's location, requiring deep incisions; this poses some concerns.
If necessity requires you to proceed with it, then you should take a female physician who is well-versed; such people are rarely found.
If you decide to proceed with the procedure, then seek out a chaste and skilled male physician; also find an experienced female midwife or a woman who has some skill in this art: make her present too and instruct her to carry out everything that you prescribe regarding examination of the stone.
Firstly, it is necessary to examine whether the woman is a virgin; then you must insert your finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If you find it, grasp the stone beneath your finger and then instruct the midwife to insert their finger into the patient's vagina; they should examine for the stone after placing their left hand on her bladder and applying good compression.
If he finds a stone, then it is necessary that he gradually move it from the urethral opening to the lower part with all his strength until he reaches the hip joint with it.
Then he cuts over it at the opposition of the midpoint of the pubic bone near the hip joint, from whichever side is prepared for him and where he feels the stone; his finger should not be removed from the stone, pressing underneath it; and let the first cut be small. Then he should insert his finger over that cut.
Then he should insert his finger over that cut. If he feels the stone, then he should enlarge the cut according to how much of it is coming out from it.
And remember that stones come in many forms. Among these there is one that is small or large; smooth or rough; it may be long or round with branches.
Therefore, you should recognise its type so that it may be signified to you by this over what you wish.
If blood overcomes you, then add some crushed ginger to the place for an hour until it stops bleeding.
Then return to your procedure until the stone comes out; and prepare what I have mentioned for extracting stones from men so that you can be helped by them with your procedure.
If you are overcome by bleeding and know that the blood is coming from an artery that has been cut; then put some powder on it and bind it with suitable bandages; do not change them; leave the stone alone and do not remove it. Perhaps the sick woman will die. Then treat the wounds.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood is stilled after a few days, and the place becomes suppurated, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
 On cutting for watery hernia.
Watery rupture is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the sac which is below the skin covering the egg-containing testicle; and it is called the scrotum.
And sometimes it is in its own little sac which nature has prepared for it on the part of the egg; and this is another egg, and it is the skin of the testicle between the scrotum that we mentioned; and this happens only rarely.
And the cause of this type of rupture is indeed weakness that happens to the testicles; because this moisture-like material pours out towards them. And sometimes it happens due to an impact on the testicles.
And this moisture-like material has many colours. Or else its colour is inclined towards yellow, or it is bloody red, or dirty black, or watery white; and this last one is more frequent.
The signs by which you may learn where the collection of water is, are these: For if it is in the scrotal sac which we have mentioned, then the abscess forms a round swelling of even length like an egg-shape; and the testicle does not appear because moisture surrounds it on all sides.
And if there is moisture in its own bandage, then it becomes a round abscess with an ear of barley, and because of this the man mistakes it for something else.
And if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part of the scrotum, then it falls under this category.
When therefore you wish to know the colour of the moisture, then try the colour of the moisture in the abscess with a square introduced, whose shape preceded it. According to that which emerges in the track of the introduced object, judge about what is between it.
When therefore we come to treatment with the iron, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to be bled if possible for him, and observe his body to be full.
Then he shall lie on his back on something somewhat high, and place beneath him many cloths.
Then sit to his left, and instruct the assistant to sit at his right, who shall stretch his rod to one of two sides of the skin of the scrotum, and towards the navel.
Then take a spatula broad and flat, and cut the skin of the scrotum from its middle lengthwise, near to the comb; and let the incision be made according to an equally distant line which divides the skin of the scrotum until it reaches the white part embracing [the testicle]: and scrape it off and observe it, or take care against this, lest you cut into it: and let your scraping, by means of which you scrape, be from that part which is suspended with the egg more: and carefully examine with your scraping according to the quantity as far as possible for you.
Then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide hole, and extract all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and stretch the bladder upwards, but do not touch the skin covering the testicles: and cut the bladder as best you can, either all at once or piecemeal, especially its thin side. For if you do not carefully examine it, there is no safety that water will not return due to its incision.
But if an egg comes out of its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the bladder's incision, push it back inside. Then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with stitches.
Then treat it like other wounds until they heal.
If you find the egg corrupted by other blackness, then you must tie up the vessels which are its support, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its support, and extract the egg; afterwards treat it as we have said.
But if water is gathered into two parts, then know that there are two branches; therefore cut off the other part as you did the first equally.
And if it is equal to be one operation, then do this: afterwards wipe away the blood. And insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or rosewater; and put outside another piece of wool that you have steeped in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and groins; and place doubled cloths on top, which are called 'poultices'; and tie them on with a bandage having six according to this pattern.
Two cloths should be taken and soaked; then they are filled with red lead powder, like so: the ends that are pressed are made of cotton or wet wool; these will be tied together around the patient's arms; one end reaches from above the anus to the back; the other side goes across the chest to the front; two more go over each thigh and finally another two go round both groins, and all ends should then be securely tied together around the patient's armpits.
Sometimes this abscess may be artificially treated with the cautery instead of the knife; and you must take a fine lancet-shaped cautery and cut into the skin covering the testicles with it; and this should be hot, as we have described until you see white pus containing water coming out; then take the cautery in this shape.
Is similar to Greek letters.
Then pierce that white pus with it (the cautery), whilst hot, until all moisture comes out.
Then pull the white pus out with hooks, and scrape it with a fine hot cautery; then cut into it as much as you can until you get all of it out.
And be careful not to let the fire touch the testicles.
And you should know that this method is safer than the other one, it will stop bleeding for longer and it's better than cutting.
If however any difficulty arises during the operation, whether from a hot abscess or bleeding or anything else at the time of cutting or cauterizing, you must treat that problem with whatever treatment is appropriate for it as we have already said.
If, however, the patient is fearful and does not expect to survive this operation due to its horror: then perform the perforation as I have described it: and that is all.
When you have confirmed through what we have said about the symptoms that the patient is watery in constitution: then you must make the patient sit on an elevated chair.
Then perforate the abscess on its lower part with a broad spatula: and make the opening according to the length of the body, leaving it wide open until all water has drained out.
Then place a poultice on the site, bind it with a bandage, and let it stay in place until all remaining water has drained out; then treat the wound until it is healed.
If, however, there is resistance to the draining of water at the time when you perforate it: and this is not due to any other cause than that a white membrane creates an obstruction at the mouth of the wound and prevents the exit of water: then you must insert a feather into the wound, or the instrument used for drawing out dropsy fluid whose tip has been blunted: or introduce the latter into the operation on the wound in small amounts.
And you should be aware that water returns and accumulates after six months or thereabouts. When it has therefore accumulated, then perforate again in the same way, and the patient will pass his days.
Chapter 63.
On the treatment of fleshy rams' horns.
You should be aware that, in the incision over this horn, fear leads to death in many cases. Therefore, it seems to me his dismissal is a salvation from that.
And I am reminded of the procedure on it, and the appearance of an abscess.
I say, then, that many abscesses occur on bodies where the testes are located; and this happens for many reasons, to wit.
Or from an acute superfluity or sharpness which is poured out onto the testes. Or from a blow.
And the colour of the abscess is according to that of the body's complexion, and there is no pain; and the abscess is serious.
And perhaps it is a petrous abscess whose colour is dark and has no sensation.
And sometimes it happens from the hardening of arteries and their swelling; as has already been mentioned before; or from the swelling of veins.
What is then from these from the swelling of arteries is recognized by the arrangement of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. And one ought not to touch it at all.
That which happens from the swelling of veins does not discharge anything upon being pressed with fingers.
And now it is possible that an incision be made over this appearance, and over the remaining flesh; and you must excise the skin of the testes. Then extend the scrotum upwards and extract it with a white cloth; and free the spermatic cord from the testis, and tie off the testis; and cut the spermatic cord after you have freed it from every part of the scrotum.
If therefore the egg is consolidated with those newly born flesh parts, then you must draw out the egg and cut it off.
And if there is an adherence between something from the siphon or in that which is between the vessels, then you must free up all of that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If however there is a birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then you must cut all of it and extract the egg as we said before.
Once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool steeped in rose oil and wine; afterwards care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals up.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of fractures, which is done along with splints.
It is an abscess that has developed a sort of wrapping around itself like a swelling with softening of the testicles; and it becomes difficult for the patient to move or exercise and walk about.
And in the treatment of this illness there is fear on account of what preceded its recollection.
But it behooves us to describe the treatment for this as was done by the ancients.
I say therefore that you must make the patient sit upon an elevated seat. Then push up the supporter of the testicles to the lower parts. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers while holding onto the vessels that are closest to the rod; and let another assistant grip this and stretch it with a strong pull.
Then make an incision with a sharp-edged spatula that is two digits wide across the straight path of the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
Then remove the skin from all sides as we have told you when extracting arteries that are located on prominent areas of bone.
After that, attach to them a needle in which is a thread twice as long and tie it on the first of those places where the veins are present; and tie it again at the last one. Then cut them in the middle of that straight incision according to the length of the body; and extract what is accumulated from dirty corrosive fluids.
Then treat the wound with the same treatment as other wounds where you want to generate pus so that the vessels which nourish one of the testicles may fall out. Indeed, it is not an evil thing.
But if it should happen to all the veins, then both testes with their vessels must be removed on account of this; so that no egg may lose its nourishment due to the incision and shrivel or dry up without being any use to them.
Chapter 65.
On treating branches of the intestine:
The cause of these branches is from an incision that occurred through the sifach extending over the belly into the region of the groin on account of a tear in the belly.
Why do the intestines from that rupture extend towards one of the testicles? This rupture is either on account of the sifach or its extension.
These two types of injuries occur due to multiple causes such as blows, jumps, shouting or lifting heavy objects and the like.
And the sign is that it comes from an extension of the scapula. It is a condition that happens gradually over time and not suddenly; it is an abscess with its deep aspect pointing inward because the scapula compresses the intestine.
And its sign is when it comes from the breaking of the scapula because at first it causes severe pain suddenly; and it is an abscess turned outward appearing just under the skin: this is due to the protrusion of the intestine and its course towards the outside of the scapula.
And sometimes it exits with the intestine's tube; this is called a 'Ramex intestinalis' or hernia, and sometimes it happens with wind.
And sometimes faeces pass into the intestine and get stuck there; this is deadly for the patient because it causes severe pain especially when pressure is applied to the area.
And there is fear concerning the use of iron in treating these types of illnesses; thus, one must be careful to avoid complications when using it.
The method of surgery is to instruct the patient to push the intestine back into their abdominal cavity with their own hand if they are able and willing to do so. Then have them lie down with their neck between your hands; then lift up their legs.
Then stretch the skin that follows it upwards and cut through all of the scrotal skin lengthwise. Then fix hooks into the two lips of the incision according to your need in opening up the wound with them; and let the incision be such that it is possible for an egg to exit through it.
Then scrape the spermatic cord and what is beneath the skin of the testicles until you uncover the white albuginea, which is hard on all sides; then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, into that which is between the white albuginea, which is under the scrotum's skin, and the second spermatic cord, and completely remove the adhesion that is in the scrotum's back part.
Then move with your right hand towards the interior of the scrotal skin and, as you do this, pull upwards on the white albuginea with your left hand; raise the testicle along with the spermatic cord toward the area to be cut, and tell your assistant to lift the testicle upward while you free the adhesion behind it upon completing the dissection.
And check with your fingers that nothing of the intestine is wrapped around there at the white hard albuginea. But if you find anything of it there, then push that part towards the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle with thick thread made of ten linen threads and insert it into the last spermatic cord, that is, the tunica vaginalis that follows the scrotum's incision; then cut off the protruding ends of the thread until you are left with four strands. Next, form some of these into a cross-shaped figure and bind them with the aforementioned 'alsifach' (a tough band) that lies beneath the testicle's skin; do this tightly around the spermatic cord so as to prevent any blood vessels from sending nourishment to it, lest an abscess forms. And place another band on top of the first one, two fingers' breadth away from it. After these two ligaments let there be left of the sifach, which is under the skin of the testicles, the amount of one finger's length; and cut off all that remains according to its roundness, and remove from it the egg.
Then cut through the lower part of the skin of the testicles with a slice from which blood and pus flow out; as we described above.
Next apply wool steeped in oil to the wound; and use the ligament as we described above. Sometimes the white sifach that we have mentioned is cauterized after its incision for fear of profuse bleeding. For this often happens. And leave the ligature in place until it falls off by itself.
But if its falling off is delayed, then bathe it with warm water; and place over it the substance that we mentioned until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the usual treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Chapter on the Ramice Leech.
In this chapter on the treatment of the Ramice Leech, I have not seen anyone who has dared to attempt its treatment with iron [instruments].
And those who were the first to comment on it said that its treatment is carried out as we described above for the ramice leech with the vine [leech]. That is, bind the cords around it after its incision with ease at the bottom; then cut in the middle and treat finally with what opens it until the cords fall off; and treat the wound as we said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
The disruption which occurs in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, as we have said, and the site protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is only for a short while, and then returns at all hours: but if this state persists for some time, there is added a hernia of the spermatic cord until eventually the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And this occurs due to an extension of the spermatic cord which is in the groins, as we have said. Which is to say, because the spermatic cord becomes extended; then it softens, the site hardens, and it protrudes.
And its treatment is with the caustic, as has been mentioned in the previous chapter.
And sometimes it is treated with the iron in this manner: that is, to have the patient lie on his back between your hands. Then cut the site of the rupture, which is hardened and protruding, with an incision across its width to a depth of three fingers' breadth.
Then grasp the spermatic cords and that which is beneath the skin until such time as you have identified the white spermatic cord which follows it under the skin.
Take an iron rod and place it over the protruding site of the spermatic cord, pressing it deep into the abdomen.
Sew the two protruding sites on the end of the iron rod from the spermatic cord together with a suture; then remove the end of the iron rod.
And do not cut into the alsifach at all, nor stretch the ovum, or anything else, as I have made you aware of during the treatment for an intestinal branch.
Then treat that wound with the treatment of wounds. Therefore, when you cut the filaments, clean it, and restore the wound until it hardens.
For sisach contracts and does not add to the prominence of the rupture.
And the cautery is better in this place, for it is closer to healing.
Chapter 68.
Concerning softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles softens many times in certain men due to which the flesh that is between them also softens, and its appearance becomes unsightly.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked to treat it that he make the patient lie on his back and cut all of the skin which has softened onto the natural skin.
Then gather the two lips with a suture; and if you wish, sew the excess of the softened skin with three or four sutures, and secure the suture.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat with the treatment of remaining wounds until it is healed, and the filaments fall off.
Chapter 69.
On castration.
You should know that castration is forbidden by our laws; therefore, I could have omitted it from this book of mine, and there would be no need to mention it except for two reasons.
The first reason is so that it may be within the knowledge of the physician when he is asked about it; and also so that he may know how to treat a person who has undergone such a procedure.
The second reason is that we often require the castration of certain animals for our own benefit, such as rams, goats, cats, and similar creatures.
I will therefore say that castration is performed in two ways. Either by scraping. Or by incision and cutting.
In the procedure that is done by scraping, the method of operation is as follows: you should make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften, relax, and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and are no longer perceptible to touch.
In the procedure that is done by incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligament and cut above each testicle with one incision until you see two testicles; then cut these after scraping both of them, but do not let anything from the scrotum remain except for a thin layer which is over the cord.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by scraping because scraping may leave some of the testicle behind, which will make the animal desire sex.
Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism, there are two methods.
A hermaphrodite is made from men in two ways. One of them is because it appears in him what follows space, or on the skin of the testicles, what is between the two testicles, a figure like a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs; and sometimes urine runs out of what is on the skin of the testicles.
However, in women there is one type, and it is a woman's vulva over the pubic bone like small male testes entirely, protruding to the outside; of which one is like a man's penis, and two are like two testes.
And the treatment of these three types, two from men, and one type from women, is as follows: because you must cut away the added flesh until the impression of it escapes. Then treat them with the treatment of other wounds.
However, in the second type of men from which urine runs out of what is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is it treatable at all.
Chapter 71.
On the cutting of warts, and protruding flesh in women's vulvas.
A wart perhaps is added on top of the natural thing until it becomes ugly and its appearance is unsightly; and sometimes it magnifies in some women so much that it expands like men's, and reaches to intercourse.
You should therefore hold the excess of the tumor with your hand or with a hook and cut it off; and do not stop cutting, especially at the deep root; so that there is no flow of blood.
Then treat it with the treatment for wounds until it is healed.
However, flesh arising is the flesh that grows from the opening of the womb until it fills itself; and perhaps it exits to the outside resembling a tail; and for this reason some ancient physicians call the illness 'tailed'. We should therefore cut it like we cut the tumor, and treat it until it is healed.
On the treatment of alratica, which is an unpenetrated wound of a woman.
Chapter 72.
Alratica is when there is an unpenetrated wound of a woman or a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental alratica arises from an earlier illness; and it occurs either due to added flesh born of the flesh or a thin membrane or thick membrane; and it can be in the depths of the womb or its sides or at its top or bottom; and it prevents intercourse, impregnation, childbirth, and perhaps menstruation.
Its diagnosis is made by the midwife's inspection, if the obstruction appears nearby.
If it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is from a thin membrane and it's near the two lips, then hasten to tear it apart.
And it is necessary to place some gauze on the two lips.
Then put the index fingers of both hands together, and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread. Then extend the two lips with force until they tear open delicately, revealing the orifice.
Then take some wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the wound; have her come every day so that the wound does not heal with any other matter.
If the orifice is thick and dense, then it must be cut out with a spatula that is wide like a myrtle leaf.
If the growth is fleshy in nature, then suspend it with hooks and cut it out; have ready some medicines which will stop any flow of blood without cauterization such as gum acacia and dragon's blood mixed with egg white.
Then insert a lead tube of adequate size so that the wound does not heal too quickly; keep it in place for some days and apply a linen plug afterwards, then treat any remainder with healing remedies until it is fully healed.
And when there is a birth of other flesh-like growths inside the womb, they must be cut out like this; for while an abscess or cancerous lump inside the womb are not treated with iron at all, it would be counterproductive to do so.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of haemorrhoids, itchy bumps, red moles on women's bodies.
Haemorrhoids are indeed an opening of the veins which causes much blood to flow out from them regularly.
When hemorrhoids are burned, they become hardened; and I have already spoken about their types and signs in the division of them, and here I will speak about which ones receive a cure and which do not.
I therefore say that hemorrhoids which are inside the uterus opening and do not show externally have no cure with a knife.
Those hemorrhoids which are inside the uterus opening but also felt externally - these are the ones that can be cured.
Therefore, it is necessary to put the woman into a cold house. Then stretch out the hemorrhoids with tweezers or a rough cloth, and cut them off from their roots.
Then sprinkle on them at the time of blood flow from one powder of these cut ones without any mixing - acacia, dragon's blood, frankincense and similar things.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. Afterward, put her into cold water.
If the blood flow persists then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rinds and galls and similar things.
Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar to make a plaster from it on her back.
If the blood stops with this then it is good; if not, apply cupping glasses to her back and breasts without making any cuts.
Then take wool and dip it into the juice of thapsia or eelgrass juice or the juice of alant roots (that is, greater meadow-rue), Pontic wine and bind it on with linen.
When the abscess is quiet, then treat the place with ointments until it heals.
Bartholomew is red like the heads of garlic, and he is of a rough appearance.
It is necessary then that you cut away what appears from it, as I said earlier equally on both sides; and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of the womb which happens in childbirth.
There are many kinds of abscesses which occur in the womb, such as cancer, and stony abscess, and ulcer, and scabby sores, and lekilati, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulae, and haemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and telar, and hot abscess.
And I have already spoken of all these diseases and their kinds, and their signs, and their treatments in different chapters; it is necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess which occurs in the womb, when it is one of those abscesses which collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening with an iron is performed.
It is necessary therefore that you pay attention. Then if the pain of the abscess in its onset is sharp with a throbbing sensation, and heat, and fever; and you see it turn red; if feeling fails over it, then do not hurry with its perforation; and treat it with that which assists towards maturation, until such time as the sharpness of the symptoms subsides.
Then you should make the woman sit on a seat which is wet with two cushions, and recline, or be propped up over her back, and gather her feet towards the lower part of her belly; and let her hips be expanded, and place her arms under her knees, and bind each one with a suitable bandage to it.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and use the tool to open the womb's opening.
And when you wish to use this tool, you must insert the rod deep into the woman's womb so that what enters from the tool does not exceed the depth of the womb and harm the patient.
But if the tool is longer than the depth, then you must place markers on the shaft to indicate the womb's depth so that the tool does not penetrate further and harm the patient. The assistant should turn the handle which runs along the tool from above, holding it steady, and turning until the womb opens.
When the head appears and is felt by hand, being soft and gentle, you must cut it at its top with a spatula an inch wide.
When pus is drained, you must place on the wound a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil with some styptic quality and apply it deep inside the womb.
And place outside over the womb and over the pubic hair clean wool soaked in water boiled with apples.
Then you must treat it for two days with an ointment suitable to the wound until it is healed.
And the womb and wound are sometimes washed so that they are irrigated with water and honey; then with water boiled with lily root or long aristolochya; after this return to ointment.
But if the wound is hidden inside the womb, you must refrain from treating it with an iron tool, instead treat it as said above.
Chapter 70.
The teachings on midwifery, how living embryos are treated when born with an unnatural shape.
It is necessary for midwives to first understand the shape of a normal birth.
From these signs it can be recognised that when you see a woman pushing downwards and wishing to take in air, and what is above her relaxes during the birth, and there is urgency about the exit of the embryo: then you should know that this birth is taking place according to its natural shape, and its exit will be over its head, and the afterbirth with it either suspended or hanging from the umbilicus.
When you see these signs, it is necessary that her abdomen be pushed, so the embryo descends quickly.
For when it has descended on its head, the afterbirth descends with it, and is cleansed of those superfluities by a good cleansing.
All other forms of birth besides this one are unnatural and unworthy.
Sometimes a fetus exits on its feet, with its body coming out before its head and its feet or hands first, sometimes one foot; sometimes the baby's head comes out with its hands; sometimes it is the breech which emerges: perhaps the neck turns; all these unnatural shapes are unworthy.
Therefore it is necessary that the midwife be prudent and subtle with regard to all these matters, take care not to err or be deceived; for I am showing each shape and form, how they are composed of parts, and indicating what they mean, so they can stand on their own.
When the fetus exits headfirst in its natural delivery and it becomes intense for the woman and difficult for her to give birth, and you see her strength already debilitated: then have her sit on a chair, or women hold her; and vapor from a woolen cloth with fenugreek decoction, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert between her fingers a small spatula and tear with it the perineum, cutting it with her nail until what is inside it runs out of moisture; then press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then the woman must be given an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil.
Then instruct her to be pressed after the enema; make her sneeze with a powder puff and hold her mouth and nose at once. The fetus will exit immediately.
If two of the fetus's hands exit first, it is necessary that you pull them back with ease gradually. If it does not obey upon entry, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet upwards; then shake the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so as not to fall with the shaking.
If the hands do not exit and the fetus dies; then cut them and extract its remainder; tie its hand with a cloth and pull it out evenly; for he will exit.
The exit of the embryo feet-first. When the fetus exits feet-first, then it is necessary to push its feet upwards; afterwards turn it gradually and then level it out.
He should then take one of his feet and stretch it gradually.
When they [the splinters] therefore come out as far as the thighs, then tell him to press it and make him sneeze with pepper: it will come out if God wills it.
And if it does not come out with what we have described, then draw the splinters gradually until you put them in their natural position. For it will come out easily itself at that time.
But if it is not possible with all that we have described: then take from the mucilage of the Althaea plant, and oil of sesame, and dissolved gum: and pound everything in a mortar with good force: then anoint with it a woman's woolen cloth, and apply to his lower abdomen. Then make him sit in warm water until he sweats profusely from the armpits.
When therefore you see that his lower parts have become warm, then give him a drink of myrrh: and place it [the poultice] on top. When therefore he has held the drink for one hour, then make him sit on a seat. Then make him sneeze: and squeeze his mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the abdomen with gentle pressure. For the splinters will come out immediately.
The outcome of the splinters is on his knees and hands. When it comes out according to this form, then insert your hands gradually into his body. Then the woman should lie down on her neck, and let her feet hang towards the lower parts; she herself is to be lying on a bed with her hands folded. Then press gradually upon her abdomen. Then remove what is under her feet from the pillows until she is ready in the lower part. If the fetus does not exit, then take her feet and move them with a strong motion. Then press gradually upon what is above the hypocondrium until the fetus rises to the upper parts. Then he should insert his hands and guide the fetus gradually; tell the woman to push until the fetus exits.
The exit of the fetus hanging laterally from the hands. It is necessary to manipulate her hand for its reduction. If however he cannot reduce it then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed; shake her legs with a violent shaking.
Then apply the ointment you have prepared from mucilages.
If she catches hold of it with her labour then make her sit on the seat. Then try to manipulate her hand for its reduction and guide the fetus according to its natural shape; make the woman sneeze and tell her to push until it exits.
The fetus emerges onto its neck, with hands spread apart, and its face is turned towards the mother's back. The midwife must hold the baby's hand, then gradually turn it over, and equalize it with ease.
When the baby is equalized, then place on its head what we have described, made of oil and mucus.
Then ask it to move gradually. When you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and ask her to lean to the right side. Then tell her to bear down, and make her sneeze with force.
The prepared baby emerges onto its side. When the baby descends into the womb in this way with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your nail until it is evacuated of moisture.
If the afterbirth hangs over the baby's face and neck, then cut it from the navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the baby into the womb until you place it as required; and tell the woman to bear down several times, for itself will come out of a gentle birth.
The emergence of twins or many babies. You should be aware that twins often occur; and sometimes three or four babies are born. However, this is unusual and rare.
There are five things that exist outside of nature and do not fully live: although they multiply, one amniotic sac contains them; they are separated by the sifach which distinguishes between each of their umbilical cords.
And sometimes they are born as a single fetus with an easy natural birth, or they are born with an unremarkable exit, as we have described.
If some of them are difficult during birth and reach that which we have mentioned regarding unnatural positions, then treat them as we have described; and let there be a skilled midwife, who acts with skill and slowness, and the child will be born according to every position with whatever help is given for their safe delivery.
A reminder of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarried.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and even more up to ten; and I have verified that a woman miscarried seven, and another fifteen, all fully formed.
This was determined by the measurement of the wise and glorious one.
Thus, all of this ought to be within the knowledge of the obstetrician. Perhaps they will come to resemble it; therefore, let them oppose this with what is necessary.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus as described in the section on medicinal treatment and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manual manipulation, then you must be mindful.
If the woman is of sound virtue and has not been afflicted by any conditions that may cause her harm, then she should lie on her back on the bed with her head inclined downward and legs raised; two assistants must hold her in place or strap her to the bed so that during delivery her body does not slip out.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with marshmallow, fenugreek, and linseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mixtures, then easily insert it into the womb. Then she should ask the woman for the place where to hook the hooks from the fetus and convenient places to do so.
Consider then if the fetus is ready to be delivered head first: hook the hooks into its eyes, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or beneath the chin, or in the fork of its neck, or near the ribs and under the hips.
If however its descent is by foot first then hook into the pubic bone and middle of its back.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand and place its curve between the fingers of her left hand; then insert this easily and hook into one of the places mentioned until reaching an empty space.
Then hook another or even third opposite to the first one if required so that it contracts evenly and does not tilt to one side.
Then it must be pulled with an equal pull and not a straight one but rather one that moves to all sides so as to ease its delivery just like in the case of tooth extraction.
And it is necessary for that which lies between them to soften and lengthen. If a part is retained from it, then the midwife must grease certain fingers with oil and insert them on that side so as to turn with them what was retained.
So if part of the fetus comes out, then change the hooks to another place that is higher: do this until the entire fetus comes out.
If one hand comes out before the other and it is not possible to draw it back due to its contraction, then a cloth must be rolled up over it. Then draw it out until it comes out completely; cut it either at the ankle joint or at the elbow; and so you must do with the other hand and both feet.
But if the fetus's head is large or it becomes contracted during exit, or there is a build-up of water in its head, then one must insert between the fingers a thorny spatulum and pierce the head with it to draw out the water; or break open its skull using an instrument called an almizdaac, whose shape appears along with those of other instruments in the chapter that comes after this.
Likewise, if the fetus is of a large-headed nature, then one must cut with an algengemat; or draw it out with an almizdaac, as we have said. Then draw the bones out with forceps.
If the head comes out and becomes contracted at the fork, then it must be pierced until all the moisture is drained from its chest.
If it does not form a knot and does not obey attempts to extract it, then cut off the head of the worm with as much tissue as possible.
If there is an abscess or dropsy of the lower belly, you should pierce it until moisture flows out.
If however the fetus is lying on its feet, then traction will be easy and you can direct it to the mouth of the womb with ease.
If however it is trapped at the belly or chest, you should remove it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; tear open the belly or chest until their contents flow out.
If however the rest of its body is delivered but not its head, then a midwife should insert her left hand... [and complete the sentence] If the mouth of the womb is open, then you should put your hand inside to search for its head with your fingers and draw it out until you can see it at the mouth of the womb; after this insert a hook or two hooks and use them to pull it out.
If the mouth of the womb is blocked due to a hot abscess, you should not work on it; instead give an evacuation of moist and fatty substances, apply poultices and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
If the fetus is lying on its side, it may be turned; you should do as we have said for a living child.
If this cannot be done, then cut it in pieces and remove it.
You must not leave any part of the placenta inside at all.
Once you have completed your procedure, then apply what we said for hot abscesses that occur in the uterus.
If there is bleeding, then get into astringent waters, and undergo the rest of the treatment.
Indeed, I have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus; then she became pregnant again with another child, but that one also died afterwards. So after some time she developed an abscess at her navel, which swelled until it burst open and started discharging pus.
I was called to treat her, and I administered long-term medication; but the wound did not heal.
So I applied on it some of the strongest drawing plasters, and a bone came out from its place. Then after several days another bone emerged. I was amazed by this because there is no bone inside the belly.
So I thought that these were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I examined the wound and extracted many bones while the woman was in better condition; she has now lived like this for a long time and discharges hardly any pus from that place anymore.
And I do not assert this as something strange, except that there is knowledge and help in it for the skilled physician who treats with his own hand.
Chapter 77.
On the shapes of instruments required for extracting a fetus.
The shape of the pivot which opens the womb.
Here below is the form of the forceps, which has two handles that are equal in length and each have a pivot at both ends of two pieces of wood. However, this pivot should be thinner than the forceps and it can be made either from ebony or boxwood.
The width of each piece of wood should be approximately two fingers wide and the edge of both is about one finger thick; the length of each should be a palm and a half long. At the centre of these two pieces of wood are attached two extensions made from the same type of wood, which have already been fixed into place on either side. These extensions are each a palm and a little more in length with a width that is around two fingers or slightly wider.
These two extensions are inserted into the womb's opening so that it opens with them when you turn both pivots.
Another similar shape, but thinner and lighter.
It should be made from ebony or boxwood following the pattern of forceps. However at the end of it there are two extensions as you can see above and each extension's length is a palm; its width is two fingers.
So when you wish to open the womb with this device then make the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging down and her legs parted. Then insert these two joined additions into the womb: and you holding the end of the lower instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with scissors, evenly according to the amount of opening of the womb that you wish, until the Midwife does what she wants.
The other form of vertigo that the ancients called the Form of the Pushing Force by which the fetus is pushed.
The Form of Almisdac, by which the large head is crushed: and it resembles forceps, which have teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it is made oblong, like forceps in this form, as you see, which have teeth like a saw's, by which it is cut and crushed.
The Form of Vuncini having one spine.
The Form of Vuncini having two spines.
The Form of Spatumilis having two ends for cutting off the head.
The Form of the two broad Spatumilia.
All these instruments are used, and the more their types multiply, and the more they are prepared by the artisan, the quicker he is at his operation, and the higher in esteem with people because of their number.
Therefore do not despise any of these instruments lest it be unprepared for you. Their need for it is indeed inexcusable.
Chapter 78.
Regarding the extraction of the Secondina nerve.
When the Secondina nerve is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the woman to hold her breath. Then make her sneeze with powder; hold your hand over her mouth and nose. If it therefore comes out by this method, that is good.
If not, take a pot and make a hole in the lid; put into it herbs that open the womb, such as galbanum, rue, dill, chamomile, sea-wormwood, wood aloe, and centaury: Take all these herbs or some of them and soak them with water, then place them over fire.
Then place a reed pip over the hole of the pot lid and another end into the womb; let her hold it until the steam reaches the depth of the womb.
Then make her sneeze as we have described. The Secondina nerve will come out with ease.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not come out, instruct the midwife to immerse her hand in oil of turpentine or marshmallow mucilage. Then she should insert it into the vulva and search for the Secondina nerve with it. Once she has found it, she should grasp it and gradually draw it out.
If it is attached deep within the womb, then insert your hand as we have described until you find the second membrane and extract it gradually following its direction so that the womb does not fall due to a strong pull; rather, it should be moved with ease to the right and left sides; then apply the amount of traction required. It then obeys (your instructions), is preserved, and comes out from any adhesions.
If the os of the womb is contracted, as we have already described, treat it with sneezing and with an ointment made from herbs.
But if it does not come out with all that we have described, then be careful not to tire yourself by repeating the extraction process.
But whatever comes out at the os of the womb from it, you should tie to the woman's thigh. Then enema her with the four-fold ointment. For it will indeed cause her to rot after days, and be dissolved, and come out.
However, when it rots, a bad smell is raised from it to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be administered to it.
Some of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Make an instrument with which to fumigate the woman in cases of retained secundine and menses.
Make it from a glass similar to an alcama or from zere: and place the wide end over the fire: and place the fumigation on top of coals: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and do another one.
Chapter 79.
On the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many children are born with their anuses unperforated, which has already been blocked by a very fine membrane. It is necessary therefore for the midwife to pierce this membrane with her finger; and if she cannot, let her pierce it with a sharp probe, being careful not to wound the muscles underneath.
Then place over it wool dipped in wine and oil. Treat it afterwards with ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will become blocked again, then place a leaden tube in the orifice for many days and remove it when the child is able to void urine.
And sometimes obstruction of the anus occurs due to healing of wounds or abscesses. It is necessary therefore to cut that healing, then treat it with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Chapter 80.
On the treatment of fistulas which occur on the lower part (of the body).
The fistulas which occur on the lower part are nodules and lumps that appear outside the anus or on one side of it; there may be a single fistula or several.
When that nodule becomes old, it opens up and runs out of it a white watery fluid or thin pus.
And sometimes there are penetrating fistulas which come from these (nodules). Thus any discharge that comes from a wound is known by its penetration, and also by the presence of wind, when the patient uses an emetic; and perhaps worms will come out with it.
And there are fistulas among them when they are in the space penetrating up to the bladder and up to the urethra. And some penetrate as far as the hip joint and as far as the tailbone.
But from that by which a penetrating fistula as far as the anus is known, there is also one which does not penetrate; you should insert your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula when it has no twists.
If there is a twist in it, then insert into it a thin lead probe or a hair from a horse's tail until you feel the probe or hair on your finger.
But if you do not feel it at the bottom and nothing comes out of the orifice by way of discharge, nor is there any wind, nor worms as I said, then you know that it does not penetrate; so proceed to its cure.
And when a fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or up to the urethra, its indication is the discharge of urine from it and the prevention of that place being consolidated with medicines.
If, however, it is penetrating up to the hip joint or up to the bone of the hip, then its sign is that the probe reaches as far as there if there is no twist in it down to the bone; and the finding of pain around the part, and that pus always comes out of it: and that medication does not take effect in it nor is it consolidated with ointment.
There is no cure whatsoever for all penetrating fistulas; and their treatment is a waste of effort for the foolish doctor on whom it is performed.
In cases where the fistula is not penetrating and not old, healing can be expected with the knife; as I tell you, and I have proven it myself: and it requires that the patient lie on their back between your hands; and raise their legs above their hips, and let their hips be inclined towards their abdomen. Then insert a lead or brass probe into it until you know where the probe has reached.
However, if the patient feels it near their anus, then you must insert your index finger into their anus.
If therefore you feel that the probe has already penetrated what you have detected with your finger, beyond which you feel neither sinew nor flesh, then know for certain that it is penetrating; do not labour over it because there is no cure for it as we have said.
Some say that flesh can be healed and from the medication by which benefit is expected, it requires a fine cauterium fire to be made according to the width of the fistula as mentioned before, and insert it burning into the fistula until it reaches near the anus. Then repeat this twice or three times until you know that all the added flesh near the fistula has been cauterised which is like a bird's cane.
Then treat it with linen bandages smeared in butter until the cauterised flesh comes out; then dress it with ointments that produce and strengthen flesh.
If it heals, then it is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
And if the abscess breaks out and does not reach your finger which is inside the anus, but there remains between it and the abscess a thick layer of flesh, or cauterize: and you see that there is a fistula in what follows along the surface of the skin, then cut away the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and as you go on cutting with the knife inside the fistula until you reach where the end of the abscess comes out, and the abscess will be released and fall off.
Then cleanse those flesh fragments which resemble the tubes of a feather so that nothing remains from them.
But if blood overpowers you and prevents you from performing the cut due to your own actions or those of another person, then it is better for you and more helpful in achieving a quicker recovery that you cauterize it with fire, or an acrid medicine.
For the fire-cauterization joins good properties: the charring of those additional flesh fragments and the cutting off of blood supply, as well as drying up moisture.
Then treat it with bandages wrapped in butter, or chopped-up cabbage leaves until the place emits pus and those charred flesh fragments come out into the pus.
Then treat the wound with healing ointments that form hard flesh; and these are medicines which have styptic as well as drying properties.
For once they are restored, then it is already healed; and you need not fear repetition [of the treatment].
But if the fistula has already reached down deep into the anus and stretches out from there due to its excessive length: then put your finger inside the anus, and feel around with it for [the fistula].
If you therefore feel a tumor and it is between you and the incision, and it consists of skin or flesh, and it is close to being penetrated; then there is no operation on it except by way of confidence and hope.
This is because one of three methods is administered on it: either you cauterize it, as we said; or you cut it away until you reach its concavity so that it is possible for you to introduce licinia and nearby treatment. And do not proceed too far with the cutting so as not to cut into the sphincter containing the anus, and it happens on the weak excretion outlet without volition. Then treat it with what we have said.
Perhaps it will indeed heal; or you will remove the tumor and clean it after cutting it close to the anus as we said, either with a probe or another sharp-pointed instrument. Then cleanse the filtered flesh which is in the incision as far as you are able with scrutiny.
Then attempt the restoration of the whole wound with its incision and upper orifice where it has healed; and a fistula remains open on the interior part of the anus, and will be lighter for the weak person.
And sometimes a fistula follows in this way: that is, when you introduce a probe into the fistula; and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus; then take a pointed probe which is like a needle for removing splinters, that is, preparing coria, in this shape. And introduce into it a thread wound from five threads, and about that amount. Then insert the probe with a thread into the fistula until it reaches its concavity.
If therefore it penetrates inside the margin of the anus near to it, then pull out the thread from that hole so that you insert your finger into the anus and extract the end of the thread, and unite both ends together: and tie up each one, and leave it for one or two days. The more the thread cuts into the flesh, bind it well until those parts which are between the two ends of the thread drop off; then treat the wound until it heals and is cured.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate by any means that presents itself to you, unless it is very deep. For it does not behove you to make it for the sake of the arm in order that you may avoid cutting into it.
Then do with it as we have said until it is healed.
Make a spatula with spines from what the fistula is split in two; its curve being very acute and one part not acute so that it does not cut into that which is unnecessary, as you see.
Head 81.
Concerning the stitching of hemorrhoids from which blood is discharged when they are cut open: and treatment for fissures.
Hemorrhoids come in two types. Or they exist inside the anus either like bladders of coals or plums; or as if they were grains themselves. And among them some are small and others large; and blood is discharged from them always either singly or many at a time. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are mostly of little moisture, from which runs yellow water or a steady flow of blood; and they are according to the colour of the body.
And the cure for that which is inside the anus is to advise the patient to empty their bowels; and it should be expressed until it exits the anus, and you see the hemorrhoids appear. Therefore, also lift them with hooks; or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
But if they are not retained by the hooks, because of their moisture and softening; then take them with a rough cloth, or with a cord made from double-twisted wool, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle over them after the cutting some hot powders, so that they stay in place like a caustic. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then care for them with the remaining treatment until they heal.
But if the anus does not obey by exiting, then give the patient an enema with a small bite, so that it washes what is inside the anus, and obeys quickly to exit when the patient empties themselves.
However, if the hemorrhoids are external to the anus, then their condition is light and easy; and it is such that you should take them with your nail, or take them with a hook, and cut them. Treat them with what we have discussed until they are healed.
And for those who fear the incision of iron, you must administer their suture in this way. Take the rolled thread, and insert it into the needle. Then draw the needle to the upper part and make it penetrate with the needle into the root from its other side; and wrap the two ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle so they are perpendicular to each other, and tighten the needle strongly with a stitch. Then tie off the thread and remove the needle.
Do this with all the sutures, leaving one out of each; do not draw them tight so that excess blood may flow from it.
Then place over the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or caustic oil, and put it over the wound; and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave it until it falls off.
When the sutures fall off, treat them with ointments and the rest of the cure until they are healed.
On the treatment of fissures. They often happen from drying out of faeces and natural constriction.
When they are dried out and medicine does not help them; then you must scrape with the point of a spatula or your nail until they become moist, and remove from them the upper layer which prevents them from healing. Then treat them until they heal as is appropriate.
If they do not become firm, repeat the procedure with more force than before until they bleed profusely and then treat them until they heal.
On the treatment of Almirmar for inverted and non-inverted conditions, and on Athelil for dry and moist wounds.
Chapter 82.
You should know that Almirmar is nothing other than a round knot of the same colour as the body, similar to the head of a nail; it occurs all over the body but particularly on the lower parts of the feet and toes, and causes pain when walking.
It is therefore necessary to cut what is around the nail-head and hold it with forceps or a hook, then pull it out by its root.
Then treat it, and if you wish to cauterise it as explained previously in its own chapter.
One type of Athelil in dry wounds is a small, rough, hardened, rounded bump on the surface of the body. And it often occurs on the hands of children.
To treat it, you should stretch out the Athelil and cut into it; or bind it with silk thread, or with a hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterise it with fire or with a caustic medicine as mentioned previously; and then remove the inverted and non-inverted Athelil with the instrument I will describe.
A Formica is also a small hardened bump on the surface of the body that goes very deep; and when it encounters cold, there is a sensation like an ant bite in it, and they appear all over the body but especially on the hands.
And its treatment is to take a small tube made from a goose quill, or the strong feather of a vulture; and place that tube over an ant until it fills the circle of the tube with its parts. Then turn your hand with the tube until you cut what is around the ant; and place it deep into the flesh, thus uprooting the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with an air tube or iron tube, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the tube be sharpened to a point, which will draw out the deaf person's earwax; easing its grip on their finger and its own turning.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant as has been mentioned previously regarding cauterization of a boil; see Chapter on Cauterization.
Chapter 83.
On the shapes of instruments which are administered for enemas in illnesses of the anus, and for relieving the belly, and colic.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, or brass, or cast bronze, or sheet copper.
And sometimes it is made of these instruments small or large, depending on those to whom they are administered.
That which is administered for the treatment of small children should be small; and those whose anuses are weak or painful, their enemas likewise.
Enema, large.
Its tube - that is the upper end to which is tied a bladder - should be wide according to this pattern; and it should have a mark showing how to tie the bladder as you see here; its lower end which is inserted into the anus should be tapered, that is not open but smooth, very soft; on one side of it are two holes, and on the other side there is just one hole.
The size of the hole should be according to the thickness of the spokes, slightly larger and into it place the medicines from an animal's bladder or from a sheep's paper which is shaped like a small asofti whose base is one palm in diameter.
And it is pierced with many holes as it revolves, and there should be the space between each hole equal to the thickness of a finger. Then introduce into those holes a strong raw thread, which is made of ten threads or thereabouts, and attach to it the bag like an asofti's. When therefore the bag is placed on it, bind it at the head of the enema tube between the two distinguishing marks with a strong tightening. Then administer an enema with it.
And this is the circular form of the bag depicted here, along with its holes.
The quality of administering the enema with it is that you fill the bag or bladder with medicine which has been heated according to the tolerance of the patient's condition; and be careful not to use very hot nor very cold [medicine].
Then let the patient lie on his back and raise his legs upwards; and place under him an inthan, that is, a leather hide upon which people sit, or a cloth.
Then anoint the end of the enema tube with oil or sheep's tallow, or with linseed mucilage or honey. Then introduce it into the anus gently. Then the attendant should take up the bag with both hands together and squeeze it forcefully until all that is in the enema tube has been evacuated into the intestine.
Then extract the enema and raise the patient's legs to the wall.
If medicine makes him feel deathly ill then he should hold on as much as possible. And if they sleep through the whole night with it then it is even more helpful.
But if you enema them due to abdominal pain, and their death is hastened as a result, then repeat the enema until they are cured.
If there are haemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus then a very gentle and mild enema should be given, using those types of enemas with which children are given enemas.
And let this be the form of a gentle enema for when there is tight skin.
Chapter 84.
I have already spoken about the division of wound treatment in a previous chapter and I will now explain here their treatment by hand and with medicine according to the completion.
I therefore say that wounds are divided according to the means by which they are inflicted and also according to the place on which the wound is received.
The means by which wounds are inflicted are therefore many and various as for instance a blow from a stone or the stroke of a sword or knife or a thrust with a lance or wooden staff or arrow; there are numerous similar cases.
The places on the body where wounds are received also differ; for instance a wound to the head or neck chest abdomen flank and similar parts of other limbs.
And I am describing the cures for certain wounds, so that I may set out this reasoning and rule for other wounds.
And I shall start with simple head wounds, since the description of compound fractures will come at the beginning of Chapter Three.
I say therefore. When there is a simple wound to the head and no bone fracture occurs: consider then if it was caused by a blow from a stone or similar object, and has already broken the skin only; and it is a large wound, and you fear an adverse outcome of warm abscesses: then proceed quickly, and perform an immediate cephalic phlebotomy: and do not delay it: and draw off some blood according to the extent of his strength: if there is nothing preventing him from undergoing phlebotomy, especially if the blood flowing out of the wound is small in amount. And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side from the wounded area.
And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side from the wounded area. And let the patient beware of over-eating, wine, and heavy foods.
If anything prevents him from having reduced amounts of food, then let his diet be further diminished, and let him avoid meats or wines.
And if an abscess occurs on the wound, place upon it a poultice soaked in rose oil alone or with wine that has some astringency to it.
If you are confident there will be no warm abscess, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh with its blood and the air has not yet changed it, some powder which I shall describe shortly: and if the air has already changed it, then apply certain ointments until it heals.
If the wound is large, or it is caused by an incision of a sword and similar weapons: and its lips do not join together with the help of poultices, then you must bring them together with stitches, as I will explain in relation to abdominal wounds regarding their suturing.
If a wound has been detected near the bone and it is hanging loose with no retention except for a small bandage: then cut it open. After that treat the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh in place of skin there; and tell the patient to eat foods which have some weight/substance such as heads (of animals), cooked wheat until it is soft like porridge and similar things.
If you find putrefaction in the skin and it is not attached to bone: then cut away all that is putrefied and throw it out; afterwards treat it.
If there is an artery or a vein from which blood continues to flow in these wounds and it is not stopped by medicines; then make an incision above the artery. If you find that it is not cut then cut it with a sharp knife or ligate (tie off) it. If the need arises such that what I have said is not applicable then cauterize it until the blood stops flowing.
If these wounds are small and simple then their treatment is easy; so that you sprinkle this powder on them: since it hardens them before the air changes/alters them.
Recipe of Flesh Powder (pulveris incarnati) Take one part frankincense (olibanum), two parts dragon's blood and three parts unslaked lime; grind all of this very well and sift it: fill the wound with it and bind it tightly so that it adheres to it well and coagulates together with the blood.
Then compress it from above with swabs and leave it be, without removing until such time as it shall not fall off. See that the medication is not removed from him before he is healed.
And sometimes lime alone will do this, when you have no frankincense on hand, and even dragon's blood performs the same operation in many large wounds, where it is appropriate to place them on top of these and compress them; they are fresh wounds with their own blood that has not been altered by air.
But if it has already been altered by air in some way, especially when this is at a time of year that is summery, then the intention of this powder is not in place: rather take care of it with what we have said, so as to put some digesting ointments on top; or lay poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until they discharge pus. Then take care of the remainder with healing until it is healed.
If however a fracture occurs with the wound in bone and is small, then extract it with gesti: and I shall now speak of the healing of fractures to the head at some point in the future.
On wounds of the neck:
If however a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference between it and the treatment of a simple head wound.
If however the neck nerve has been cut through or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there lies no skill in its healing apart from to be deprived of that which causes violent constriction, such as Zinnia and Zea mays, and their like. Since they harm nerves and contract them.
And do not place anything cold whatsoever on the wound: for the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is superior to other body parts; let it be that by which it is healed from among medicines, gentle, such as lime washed with sweet water several times infused with oil, or with rose oil, and tutia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and the remaining mineral stones, in this manner, and moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then apply a suture; or contract its lips with threads. Then treat it until it heals.
But if there is depth to the wound, or if a cavity has formed within its lower part, where pus has already gathered, then pierce it at a more depressed place on it.
If an artery has been cut within the wound and its flow of blood has been lost; then separate it or tie it off, and bind it; or cauterize it if necessity provokes you to do so.
But if now the windpipe has been split or entirely severed and the larynx saved; then bring together the lips of the skin with a suture over the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe itself, but rather set it equal to its former state, and return it to its natural shape. Then bind it with an appropriate bandage and leave it for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have an astringent quality or those which dry out the wound, until it is healed.
If the wound has already made an impression in the bone, then probe it; if there are fragments of bone inside, extract all of them or as many as you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the wound becomes gangrenous, separates, and its discharge is alleviated.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle over it the powder I described. If however you see bone in the wound, and a fistula forms, then treat it with what was mentioned in its own chapter.
On wounds in spatulates.
If there is a blow from a lance or knife, and you see its depth, then consider it. If breath escapes from the wound when the patient gasps, then know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and is fresh with its blood, then do not apply any powder to it at first, nor bind it tight so that the blood is not retained in its depth and return to the heart and kill the patient; but put on it an attracting ointment, and loosen it twice a day.
If however the ointment is not available to you, then put on the wound's orifice an old cloth so that it sucks out what comes from it of humours; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what gathers in it runs off.
If however three days or more have passed since the wound and no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor tightness in gasping has occurred to the patient, and you see his other conditions are good, then know that the wound is saved. Take care of it yourself with lint dressings and other treatment until it is healed.
But if its healing is neglected, and it keeps opening up, then know that a fistula has formed. Therefore treat her according to the chapter on female disorders.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back then treat it with what has been described before regarding stitching if it is large, or with dust if it is small.
But if it has already made an imprint on the bone and cut off a piece from it then probe the wound and hasten to extract those pieces if they are separated. But if they are not separated then leave them until the wound becomes gangrenous because their extraction would be eased.
The judgement on the treatment of other accidental wounds in the remaining body parts is the same as what we have said before.
On abdominal wounds, and intestinal protrusions, and their treatment:
A rupture of the abdomen is great, medium or small.
Therefore sometimes from the great [rupture] an intestine emerges or several intestines emerge.
Why does this happen? Their introduction is difficult as is their stitching.
And the small rupture also occurs in another manner. It follows therefore that their reduction is made more difficult if you do not hasten to introduce them back into place immediately because they become inflated, opened and enlarged so their entry becomes hard.
Therefore, a medial disruption is better for ruptures because the reduction of the intestine is not difficult like it is with these two types.
Yes, I am aware that there are four methods of suture for veins.
Two common sutures are suitable for sewing the belly and other wounds of the body, and two other special sutures are specific to other types of wound. However, they are more specific for sewing the belly, and I will explain each of them to you with an explanation and a description.
I say therefore that when a wound is small and some of the intestines come out but it is difficult to put them back in, then one of two methods should be used. Either because of the small size of the rupture, as we have said, or because there is a swelling in the intestine due to cold air.
When this is the case, you should warm it up by submerging a sponge or a damp cloth in warm water alone. Or you could boil it in water with squills, rushes, barley grains, and embrocation until the swelling goes down.
Sometimes wine with an astringent effect will do this, and it is better than water alone at reducing the swelling.
Once you see that the swelling has gone down, then moisten the intestine with water in which marshmallow or malva have been boiled. As it soothes its entrance with a small amount of this preparation.
If, however, his recovery is impeded after this treatment, then seek a little more sharpness in the instrument with which you cut the haemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared than cutting; and there is no compulsion to cut after the need and failure of the instrument.
Let one part of it be the single curved sharp part, and let its other part not be sharp, and let its delicate tip not have the fineness of a scalpel, but rather be slightly more blunt; and it is that which resembles chalk, as you see.
Therefore, when the wound is enlarged and it enters the intestine, then it should be reduced back to its natural form in its proper place on itself if possible over that; for it is better.
When, however, the rupture is wide in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the sick person lie on their back and put their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then put their head and chest higher than their lower parts.
And likewise if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the belly, then direct your attention and consider always that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And thus you ought to administer this for large wounds as well as medium-sized ones.
For small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then ensure that there is present between your hands a pious assistant who holds the entire rupture with his hand and brings its lips together. Then remove from it for him who follows a piece after a piece: and this is the way of single suture.
And it is, to take a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound. Then withdraw from the edge of the wound a length equal to that of the ring finger of the physician; and fix one needle apart so as to introduce into it thread at both ends of the skin, with two ends of the suture which is under the skin on the inside until you have made it pierce through to the other side, then already will you have brought together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the suture: and there are four threads.
Then tighten with double thread around the circumference of the needle several times from both sides at once until the two lips of the wound are brought together by a suitable arrangement.
Then withdraw the thickness of your finger as well, and fix into them another needle; afterwards straighten it with thread, just as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not stop doing this with as many needles as you need until you have completed the binding of the whole wound.
And the needles should be medium between thickness and thinness; since thin needles very quickly pierce flesh and thick ones are difficult to introduce into skin; for this reason it is necessary that they should be of a medium size as regards both thinness and thickness.
And it is not necessary to fix the needles in two edges of the skin close together so that flesh may not be quickly pierced and the wound opened up before it has healed; nor do they stretch out with the suture so as to hinder the wound from healing.
Then cut off the points of the needles so that they may not hurt the patient while he sleeps; and put over them little pads made of linen on every side which keep the ends of the needles in place: and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
This particular type of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds. Since one needle or two or approximately that amount is sufficient for the suture of these (wounds).
However, the second type of suture is common, where you gather together with sutures four edges: two edges of skin and two edges of subcutaneous tissue, using a needle that has a thread wrapped around it evenly in fineness and thickness.
Then, when you penetrate with the needle these four edges, bring back the needle from the side where you started it so that the thread forms a loop on top of the wound; this creates a suture similar to the way cloths are tied together by string and place between each part of the suture a small finger's width.
This type of suture is known to people.
And with this type of suture, I closed the wound of a man who had been wounded with a knife in his belly; it was a large gash about one palm length and there were two palms' worth of intestines protruding from the middle intestine and the tear was located right in the center of his abdomen.
I replaced that after his intestines had been hanging outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound therefore healed within about fifteen days; I treated him and he recovered, living many more years after that, going about his own affairs.
And the doctors had judged that it would not heal.
And it was by miracle that I did not treat it with ointment. Because I was in a place where no ointment or medicine could be found. I therefore placed an old poultice on the wound twice a day, and I diligently washed it with honey water until it was healed.
I shall now describe two types of stitches that are specific to this method, according to the text.
And it begins with an acute stitch: you insert the needle from the outside to the inside.
When the needle has penetrated through the skin and is entering the flesh along the length and breadth of the entire body: leave one end on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it emerge at the other end from the inside to the outside at the other end of mirach.
Once you have made it emerge, then make it pass through again at this same mirach end from the outside to the inside: and leave the sifac end that is on this side, and make the needle emerge at the other end from the inside to the outside: and make it go all the way in as you did with the mirach end that is on its part until it goes right through.
Then start again from this same side, and suture it with the end that is from sifac on the other side, and pull out the needle from the skin where it went through.
Then bring it back to that skin, and suture the sifac end which is on the other side with this mirach end: and pull it out from the skin that is on its part, and do one after the other, and another: and do it alternately, until you have stitched all of it completely according to this example.
And the essence of this suture is to stitch like that of tanning hides where they stitch skins together: so you must suture one end of sifac from one side with an end of the skin; and leave it on the other side alternately until you have completed stitching them all.
The second type of suture is specific, as Galen said.
His speech is told as if he compares it to the way some doctors practice medicine, so that they bring together every part to its corresponding match in nature: and they apply the tip of sifac to one end, and the other end to the tip of mirach. And it is done as I tell you.
You must pierce the needle into the tip of mirach near you from the outside and make it penetrate to the inside only; and release the two tips of sifac. Then turn the needle, and make it penetrate from outside to inside on both tips of sifac, namely on each side.
Then turn both of them as well, also make each one penetrate from inside to outside on the other two tips of mirach, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common easy suture, and it is a suture which came before the reminder.
This speech is therefore also that of Galen.
And some said so. The suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles. Which is to introduce into both a single thread; and begin with the introduction of the needle from what is near you, and make it penetrate all the way to the other side, according to the suture of those who are equally skinned.
And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen: then its suture is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen.
The judgement of a wound's treatment is the judgement of other wounds.
Which is because when you treat a fresh wound with its blood, before it is altered by the air; and you clean the intestines, and sew it up, and make it suitable: then place it on incarnantium powder.
If the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ointments that are available to you until they form pus; and the threads fall out, and the sifac and mirach are consolidated. Then treat it as you would other wounds until they heal.
If however you do not have the medicines available, then place an old rag on it immediately as soon as it begins to discharge pus; and change it twice a day, as I taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not require any other treatment in many cases when the wounds are simple.
However if you fear that the wound will spread to main parts of the body by injury, then you must immerse soft wool in moderately warm oil or rose oil; and place it around the areas which are between the groin and armpits.
If they feel pain, or pricking sensations, or putridity in their belly (for this often happens), then administer an enema of astringent wine which is black and tepid; especially if the rot has already reached into the stomach, and is about to pierce through to their breast.
And note that that which comes from the large intestines is more easily healed; and that which comes from the small intestines is more difficult to heal.
The intestine which is called the jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that occurs in it at all; and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and the size of them, and because of the delicacy of its body, and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
If however that which proceeds from the wound is fresh cirrhotic tissue, and you pursue it: return it according to your own reduction method, by which you reduce intestines equally.
If however time has passed and it has already turned green or black, then you must tie it with a thread above the spot that has darkened from it, so that there is no bleeding. In cirrhotic tissue there are veins and arteries.
Then cut off what is beyond that ligament and leave the two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it; so as to alleviate the traction on you when extracting cirrhotic tissue, and discharging the pus of the wound.
Remembrance of the wound that occurs in the intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in some people; because I saw one who was wounded in their belly by a lance blow, and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and the wound had become old: and a fistula formed, and there was an excretion and flatulence from it.
I therefore applied treatment until I was not confident in its healing; nor did I cease to probe it until the site had healed and consolidated.
After I saw that the wound was already healed, I feared for my patient that something bad might happen to their abdomen; but nothing of the sort happened to them. And they remained in a better state of health, eating and drinking, having sex, taking baths, and following their regular routines.
And some medical experts have said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be stitched closed in this manner. And you must take ants with large heads. Then gather the two lips of the wound and place one ant with its mouth open on top of the two lips of the wound. When it bites down on them and clamps its jaws shut, cut off its head as it will stick there and not let go.
Then place another ant near the first one, and keep doing this with ants after ants according to the size of the wound.
After that, bring it down, and close the wound. For those heads remain attached inside the intestines until they are eaten away by the intestine itself, and it heals up completely without any harm to the patient.
It is also possible to stitch the intestines together with a thin thread which has been taken from an animal's gut and attached to the needle beforehand.
And you must take one end of this thread from an animal's gut and strip off most of the flesh. Then tie to its end a thin linen thread wound around it. Then insert that thread into the needle, and sew with it the intestine. Then bring it back to ruin.
And this way of sewing with ants and intestines is only according to the path of trust and hope.
You know that a wound which is large and extensive, especially if it is on one of the thinner intestines: then there is no skill but deception, nor is its healing at all.
Concerning the treatment of fistulae, and abscesses.
You know that any wound or abscess which becomes old and antiquated, turns into an ulcer, does not heal, and discharges pus always without abating: it is then universally called a fistula wherever the affected member may be, and we call this 'zuchemen'.
The fistula is in truth a hard, white, filtered knot with which there is no pain; it has the shape of a bird's feather: and because of this some call it 'risati', that is to say, 'feather'.
And there are times when it becomes moist with pus. Perhaps the moisture is discharged at certain times. And sometimes this moisture is large in quantity; and it is small; it is thick, and it is thin.
And I have already mentioned in the division when I spoke of wounds that any ulcer which does not heal and on which flesh is not formed - it is because of one of nine causes.
One reason is either due to a lack of blood in the body, or because of the malignancy of it, or because there is hard flesh between it and its lips, preventing the birth of flesh; or because it is full of dirt and filth, or because an ulcer within itself is putrid, and the material sent to it is of poor quality: or because the medicine is unsuitable for its treatment; or because the corruption falling in the region is a type of pestilence, or due to the properties in that region, as happens in Caesaraugusta, where diseases are difficult to digest, and nature delays the healing of abscesses; or because there is one bone in it, or a number of bones.
And I have already demonstrated all these causes and their signs, along with the cures and medications for each in the division; and here I must make you aware of the cure for Fistula and Zuken, which is done through surgical procedure with the hand.
Therefore, you should know that Fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For among them are Fistulae that reach major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine; or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs; or any of the vertebrae in the back, or any composite joints made up of several parts, like the hand and foot; and among them are those which spread towards the proximity of the principal member and its likenesses.
Which of these Fistulae is in this condition, is among the diseases difficult to heal, and does not receive a cure, and dealing with it is laborious and ignorant work.
But if there is any Fistula whose depth does not reach these places that I have mentioned, and you hope, trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe made from brass or iron, if the fistula runs straight, and examine it with this.
If there is a twist within the fistula, then examine it with a fine lead probe. Because the softness of the metal enables it to bend and conform to twists.
If the fistula has multiple openings, you cannot mark it out with the probe. Flush out each opening with enemas.
For the fluid you use for the enema will drain towards other openings and flow out of them.
Then carefully determine how you can find out whether there is a bone or nerve inside and if the cavity of the fistula is deep or shallow; or if it is a single fistula with multiple openings and stand over all of these, using all your strength; by questioning the patient and observing the signs and causes of the swelling.
When you have stood correctly over all of these, then go forward with confidence to healing; and consider at that time whether the fistula is shallow close by or in a safe place far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein or any of the places I mentioned; then cut it open as previously described and remove what is inside it through filtration such as putrid flesh, which forms around its opening, made up of flesh and cellulite-like matter; heal it until it is cured.
If however the fistula is of great depth and runs straight then you must cut it open as deep down as possible. Then clean it from all its putrid flesh.
Then apply lint wrapped in sharp medicines; and insert them as far as the hollow of the fistula that you have grasped with an iron rod: do this a few times until the caustic medicine corrodes all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from putrefaction.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If however it does not heal with that, then cauterize it according to what we have described.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is bone, and it is confirmed to you: then expose it, and cut into it as I have described to you; if nothing prevents you from a vein or nerve, or principal limb, as we said.
If therefore you detect bone, and there is something of putrefaction and blackness in it: then scrape it until its putrefaction is entirely removed. Then treat it with something that makes flesh grow in it, until it is healed.
If it does not heal, and emits pus as before; then know that you have not reached the complete removal of putrefaction.
Expose it again therefore, and make an examination of its scraping and cleaning with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If therefore it is healed, that is good; and if not, then know that the putrefaction is in a far-off depth of the body which you have not reached. You therefore have no skill in it but to leave it to nature.
If a small bone is corrupted and it is possible for you to do so, extract it with fine scissors that correspond to it.
If there are many bones, then carefully extract them all using your strength and do not leave any behind.
If any of the moistures cause you difficulty and there is no fear or mistake about opening them up: then open those moistures and flesh if they are present there, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones immediately, then place on the wound something that will cause it to rot: and leave it until those parts around the bones rot away from flesh and moistures.
And ensure that the wound does not heal. And the incision you made during your operation should be kept open. In my opinion, if you are worried then place on it a poultice of ground sulfur and oil that has been steeped in vinegar; or one steeped in Egyptian ointment, or any of the violet-based ointments.
For when those moistures rot as expected, and the bones are separated from them, the removal of said parts will be alleviated along with the extraction of the bones themselves.
But if it is one large bone, such as a shin bone or hip bone and those similar to them, and what has corrupted it is a large part: then scrape it with an ultimate rasp until the blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted in it is a large part and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it must be sawn through and cut away entirely up to where the corruption has spread; then treat it until it heals.
And I tell you this story as an example and a guide for your own surgical practice.
There was a young man around thirty years of age who experienced pain in his leg due to an internal cause, originating from within the body, until it reached his leg and developed into a large abscess; there was no external cause.
So time passed with the man suffering from medical error until the abscess opened up and a lot of pus came out. And his healing was delayed until his leg became fistulated and developed many openings which all discharged pus and bodily fluids.
A lot of doctors tried to treat him for about two years but none were skilled in the surgical arts until I was called upon and saw his leg with the great flow of pus issuing from those openings; even now his whole body had wasted away and his complexion was sallow.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the openings and it reached bone.
Then I examined all the openings and found that they connected with each other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore made an incision and probed over one of those openings until I reached a piece of bone; upon examining it, I found that part to be damaged: already corroded, blackened, rotted, and perforated right through as far as the marrow.
I therefore sawed away what I had detected, preparing the remaining bone.
I appointed that there was no bone except for the corruption which I cut away and extracted. And I had already eradicated it.
Then I applied healing medicines to consolidate the restoration of the wound over a long period. And it has not consolidated.
Then I tried again, and found the bone broken a second time like the first break; and I cut away what appeared to me to be yet another part of this corruption.
Then I attempted its restoration. And it has not been restored.
Therefore I tried again, and did not cease from cutting the bone in pieces and attempting its restoration; but it was not restored until I had cut away about a span of this bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicine and it consolidated quickly and healed; this repetition of the operation would not have been necessary had it not been for the infirm man's weak condition, his lack of tolerance, and my fear over him lest he die: for in every hour from an excess of evacuation he suffered evil swoonings.
He was therefore completely healed; hard flesh grew instead of the bone, and a good arrangement was made within his body so that his strength returned; he resumed his usual occupations and no injury resulted from this for him while walking.
But if a prominent bone in the body has already been broken then you must extract it like this; take a bandage and bind it at the end of the protruding bone, make someone lift that part upward while you apply another bandage made from thicker wool than the first one. Then tie it above the flesh that is over the bone; and extend its end so as to pull the flesh towards the lower part, and you uncover the flesh over the place where you wish to saw, so that the saw does not hurt (the flesh).
Place a piece of wood or board under the bone below at an angle; for when you do this, it is not prevented that it cuts the corrupted flesh.
And it must be that the saw is above the corrupted place for a short while, so that corruption does not occur in the cavity of the bone; and (the corruption) does not appear in its appearance to the senses, and forces (one) to use another saw in its stead.
If the bone is corrupted and is not prominent, but its part continues with another part; and the corruption is in its middle or on one of its sides: then uncover all the flesh from all sides completely. Then place a piece of wood below.
After that, saw it from the first side where the corruption is until the saw reaches the other side; and let the saw be according to the length of the corruption for a little while, as we said.
If the corruption is at the joint, cut that corrupted joint; then saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
But if the corruption is at the connection of two joints, then there is no remedy for it except abrasion.
If the corruption is at the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, then the matter with it is very difficult. But one must inquire about the corruption in what way does it appear to you? And cauterize it, and clean it as best you can according to how it is positioned, and with whatever skill you have: when neither the Vein nor Nerve opposes you.
And know that there are many knives and saws for cutting these bones, according to the location of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, fineness, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare all the instruments of every kind of operation suitable for that operation.
And know that these operations show you the type of instrument required for it when you have plenty of time. And the knowledge of the ways of this art is a sign of the understanding of illnesses; for then you will already find for yourself what suits each illness from among the instruments.
And I am confirming to you in this chapter's final section the number of instruments that you keep as examples for what you cut, and as a test by which you experiment on others.
Form of another saw.
Form of scissors with joints. The head of this surgical instrument should be shaped like the head of a star-pated nail, and its points should correspond to the shape of the points of an elischetfegi.
And it is not appropriate unless the heads of the joined bones are rubbed with it when they become corrupted, or a large and extensive bone.
The shape of the larger surgical instrument.
The shape of the wide surgical instrument.
The shape of the surgical instrument which has a hollowed-out area.
The shape of another thin surgical instrument.
The shape of the other curved-tipped surgical instrument.
The shape of the surgical instrument like a pair of thin pincers.
This is like a Saw, and its tip is like a Serrated Edge; it is shown in many places concerning bones.
The shape of the surgical instrument suitable for dealing with perforated bones.
Its tip is triangular, of sharp points.
It should be made from Indian steel. And likewise it should be made in the same way for all the surgical instruments, cutting tools, and saws that we have mentioned.
On the cutting of bone ends and the sawing of bones.
The limbs rot, either due to an external cause or an internal one.
When you have treated that corruption with medicinal cure and it does not respond to the treatment, and you see that the corruption spreads into the limb which nothing can save, then you must cut off that limb as far as the spread of corruption reaches so that the patient may emerge from death or a worse disfigurement.
And the sign that this has happened is when the limb turns black until it seems burnt by fire or rotten after turning black; it must be cut off where the rot reaches to prevent its spread throughout the body.
Therefore, prepare for the incision of it, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain venomous creatures such as the marine scorpion, viper, rutela, and similar animals.
If the corruption or sting is at the tip of a finger, then cut off that finger and do not give space to the corruption so it does not spread into the rest of the hand.
Similarly, if it happens to the hand, then cut off that hand at its root and do not give space to the corruption until it reaches the arm.
And if it invades that part then cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
But if the corruption has spread beyond the elbow, then the patient is doomed to death. And treating that besides with curative measures is an exercise in futility.
Similarly, if the corruption invades a toe then cut it off at one of its joints; but if it reaches the instep then amputate the entire foot. If it rises to the knee, then make an incision in the leg at the knee joint.
If the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill [to be employed] but to give up and leave the sick person to die.
The method of making an incision into a limb or sewing it up is to tighten the sinew below where you wish to make the incision; and then tighten another sinew above that place. And the attendant should stretch one of these sinews downwards; and the other attendant should stretch the upper sinew upwards. And you separate the flesh which is between these two sinews with a broad spatule until all of it has been uncovered. Then make your incision or sew it up.
And you should place a piece of linen cloth around all the parts [of the wound] and do not let the needle touch healthy skin; this will otherwise cause added injury to the sick person and hot abscesses.
If there is a gush of blood internally as you are working on it, then cauterise the place quickly; or put some styptical powders upon it. Then return to your medicating until you have completed the task.
Then bind up the wounded limb with suitable bindings, and take care of it until it is healed.
And I tell you that this same accident happened to a man in his foot.
That is because his foot was afflicted by a blackening like a burn which resembles the effect of fire; and this corruption first began on his toe before it spread to take over the whole foot.
The man therefore prepared himself, after seeing that the injury was affecting his limb with its severity which he found through pain and burning sensation; it affected him at the joint, but then he healed.
And after a long period of time passed, the same injury occurred to him in the index finger of his hand.
He came to me, and I tried to remove the excess with him by using medicines which I placed on his hand after cleaning his body; however, it did not drain away, and began to move into another finger until the injury affected his entire hand.
He therefore called for me to amputate his hand; I refused to do it, hoping that the excess could be drained by me, and also fearing death in relation to an amputation of his hand. Since the man's condition was advanced.
After he had lost hope in me, he returned to his land; and he reached out for help from me because he prepared himself and amputated his entire hand, and then healed.
I have not related this account except as a guide for those who suffer from this type of injury; and to indicate what can be indicated, and how it should be treated.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and the nature of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy parts and the duration of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus; then it ruptures or perforates, and what is inside of it, from the pus, comes out leaving an empty space like a vessel, and the skin over it is like cloth that has been worn thin: if it does not reach its ultimate stage in terms of corruption where it affects bone, nerve or ligament, it should be called a hemorrhoid; but if prolonged until the infection reaches one of these parts, then it may be called an abscess or zuken.
And its treatment is to cut that skin completely as it peels off; especially when it has thinned and become like a cloth; and you trust that it will not stick to the wound due to its own decay.
But if you hope that the skin will stick and it does not follow from this ultimate attachment; and if there is thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with enemas; and it is necessary to pay attention to the abdominal cavity.
Then if it is large and the pus emitted from it has a foul odor; then enema it with Egyptian medicine, which consists of equal parts vinegar, oil, and ziniar, combined in a jar; boil them over fire until the medicine reddens; and becomes as thick as honey.
Then take as much of it as you need; and dissolve it with water and honey, and enema the abdominal cavity with it; compress its opening, and leave the medicine in for about two hours.
Then extract it with pressure; do this for as many days as necessary until the abdominal cavity is cleansed and the stench is removed.
And sometimes enema with water of ashes when this medicine is not available to you; and it is necessary to take the ash of grapevine wood, or the ash of holm oak wood; and throw it into the water. Then mix it well, and enema with it until you trust that the abdominal cavity is now cleansed.
But if the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then enema them with water and honey mixed with a small amount of crushed ziniar. Or use an enema made with honey and wine mixed together, since the nature of honey is to cleanse and wash away impurities; and the wine makes the membrane adhere - especially when there is excess astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you have done this several times and are confident that the corruption of the membrane has been removed, then use an enema made with whatever promotes flesh growth.
And it is good to take some dyaphinion plaster and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or use an enema made with certain other medicines and salves whose properties I have described in the book on salves.
But if the membrane's opening is tight and will not admit the enema pipe, then stretch it a little with an iron instrument; or apply to it linen wrapped around a stick that has been dipped in Egyptian ointment, or in royal ointment, until it is stretched.
And similarly, if the opening is also wide, then draw its lips together with a stitch; and leave as much of it outside as the enema tube can enter without difficulty.
And similarly, if the opening from which pus flows is raised towards the top, then cut it lower down on its own surface so that the pus can flow out downward; for when pus is confined within the depth of the membrane, it prevents flesh from forming there.
But if you cannot conveniently cut the membrane just below where you wish, then try to prepare the member in such a way that the pus will flow out easily as it is prepared for you. Try to ensure that no pus is retained in it at all; and take the consolidating medicines which are applied to wounds, suitable for what you wish. And extend them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it covers the entire bosom (breast). Then make an incision with the scissors along the edge of the breast opening slightly beyond the nipple. Then spread another soft ointment on the cloth according to the size of the nipple hole; and place it over the breast in a position away from the nipple opening so as to ease the outflow of pus from it: and do not remove the large cloth unless after some days have passed.
But the one that is over the breast opening, is the one you remove every hour, so that what has collected in it of pus may flow out: and so that you know whether the fluid flowing from it is a lot or a little; digested or undigested.
And when you re-examine the breast itself, consider whether its owner feels pain in it or not; and whether there is a boil on it or no boil.
When therefore your treatment has progressed thus and you see the material which comes out over the breast opening, then you know that the breast now adheres or is close to adhering; then therefore remove it in the morning or on the third day: and when you are removing the wound, then change to another cloth and renew the ointment.
But if a refined fluid emerges from the breast after a long time has passed, then do not despair of its adhering, for its healing is approaching; because there are people who delay the growth of flesh in their wounds, and some act contrary to it.
But if undigested pus emerges from the breast after many days, then you know that the breast is not adhering.
If the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its condition prolongs, then add to the drying medications, but let the physicians ensure that the medicines are moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as dyaphyinicon ointment when excess fat is added to it.
And from the very last part that is treated, it is such that you should take dyaphyinicon ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, and moisten over it an equal amount of old wine by substance.
Then prepare it with that, and use it.
And it now acts similarly to this procedure, when dyaphyinicon ointment is not present to you, use honey, when you boil it until it thickens, and use it. Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense: pound everything, and powder it over honey while it's over the fire. Then spread over it a cloth and bind it on the sinus: and spread over it the honey that you boiled until it thickens: and powder over it spices, and put over the cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes it is administered with long birthwort, and roots of heavenly lily, and lily: and herb flour, and centaurea. Use these simples, or aggregate them, pound them, and sieve them: and powder over the honey I described, and use it.
But if the condition of the sinus prolongs and it does not heal with this cure, then know that there is corruption within its depth: or it now causes an impression in the bones, or other hard tissues, or ligaments: then treat it with the cure for Fistulas, as stated before.
On treating panaritium, nail attrition, finger incisions and amputations.
A panaritium is an abscess that develops under the nail of the thumb or toe, and it may occur on other fingers as well.
If it is left untreated and the condition persists, the abscess may become an aposteme that fills with pus; or it may rot and discharge pus until it eats away at the nail bed, potentially corrupting the entire finger, reaching the bone, causing a foul smell, turning the fingertip wide and discoloured.
When you treat it as we mentioned earlier and the treatment does not take effect, then you must use a knife to cut away all of the remaining excess from the nail. Then cauterise the wound after that. Indeed, hot cauterisation is very beneficial.
However, if the bone is sound and both nail bed and root are healthy, but excess nail growth now presses against flesh deeper down, piercing it or hurting it, then you should place a thin probe under the corner of the nail that pierces into the flesh and push it upwards; cut this flesh away gently and apply to what remains of the flesh any burning, corrosive medicine until all is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If however the infection has already reached the bone, then you must cut away and remove that bone; for it will never heal so long as the infected bone remains.
If you see decay and deterioration progressing into the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints, according to what has been previously mentioned. Then treat the wound until it is healed.
However, if there is a nail injury or blow, and severe pain occurs, then it is necessary to bleed the patient first with cupping glasses. Then cut the nail with an acute spatule by making a cross-section from above downwards.
Watch out that the cutting does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for you will cause severe pain to occur in the patient, and it may result in an addition of flesh at the site due to growth of new tissue.
Then treat the site with something that will relieve pain.
However, the extra finger that appears on some hands of people may be entirely fleshy; and there are bones in some of them, and a nail is present in some: and some of them appear at the base of the joint, or their origin lies in the joints of the digit. The one that appears in the joints of a digit does not move; but the one that arises at the joint of two digits may possibly be movable.
Therefore, the sectioning is easy for the one among them that is fleshy. That is, cut it at its base with a broad spatule.
However, the treatment of the one whose origin is at the base of the joint is difficult. Refrain therefore from cutting it.
However, in the case of one born with an extra digit near the last joint, you must first cut their flesh with a round incision until you reach the bone. Then saw the bone using one of those saws suitable for this purpose. After that, treat it until it is healed.
However, the joining together of fingers which happens either because of birth defects, or from wound healing, or burns from fire, and similar conditions.
It is therefore necessary to cut this joining together of fingers until they return to their original form. Then place between them strips of linen or cloth soaked in rose oil, so that they do not heal quickly and separate them; or place between them a thin sheet of lead until the wound has healed as it should.
And similarly if joining occurs between some of the fingers and the palm, then cut this joining as is prepared and appropriate for the shape of the limb.
Concerning the treatment of disfigurements by incision:
There are twisted, swollen veins full of melancholy humours which appear on many parts of the body; and their outcomes most often occur in the legs, especially those of walkers and workers, and bearers of heavy loads.
It is therefore necessary to administer several strong bleedings in order to remove the black bile.
Then use leeches on the patient's veins.
The treatment of these conditions with iron is done in two ways. One way is to make incisions and extract the black blood. Another method is to raise the vein and remove it entirely.
The incision is made in this way. Soak the leg first with hot water until the thick, dirty blood dissolves. Then bind the patient's leg from the upper part of their hip to just below the knee with a cloth. Then cut open the vein at one place or two or three places with broad incisions.
Then raise it, that is, extract the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg to above and let the patient's attendant first stop the bleeding with a cauterizer. Then cut the nail down to the quick until you see that enough blood has come out and as much as the patient can tolerate.
After that bind it and tell the patient to avoid foods which produce black bile; repeat the evacuation of the bowels and bloodletting when the veins fill up again and harm the patient.
Its raising is done in this way. Shave the patient's leg if there is much hair on it. Alternatively put the patient in a bath or else soak their leg with hot water until it reddens and the veins stand out or let him exercise vigorously with strong movement if no bath is available until his limbs are warm.
Then cut the skin with a straight incision along the vein's length: either at its end near the knee or on its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks and scrape the vein from all sides until it becomes apparent to the touch; you will know that this is so when you see it become red, gradually turning black. As such, once it has come out of the skin, you see that it is white like a cord.
Then insert a rod under it until you see that when raised, it comes out of the skin; suspend it gently with a blunt hook.
Then make another incision close to that first incision, three fingers away from it. Then scrape the skin above the vein until it becomes apparent to the touch. Then raise it with rods as you did before, and then suspend it with another hook just like what was done first.
Then make another incision or more incisions if you need to do so. Then raise it up and then make the last incision near the heel.
Then pull it out to the incision above it.
Do this until you pull it out of the top incision or any higher ones until it comes out fully; then cut it.
But if it does not obey you when pulling and raising, then insert a needle with a strong thread twice through it and tie it, then pull it out; or put a rod under it: turn your hand in all directions until it comes out. And take care not to cut it. For if you do cut it, it becomes difficult for you to raise it greatly, and it enters the patient from that harm.
So when you have extracted it all: then place over the wound a piece of wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or just oil; and tend it until it is healed.
But if the vein is twisted, having a turn to the sides, and is not as we said straight: then you should cut over it on all sides of its twist, and the places of its folding.
Then suspend it with hooks until you raise it all; and take care at your cutting over it not to cut the vein or injure it: for it will be difficult for you to raise or extract it. Therefore, preserve your prudence.
The form of the occurrence by which a vein is healed.
Form of the blind incision.
It does not have the curvature of other incisions, nor is it sharp-ended so as not to wound the vein; and it is thick, curved, and soft: for if it were thin, its thinness would cut into the vein; rather let there be superfluous thickness to it, as we said.
On the extraction of the thigh vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, such as Alizegi, and the land of the Arabs; and also in dry, hot lands with little moisture: that is to say, those where neither grass nor tree grows.
And perhaps it generates in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is indeed from the putrefaction that occurs beneath the skin, just as it happens within the bodies of snakes and roundworms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this condition is that a severe inflammation occurs in the leg. Then the area should be cauterized. Then the vein begins to emerge from that place of cauterization, like the root of a plant or an animal.
When its end becomes visible, you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing between one and two drachmas and tie it with string; then leave the lead hanging from the leg.
So whenever anything comes out of it to the outside, wrap that in lead and tie it up. But if it extends for a long time, then cut off that section and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it off entirely until it has completely emerged. For if you cut it off, it contracts and enters the flesh; this causes an abscess to form, as well as decay in that place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it should be handled gently and drawn out little by little until it has emerged completely, leaving nothing of it inside the body; this vein emerges from some people to a length of five and ten palms. He has now arrived with a wound that measures twenty palms in length.
But if it happens to you at the time of your treatment: then insert a rod into its hole and pierce it with a long hole, with a body, until all that is inside it has been evacuated; and apply the rotting of the place with medicines for several days. Then treat it with treatment for boils.
And indeed this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle joint or on the foot itself; and it happens to have multiple openings, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Treat it therefore as we have said above, and with what has been mentioned before.
On the operation for worms generated under the skin, which is called bovina disease.
This disease is called bovina disease in a certain region among us; because it often happens to cattle and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it penetrates the entire body, going up and down; and it can be felt during its movement from one limb to another until it bursts through wherever it ruptures a place on the skin and comes out.
And its generation is from the rotting of certain fluids. As happens with worms and snakes, that is, earthworms, and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared because of its evil. Because when it enters the body and is elevated to the head, and reaches its place, then perhaps it opens up there and exits, destroying the eye; and this happens many times.
How then do you want to cure him and extract it, then that won't happen unless during his walk and the appearance of its symptoms.
It is therefore necessary to tie up what is above him and what is below with a strong binding ligature. Then cut above it and extract it.
But if it is buried in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a hot iron on the spot until he dies.
And the greater fear is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we said.
But if you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind beneath it the eyelid with a good bandage. Then cut above it and extract it.
And the patient must use cleansing of his body with medicines that dissolve harmful putrid fluids.
And he should beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
On the incision for Nakir's disease.
This disease is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some limbs, then shifts from limb to limb.
And I myself have indeed seen it, as I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman in some villages. And I found her arm swollen, and I saw slight inflammation in the vein of the biceps tendon.
And after I stayed for an hour, I saw one inflammation advancing with little sparks, like a worm moves, ascending to her shoulder faster than it is possible; as if it were live silver running from place to place.
The pain receded from that spot, and was fixed in her shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and it rushed into the rest of her body until it reached her other arm.
Then she told me that it was revolving through her entire body, just as I saw.
I was amazed at the speed of its transition from limb to limb. And indeed, I had never before seen this illness with my own eyes in such a way. However, I have seen many who find that their pain shifts from limb to limb; and I have not witnessed it with my own eyes as I did with this woman.
And I do not think it is anything other than the fact that she was among those from dry villages whose veins are easily spotted; therefore, this shift in sensation appears windy to them.
And it is necessary that this not appear according to this reasoning for those who are luxurious and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
When you wish to cure her, and the patient feels this pain; then if it is visible to your eye as we have said, then squeeze firmly above it, and underneath it quickly; and cut over it until the windiness escapes, constrained; and cauterize the spot.
If you cannot see it with your own eyes: then treat it with a shaking of the body, and with that which dispels viscous substances, and let it purge them with foul pills, and with pills made from serapin, and similar substances.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to their types, and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is such that among them are some which have large barbs, and small ones: hollow, and solid. And there are those which have three edges. And from these some have barbs. And there are those which have stars.
Those which fall according to the limbs into which they fall are of two kinds. For either the limbs are from the hollow principal members, such as the brain, and heart, and spleen, and lungs, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar organs. When it falls into one of these limbs, and you see the signs of death that I will tell you about afterwards, then you must avoid extracting that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many situations. And when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it, and treat the wound.
For the signs from the brain when an arrow falls into it, and pierces the bone, and emerges from the fontanel which is above the brain, are: for violent pain occurs to him, and dimming of vision, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and a red tongue, and spasms, and clouding of intellect, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood comes out through the nose, or the ears. And possibly speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And out of the place of the wound comes forth white moisture resembling pus. And from it emerges flesh of similar consistency.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then desist from the cure, and extract the arrow if it has not come out.
The signs of an arrow having struck the heart are: that it is near the left nipple; and he feels with his hand as though it were fixed in something hard, not empty. And perhaps the arrow has a motion similar to the pulse; and black blood flows from the wound. And it is followed by coldness of the limbs, and cold sweat, and fainting. You should therefore know that death has surely set in.
And the sign of an arrow having struck the lung is the emergence of foamy blood from the wound; and the veins which follow around the neck become swollen, and the colour of the patient changes. And he emits a great, deep sigh; and seeks to draw in cold air.
If the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the chest, then it is near the lower ribs; and there is great panting with severe pain, together with a sigh; and all parts of the shoulders move.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then perhaps undigested food comes out from the wound.
And if an arrow falls into the belly and lodges there: some feces may exit from the wound, or a bladder, or intestines that have already been perforated. Therefore there is no hope of curing him, nor of extracting the arrow.
But if the arrow falls into the bladder and urine escapes from it: and something comes out to the exterior, and the pain is more intense above the wounded person: then you know that it is fatal.
The remaining body parts, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder blade, collar bone, spine, hip, leg and similar members can be saved according to many different treatments when the arrow has not struck an artery or nerve, and is not poisonous.
And I tell you what I have seen regarding these arrows so that it may guide your treatment.
That is to say, an arrow fell into the eye of a man, at the root of his nose. So I extracted it from the other side, beneath his ear fat; and he was cured without any damage to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had fallen into the fat of his eye beneath his lower eyelid; and already it was hidden, but I could only grasp its small tip attached to its shaft: this arrow was large among Turkish archery arrows with a rounded head lacking ears.
So the Jew was cured without any bad accident happening to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
The arrow was Arabic, and it belonged to him who has ears. Therefore I secured the arrow between two guide wires above it, and by then it was already submerged in his throat. I thus operated with care until I extracted it; and the Christian was cured.
And I extracted another arrow from the man who had fallen on it; and we thought he would die from that.
After thirty days had passed and nothing in his condition changed, I therefore secured the arrow above it; and I applied ingenuity to this [arrow] and extracted it; he was cured, and no misfortune befell him.
And I saw the man who had fallen on an arrow in his back, and the wound over it was healed. After seven years had passed, the arrow came out at his hip's root.
And I saw a woman who had fallen on an arrow in her belly; and the wound over it was healed, and the arrow remained inside of her: and none of her conditions changed, nor did she find any harm to herself by any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man who had fallen on an arrow in his face; and the wound was healed but it remained there without causing him much pain; and many similar things like this.
And I extracted an arrow from the chief among the king's men which had fallen on him at the middle of his nose and already it bent a little bit towards the right; and all of the arrow was hidden.
I was called to treat him after the arrow wound for three days. I found therefore that the arrow wound was very tight.
So I examined it with a thin probe, and did not feel it; yet he himself discovered the puncture and pain under his right ear. I hoped therefore that it was a puncture from the tip of the arrow.
So I dressed the place with a plaster which had an attracting and digesting power, hoping that the spot would become sore and reveal to me the sign of the arrowhead so that I might cut over it; but nothing happened in this place to indicate that the arrow-head was there.
I kept dressing it for many days with the same plaster; and nothing happened, but meanwhile the wound healed up; and he remained weak from the extraction over a space of some days until one day he felt an arrow inside his nose. And he told me about it.
And he told me about it. I therefore placed a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for many days until it was opened; and with the probe I probed inside it, and felt the thin end of the arrow-head which was sticking into some wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound by means of that sharp medicine until the end of the arrow-head became visible to us; and this process took about four months.
Then after the wound had been made wider and it was possible for me to introduce a pair of forceps into it and move them about without success; I did not desist from contriving and planning means of extracting it with various instruments until one day I began upon it with a specially-made pair of forceps, which will be described at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it. Then I healed the wound.
And indeed doctors judge that the nose cartilage does not heal. I therefore healed it, and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was cured completely; nor did anything harm him at all.
And I tell you the process of extracting certain arrows, so that you may place that rule and its significance over what I have not said.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not covered together with the narration; nor does a book comprehend it, and a prudent artisan compares little things to great ones: and what is present, to that which is absent; and finds new methods, and new instruments for the problems of unfamiliar cases in this art when they arise.
I say therefore that arrows do not come out of the members in which they are fixed unless according to two methods. Or by pulling it from the place where it entered. Or by pushing from the opposite side of the other part.
And that which comes out where it entered is either an arrow proceeding into a fleshy place; and it is pulled, and comes out.
If it does not obey and come out of the hour that it fell, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it becomes rotten; and its pull is eased, and its exit.
And similarly if it is fixed into a bone and does not obey you to come out, then leave it for some days too; and repeat pulling on it and moving it every day until it comes out.
If it does not obey you with an exit after a day, then you must perforate around the arrow on the very bone from all sides using a fine trephine until the arrows are enlarged. Then pull it out, and extract it.
But if the arrow is already concealed within some part of the body where it escapes the sense of feeling, then search for it with a probe. But if you feel it, then pull it out using some instruments that are suitable for pulling it out.
But if you cannot manage it because of the tightness of the wound and because of the length of the arrow being deep inside; and there is no bone or nerve or vein in that place to prevent you: then wait over it until the wound widens, and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If there are ears to which it is attached, then free the flesh fixed on them from every side and by all means you can do so, and use tricks if you cannot without tearing away the flesh at the fracture of the ears, and twisting them until they come out.
And when you perform the arrow extraction in any place it is located, then use your hand to twist and scissors for all parts until you make it come out: and with extreme caution so as not to break the arrow, which would make its retrieval difficult.
If you cannot remove it within an hour, then leave it for a few days until the tissue around it becomes rotten. Then try again to remove it: the pain will have subsided by then. If the bleeding is a problem for you, then perform what we said regarding treatment in its own chapter. And take care with your skill so as not to cut an artery or nerve.
And apply every trick you can to remove the arrow as easily and calmly as possible, with slowness and strength just as I have described it for you.
And you must make sure that the patient is positioned during arrow extraction in just as they were when shot by it. Because it will be of greater benefit to them. If that is not possible for you then apply what is possible according to the positioning of the patient.
If the arrow is exiting from another part of the body or something has already emerged to the outside, or if you see that a bulge is forming at the end of the arrow through your senses on the upper side of nearby skin: cut above it and make an incision large enough to fit scissors into.
Then pull it out; for it now becomes easy to remove.
If it is retained within the bone, then turn your hand according to its curvature until the arrowhead embeds itself into the bone and widens; subsequently, pull it out.
And if not: leave it for several days; then try again until it exits.
If the arrow shaft is within her, push it out with that too.
If the shaft has fallen out but you wish to administer a push: then introduce into it an implement with a concave end so that its cavity may encompass the tail of the arrowhead; subsequently, push it along with the latter.
If, however, the arrowhead is concave: push it along with an instrument entering into its concavity. Indeed, for the latter will alleviate the pain of the arrowhead's exit.
If the arrowhead is poisoned, it is necessary to scoop out all the flesh containing the poison; if you are able to do so. Then treat it with whatever is suitable for its healing.
If the arrowhead is lodged in the chest, or abdomen, or thigh, or side; and it can be reached with your probing fingers, and you are able to cut above it: then do so, being mindful of any veins or nerves that may lie nearby, and extract it.
Then sew up the wound if you see fit, and treat it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps with which arrowheads may be extracted.
The extremities are like a bird's beak, which have been made like iron: when they grasp the arrowhead, they do not let it go.
And they come in many shapes and sizes: large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrowhead, its smallness, the width of the wound, and its tightness.
The shape is that of an impelling concave.
And the shape is that of a deafening impulse.
This is the deaf extremity like a wedge, so as to ease its entry into the concave arrowhead and drive it with itself.
On venesection of veins.
The veins that have become accustomed to venesection in the body are thirty in number.
Of these, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsatile veins that are behind the ears, called the two Herbs; and two arteries that are visible in the two temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimals of the two eyes, which are called Watchers; and a vein that is prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein that is at the end of the nose. And two Guidegies, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins that are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
Veins however that are phlebotomized in the arms, are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic vein, and it lies on the side of the wrist; and the common people call this the head vein. And the second one is the Basilic vein. And the third one is the median vein, which branches from both the Basilic vein and the Cephalic vein; this common people call it the body vein. And the Basilic vein is located on the inner side of the arm; it is also called the ulnar vein. And the common people call this belly vein. And the Brachial vein is situated on top of the forearm; this is the one that is phlebotomized and it appears above the thumb as a prominent bulge.
And the superificialis vein; this is situated between the ring finger and little finger, and it has two branches.
And there are three veins in the leg and foot. One of them is located underneath the curvature of the thumb on the outer side. The second is the saphenous vein, which lies near to the heel on the inner side. The vein Ness: and its location is by the heel bone on the side of the silvester.
And in the other calf there are three veins similar to those.
Regarding bloodletting of two veins behind the ears.
Bloodletting of the two veins behind the ears is beneficial for chronic catarrh, headache, and old head ulcers.
And the quality of performing bloodletting is as I describe it. And the patient's head should be shaved, then their occipital region is rubbed thoroughly at the site of the two veins with a coarse cloth and thorough friction. Then the patient should tighten their neck with a cord until the two veins appear. And their locations are behind the ears at two depressed areas of the head. So probe for them with your finger, and wherever you feel their pulse under your finger, there mark it with the cauterizing iron.
Then take up the lancet-type bloodletting tool, which is called the "Incising" one. Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the bloodletting cup reaches the mouth of the incision. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein and skin in an incising motion. Let the length of the cut be about two joined fingers in quantity or around that; and make as much blood come out as you wish.
Then compress it with cloths and leave it until it heals.
And now we have already discussed the incision of these at the beginning of the book, as well as their cauterization.
The bleeding of two arteries in the temples is beneficial for old headache; bad eyesight; and persistent red eyes caused by a flow of excess humours.
And the quality of bleeding these arteries is as I tell you. The patient should firmly press their neck until two veins become visibly apparent and you can feel the pulsation of them under your finger. Then mark these with an iron cautery.
Then lift the skin above the vein with your index finger and insert a bleeding-lance from underneath, then raise the vein upwards. And cut it as you did with the other two veins, and let flow as much blood as your need requires.
Then release the patient's compression and place your finger over the vein for an hour. Afterwards place a poultice over it and tightly compress the patient from above with strong binding; leave it until it heals.
And now we have already revisited the discussion of these, their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of this book.
The remedy for venesection of the frontal vein is after that of the cephalic vein, for old facial ailments: and for hemicrania, and redness: and for foul ulcers.
And the quality of its venesection is, as I tell you. The patient should strain his neck with a towel until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called the "burrower".
Place the prominent point that is on the head of the burrower over the vein itself, and strike above it with a comb or some other thing in its manner: and let the blood run according to the quantity you want. Then loosen the patient's piercing, and squeeze it until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad lancet. However it ought not to be that the lancet is of a sharp point like other lancets, but rather of a broad point. And let the lancet be passed across it according to its direction: for the bone is near: and perhaps therein the lancet will break when it is thin.
The remedy for the two veins that are in the two lachrymals of the two eyes is for eye scab and redness: and a sty in the eye, and facial ailments.
And the quality of their venesection is that the patient should strain his neck with a towel. Then perform bloodletting on them: and you should stand over their head.
And the bloodletting should be done transversely along a small length with a small, somewhat wide, lancet because there is no flesh in that place. For if the lancet is fine at its point, it may break.
Then draw as much blood as you need to make [the patient] run. And put a bandage on them, tighten it one night, then loosen it.
Bloodletting from the veins of the nose is beneficial for acute fever, severe inflammation, and facial ailments such as headache and facial redness, especially when it is longstanding.
The nature of this bloodletting is such that the patient should tighten their neck. Then hold their nose with your left hand and take a fine, long lancet; fix it into the middle of their nose, between that which divides the nose lengthwise. For the vein does not appear there to the sense [of touch], but because blood starts flowing immediately.
And you should keep your hand [on the lancet] to some extent; draw as much blood as is necessary for you. Then bandage it one night. For it heals quickly.
The two bloodletting instruments of Guidegi are beneficial for treating shortness of breath, the onset of leprosy, melancholy ailments, itching rashes, and malignant sores, as well as corroding herpes-like conditions.
And the quality of those bloodletting instruments is such that they should be tightened on the patient under both armpits around their neck with a bandage; and the practitioner should stand over the patient's head while the patient sits on a chair.
Next, cut open the blood vessels themselves with an appropriate length-wide bloodletting knife. Then draw out an appropriate quantity of blood, or according to the necessity that you see is required. Afterwards, do likewise with the other vein.
Then untie the bandage and tighten both veins with moderate pressure to prevent the patient from being overly weakened. And leave it until morning. The wound will heal.
On the bloodletting of the jugular veins, by Algaberich. Algaberich's bloodletting instruments for the jugular veins are useful because they help with bad breath and gum infection; malignant sores; and lip cracks as well as malignant sores on the nose or around it.
The quality of those bloodletting instruments is such that you should make the patient sit before you and tighten their neck with a cord. Then roll back their lip and look at the two veins - one from the right side of their lip, and another from its left; you can see both by the blackness they display on either side. And it is true that around them are small, black veins. Make an incision on both sides with an incising instrument.
But if there is doubt about which one it is, and you do not know which one it is, then direct your attention to the greater of them and the more obvious ones.
And likewise do the same with regard to the two veins that are in the upper lip, and it is indeed customary for this to be done; and make an incision on both of the veins that are in the lower lip.
On bloodletting from the vein beneath the tongue after bloodletting from the cephalic vein. Bloodletting from the two veins beneath the tongue is beneficial for relief of swellings that are in the throat, and diseases of the uvula, and disorders of the mouth.
And the manner of bloodletting from them is that the patient should sit between your hands in front of the sun; and lift their tongue, and look beneath the tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for another vein: and note that the colour of each has turned towards blackness.
Bloodlet from both; and be careful not to press your hand too hard when bloodletting from them. For beneath it are arteries, and perhaps there may be a gushing of blood from those arteries.
Now the three veins from which blood is customarily let in the elbow are those from which bloodletting has become customary among all people.
And venesection on these can be done in two ways. Or by pricking with a broad myrtle-stick venesector; or with an oil flask inclined to fineness; or by cutting with the knife type venesector which is called alnesil. And this is its form:
And from them are broad types, and fine ones according to the width of veins and their constriction. The form of the myrtle stick venesector is broad as you can see. And it is suitable for opening hollow veins, full of blood, protruding and visible ones; thick veins too those which contain thick, murky blood.
And this venesector is of lesser breadth and finer at the tip.
And it is suitable for venesection of fine veins which contain thin yellow blood.
And the basilic vein, which is one of these three venesection veins. Because it extracts blood from illnesses under the throat and neck, of what follows after breast down to the belly; and it is suited for a skilled venesector with their instrument to be careful about it, and be above fear of it because underneath it is an artery. So if they make an error and add to the venesector's incision, they will cut that artery, and there results a gushing of blood. Therefore, one should not perform a venesection on her with a sharp lancet; instead, let it be done by cutting with alnesil.
If it does not appear as a clear manifestation in the basilica, then one must remove others from it and change to another location; or seek some offshoot of it, or perform a venesection at its place on the arm. For it is indeed manifest, and cut it with the lancet anesil, as we have said.
But if you wish to locate the vein itself, then one must feel around for a spot in front of the tightness [?] of the arm until you identify the pulse. Then mark the spot with a cauterizing iron; afterwards cut the arm and cut [?] the vein with a concave incision using the lancet alnesil, as we have said. And be careful that no percussion falls through space from the place of the artery.
And when you see that, as you tighten the binding, there is swelling at the spot marked by the cauterizing iron, then this swelling is of the artery; therefore avoid it.
But if you see blood rising during the venesection like a child's urine and it is thin, red blood; then you know that it is from arterial blood. Then hurry and place your finger over that long space, then remove it. If the flow of blood is arrested (for it often is), then bind the arm and let it be; and caution the patient against moving; and reassure them about their fear.
And it should not move for several days until healed.
But if the blood is not cut off and it overpowers you: and there is no medicine available for you at that moment, then open the artery if it appears to you. For its ends contract, and the blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of pistachio and pound it: take one half, and bind it over the place where you are binding the vein appropriately, with a bandage and lint until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then treat it with what preceded the mention of the place where the removal of the flow of blood originated: and its cutting off of blood is not difficult in many cases because of the small location of the wound, and possibility of binding from the arm.
As for the dark vein of phlebotomy, its function is to draw blood from the upper part of the head and lower part of the body: because it consists of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist to be above fear from its phlebotomy, because beneath it is a nerve. Therefore if he adds to the puncture of its phlebotomy and finds a nerve, numbness occurs in it, and its healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it may not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to sensation. If it is hidden in certain people and is subtle, and does not show itself, then you must make an incision with your phlebotomy tool where you want to remove the abscess, along with a cut using alnesil, and avoid nerves with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then open up the vein lengthwise.
Regarding the cephalic vein. The cephalic vein phlebotomy is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and helps alleviate eye ailments.
In this vein specifically, if you wish to perform a phlebotomy, it is best to do so by pricking with an olive-wood or myrtle-wood phlebotomist tool, as it is safer than all other veins since there are no arteries or nerves underneath.
However, when performing a phlebotomy, it is advisable to avoid the start of the forearm with your phlebotomist tool and look for a softer spot; if not found on the first try, repeating the procedure multiple times will not harm them.
However, perhaps an abscess forms in some people when not lanced on the first strike but this abscess does no harm to them.
On the usefulness of phlebotomy and precautions to be observed during it. The quality of phlebotomy and its complications from which you must think about remedying it.
First and foremost, you must know that a phlebotomy is not administered unless it preserves health, sustains its endurance, and protects from illnesses.
And to perform a phlebotomy on one of the three veins that are found at the elbow, namely the Cephalic, the Thumbs, and the Basilic vein. And to perform a phlebotomy at the beginning of spring while fasting and also during summer; likewise autumn, and winter after a meal when signs of fullness appear.
And to perform a phlebotomy on the first day or third day after three hours have passed since the last meal was taken.
A phlebotomy administered for illness does not have a set time; rather it is done when the situation and necessity call for it to be performed at night or day, and during any hour of the day and every season.
And it is not necessary for boys to undergo the procedure until they reach fourteen years of age. A pregnant woman should not undergo the procedure from her fourth to seventh month of pregnancy. Neither should elderly people who have reached or passed sixty years of age undergo the procedure.
When a person wishes to undergo the procedure for any reason, they must cleanse their intestines beforehand with an enema; if there is hardened faeces in them, so that during the procedure, the veins will not draw from the intestine harmful impurities which damage major organs.
Nor should the procedure be performed on a patient who is afflicted with nausea and discomfort following a meal; or one suffering from inebriation or hangover until these conditions have passed. Nor should it be performed on a patient suffering from dropsy (edema).
And the procedure must not be performed repeatedly after a case of colic pain, vomiting, abdominal flux, excessive sexual intercourse, labour or other physical exertion; nor during a period of restlessness, fasting, and any circumstance that causes depletion of one's vitality from either body or mind.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if blood is thick with food and drink, and medicines: if it is possible for him to do so.
Then he should enter the bath, if nothing prevents it; or engage in some form of exercise to refine the blood.
And place the phlebotomy on his chest around the third hour of the day, as we have said; and try to evacuate from his chest that day all bad animal incidents: such as distress, anger, fear; and all bodily incidents, such as labor, pain, excessive sexual intercourse, and similar things.
And he should make available to himself those things from which custom has driven away the use of men on account of their bitterness, smell and touch, and similar things as far as possible in quantity.
Then the bloodletter should sit on a cushion that is higher than the patient's mattress; afterwards he should extend his arm and rub it twice or thrice with his own hand. Then bind the ligature with straps and roll them around twice.
The binding should be moderate, because when the binding is uneven or excessive it prevents the flow of blood; likewise with too little binding.
After the binding it is necessary for the patient to rub his hands together until the veins fill and become apparent to sight.
Then the bloodletter should wipe the phlebotomy with a little oil, which is old and his own.
Then the bloodletter should place his left index finger on the vein beneath the site of the intended phlebotomy, lightly; so that the vein does not escape and the strike is not broken. Because from the veins you find one like a string that escapes during bleeding; and of these is one which is full of windiness: and when you place the lancet upon it, it contracts under the lancet, and deceives the blood-letter, and the lancet does not open the vein; and if it opens it, it is tight: therefore, for this reason it is necessary that the blood-letter be made firm, and be solicitous in all these matters.
Then put down the lancet. If therefore the vein is opened with one thrust, then it is good. And if not, then repeat that thrust with another a little below or above the same place quickly; if the spot does not blanch.
But if it blanches or the patient grows faint, then let him rest one day, or two days; and do not bind up tightly. For perhaps it will draw out heat as a pustule. Nor should one enter the bath.
Then repeat bloodletting if he desires it.
But if the opening is small or blood flows slowly; and you fear that not enough blood will come out: then repeat the lancet in the same hole according to its straightness, and add a little to the procedure.
And do it quickly before the spot blanches; for indeed a blanched spot is found in many men during small procedures.
If therefore you see that it is already blanched, then do not repeat on it at all; for nothing excuses you. Place on it a bit of oil residue: for it eases the flow of blood. And honey is better in this place than oil itself, and than other oils.
Likewise, apply oil residue to all your bloodlettings where you cut veins in order to prevent the flow of blood; and make that with alfarah ointment and sagzene when one of them is placed on a spot.
For blood becomes thinner and dissolves when it's thick.
But if a large abscess occurs at the bloodletting site - which often happens, especially for those who haven't been bled before or have a small vein opening - then hurry and place over the spot a sponge soaked in warm water and salt; press it there for an hour: since it dissolves.
And you must do this after the blood's stopped flowing from that vein itself or from another.
If some blackness or greenness remains in the spot after a few days that's not harmful; and if you wish to apply over it something of aloe or dissolved myrrh; or anything of mint juice, which is called calamint or similar.
And indeed abscesses and swellings often occur near the Basilica's bloodletting.
Place your hand over it; then if you find softness under your pressure on it, that swelling is bad. Therefore take care to place over it something of what we've said. For perhaps arterial blood will flow from it.
But make a plaster for him with that which has astringency, so that the area hardens. Then treat himself with the remaining treatment until he is healed.
And you must take from everyone blood according to the quantity of their strength. And that which appears in color over the blood is victorious.
For if the blood is black, then let it exit until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it go until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is sharp, let its sharpness be removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full and strong but needs the extraction of blood to have one vein enlarged so that a wide phlebotomist can be applied; and let this be the opposite case for someone who is weak.
And it is necessary to extract blood from the veins and let there be a narrow opening; and what is best in venesection is that there should be a cross incision instead of puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from excessive bleeding and nerve injury; and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection that extends in breadth or length.
And for him who is accustomed to fainting during bloodletting, it is necessary that he be fed before phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in pomegranate juice; or boiled spinach if it's heated; and take from his blood in three veins, or four.
And if he is of a cold constitution, then let him take before bloodletting bread soaked in a warm sugar syrup or in an aromatic honey syrup with spices, or one that has fragrance.
If syncope occurs during bloodletting and the cause of it is excessive loss of blood; then one should take a drink of meat broth and delicate fragrant syrup, and use aromatic scents with aloes and wrap their chest with it: and they may apply all other remedies mentioned in chapter syncope for evacuation.
Whoever wishes to cure their arm and release blood a second time: it is necessary that someone who has undergone phlebotomy for evacuation with abundant loss of blood but whose strength is weak should release their blood little by little according to the quantity of his strength over several continuous days.
Whoever wishes to cure their arm and release blood a second time and whose body is strong should do so after seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from their body towards the opposite side to which it inclines should have this done on the second or third day.
In a body in which blood has already become heated and thickened causing fever to occur; it is necessary that the blood be let once only and with much quantity extracted: and the opening should be enlarged until syncope occurs after you have observed all conditions of phlebotomy: and as you place your hand over their pulse near where the blood courses so that death does not come in lieu of syncope. It often happens thus when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligence occurs.
And when you wish to cure the arm and release blood a second time after the opening of the vein has been closed making it difficult for blood to flow out: one must not press hard upon it nor quickly extend with curvature. For it is a very bad illness, indeed, so leave it alone until it has been bled for a second time.
Or remove that clot of blood from the opening of the vein with a sharp probe and put over it some salt dissolved in water. And put over it some of the ointment called alfaroch or sagzene and place a gentle compression on it until blood begins to flow out.
But if the vein has already developed an abscess then leave it alone and do not cauterize it until the abscess has subsided.
If however you are compelled to draw off the blood a second time and there is no excuse for not doing so then either bleed it above that place or on the other arm in another vein.
The arm is bled at the place of the cubit and basilica when these are not found but hidden because it consists of them.
And the quality of that bleeding is such that the sick person should immerse his hand in warm water until the wrist turns red and the vein appears plainly.
Then bind over it with a bandage that has medium tightness. Then bleed it by means of a crosswise incision gradually, not lengthwise nor width-wise; and let your opening be wide and make the bleeding such as to cover part of the joint of the hand.
But if the blood is prevented from flowing then immerse the hand again in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you have accomplished your purpose.
If however you are in summer days, then you are excused from repeating the handwashing with warm water. And it is most important to immerse the blood vessel in hot water during winter time.
And the bloodletting of this vein is safer than all others, since there is no pulsating vein beneath it nor a nerve.
Bloodletting from the little finger of the right hand, however, is beneficial for liver diseases.
The quality of this bloodletting is such that you should first bind the patient's arm tightly with a ligature or with your hand, after dipping it into hot water, until the vein has filled and becomes very obvious to touch. Then bloodlet from that same spot with a transverse incision. And if you cut it completely through, it will not harm the patient at all.
And take care to not leave your hand on top of the bloodletting knife afterwards. Under it, in fact, lie the nerves of the fingers stripped bare of flesh.
Then return the hand to hot water again and let the blood run out into it freely. For if you do not return the hand to hot water, blood will clot at the mouth of the vein and hinder its flow.
Once you have extracted the required amount of blood, then put oil and salt on top of the vein so that it does not close up quickly.
And likewise it is necessary to do this with any tight ligature as well.
The instrument for his phlebotomy, however, is on the left hand, as it is suitable for spleen ailments; and do likewise with his phlebotomy as you did with the second one equally.
The instrument for saphenous phlebotomy is useful for ailments in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, and menstrual retention, kidney problems, old ulcers on hips and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that the patient should immerse his foot in warm water and massage it until the veins become prominent; then bind above the ankle with a strap. The veins indeed have their location near the heel, appearing towards the thumb; and many branches spread out from it on the surface of the foot.
Therefore, perform the phlebotomy on its wider branch or near the heel at its convergence point; for it is better and safer so.
But if you bleed it on the surface of the foot, then take care to avoid the nerves which are beneath it under the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy so that you bleed it across the vein as if you wish to cut it; and let the phlebotomy be a Nesil.
But if the outflow of blood is hindered, then immerse his foot again in warm water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomy instrument misses the vein at first attempt, repeat with the phlebotomy slightly above, for it is a safe place and you need not fear any harm when avoiding nerves as mentioned before.
And similarly with the other foot's saphenous vein equally.
The place of the sciatic veins, as we said, is at the heel on the outer side.
And the benefit of its bloodletting is for hip pain, when it is due to hot blood.
And the manner of its bloodletting is that the patient should enter a bath and hurry; and have their legs compressed on the side of the hip to above the heel by four fingers with a thin long bandage: for it is not evident unless because of this.
When it is therefore evident, then bloodlet that vein however you find possible, or according to its direction: and it is better, either by cutting it with an incision, or severing it with a section. For its place is safer, and itself is very hidden in most people.
For its place is safer, and itself is very hidden in most people. If you do not find it, and it does not at all appear to sight: then bloodlet one of its branches, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot towards the ankle; and avoid the nerves, and let as much blood run out as you wish.
Then loosen the binding, and place leather over the site of bloodletting, and bind the site. For it heals quickly.
On Cupping, and the quality of its use.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, and of brass, and of glass.
And cupping is done in two ways. With scarification and bloodletting: the other is cupping without scarification.
And this cupping that is without scarification, is done in two ways. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the cupping sites that are applied with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen places on the body. One of which is cupping on the forehead, and it is at the back of the head; Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; and Alhagdahim cuppings, and they are two layers of the neck from both sides together; and mentum cupping, and it is under the jaw below the mouth; and two spatula cuppings; and Alachosos cupping at the end of the spine; and two bowl cuppings, and they are in the middle of two arms; and two leg cuppings; and two spoon cuppings.
And cupping does not extract blood from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and because of that, there is no loss of strength from it as happens with phlebotomy. Nor is it appropriate to apply cupping with fire or without fire for any illnesses that arise from congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
If necessity arises to apply cupping because of illness or custom, we do it at any hour at the beginning of a month, at its end, and in its middle, and at whatever time is required.
This occurs because there are men who, when blood multiplies within them, require its extraction by means of venesection; they find heaviness in their head and a stoppage.
And among them there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. And among them there are those who experience itching on their face and forehead, darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And among them there are those who scratch the site of their venesection. And among them there is one whose laughter multiplies. And among them there is one who experiences the taste of blood in their mouth or has an abscess on their tongue and spits out blood. And among them there is one whose sleep multiplies. And among them there is one who sees blood and redness, killings, injuries, and things similar to these in their sleep.
When therefore we see any of these things, and especially if it is on the thirteenth day of the month, we order venesection to be carried out after two or three hours have passed from that time.
The site of venesection on the nape of the neck is this: for it brings relief from heaviness in the head and that which flows towards the eyes. But it should be done after the evacuation of the entire body.
And indeed this cupping is in place of the cephalic venesection.
It is not permitted for those with a cold constitution or suffering from catarrh to use it. For it inflicts on him great harm.
And for this reason, it is not appropriate for the elderly to use it, or those with cold illnesses in their head.
However, whoever is diligent about it has oblivion generated over him.
And for this reason you should instruct the Wind Doctor to place their hand briefly on the patient's lower body, fearing that oblivion may be generated.
The Wind Cure or Alkehel is a substitute for the Black Phlebotomy and the Basilival Phlebotomy, and it benefits asthma, suffocative breathlessness, wheezing breathlessness, cough, and fullness.
And it is necessary to apply the Wind Cure or Alkehel briefly because if placed below this level, it produces weakness of the heart and stomach.
The Wind Cure of Alhadjim is beneficial for sudden headaches, ophthalmia, migraine, and toothache pain at the roots; it is a substitute for the Basilival Phlebotomy.
And you should instruct the Wind Doctor not to press their hand too hard with the scarification instrument, so as not to cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
The Wind Cure applied under the chin benefits a dry mouth and corrupted gums, as well as other similar oral illnesses; it replaces the two-lipped phlebotomy of Aljeherich.
The Wind Cure of paddles benefits Alchafacha, which is an illness resulting from repulsion and heat.
The ventilation of the internal parts by means of two small tubes brings benefit comparable to that of venesection of three veins - Basilica, Fusca and Cephalica; for it draws blood from all those minute veins which are in the flesh; and these minute veins draw from other larger ones until this drawing reaches the three (major) veins.
And you should instruct the person carrying out the ventilation not to go too deep with the scarification; for the place is bared of flesh and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The ventilation cup which is placed on an aching part brings benefit to haemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And you should instruct the person carrying out ventilation to use a large cup and one made of copper; for the place needs strong suction, and perhaps fragile cups might break; and they must make an extensive scarification.
Ventilation cups of the legs lessen markedly swellings; for they draw blood from all over the body and bring benefit to old pains in the kidneys, uterus and bladder; they provoke menstruation, and bring benefit to boils and itching; and serve as a substitute for venesection of two saphenous veins and the alcharoben.
However they greatly weaken the body, and cause many people to faint.
And the benefit of ventilation cups for the alcharoben is nearly as great as that of ventilation cups on both legs.
The proper positioning of the ventilation cups is that you should put on a cup first when it is empty, and draw with moderate suction; and do not keep the cups in place too long but apply them quickly and remove them quickly so that humours arrive at an equal rate: and cease neither repeating this nor continuing until you see the spot turn red and swell up, and there appears some redness of blood; then scarify and repeat suction slowly. Then consider the arrangement of the bodies.
He who is of tender flesh among men, of whom there are few, should be sacrificed once, no more, so that the place may not become ulcerated.
And instruct the Wind-Cutter to enlarge the incision and make it a little deeper, and moderate the suction in terms of ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is thickness in the blood, then you should sacrifice him twice. In the first liquid, a way is opened to thin out the blood and reduce its wateriness; in the second, on the other hand, it is an expert inquiry into how to extract thick blood.
If the blood is very feculent, then a third sacrifice should be made so as to achieve the final goal.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood gradually or little by little, one sacrifice is sufficient for us. If we wish to extract much blood, we make multiple sacrifices.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to sacrifice with deep incisions; and the equal limit of incision is the depth of the skin.
What is to be administered from the oils at the placement of the Wind-Cutters, and what must be cautioned by the Wind-Cutter.
In the case of one whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary that the places of Wind-Cutters be anointed with open, softening, dissolving oils: if it is in summertime, such as aloe oil, or violet oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from gourd seeds.
And if it is during winter time, then use narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or sarbatinum oil: and similar ones.
If however the superfluity is thick and cold, then use bitter lemon oil, or balm oil, or poplar oil, or dill oil: and similar ones.
If the windpipe is long with small pores and soft flesh, then it should be kept away from oil, and these people should wash the windy places of their bodies after a storm with dew-water, or with cold water, or with aloe vera water, or with gourd water, or with purslane water: and similar ones.
He whose blood is very moist should wash windy places with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumach: and similar ones.
He whose superfluities are thick should wash his windy places with old wine, or with ivy water, or with dill decoction, or chamomile: and similar ones.
One should be careful of getting windy in the bath or in the vapour of the bath; indeed one ought to administer it after coming out of the bath for an hour, or two hours.
And no-one should sleep after a storm.
What is the thing by which one ought to be governed when windy or bleeding before a storm?
And after this one ought to consider first of all: then if the windy or bleeding person is choleric, and excesses and inflammation conquer his blood; then it is necessary that he take refrigerants such as pomegranate molasses: also celery with vinegar and lettuce, and rocket (arugula), and dill: and similar ones.
And give him food like chicken, boiled lamb meat, and seasoned dishes with vinegar: and similar foods.
And for someone with a cold constitution, they should drink syrup made from honey or alum, or alsecaniabin made from seeds; and they should consume moderately aromatic wine, which is between old and new; and it is advised that they eat less food. Give him chicken, lamb, small birds such as sparrows, and young pigeons to eat.
On the day of ventouses and bloodletting, a person's drink should be greater than their food; and it is necessary to give some people almond tyriake or a medication made from musk (myrrh), or alesselithe before the application of ventouses: either before or after the bloodletting procedure; so as to strengthen the main limbs and purify the blood. It is not advisable for them to drink it heated.
On ventouses without scarification. Ventouses without scarification are those that are applied to the liver, spleen, for gout, and to the stomach, navel, kidney area, hip joints; because these limbs cannot bear the scarification process.
They are not sought after except for the extraction of blood from one limb to another; like when we place a ventouse on the nipples during nosebleeds. And we use them to relieve the cold congealed ventosity from one limb by applying it to another; like when we place a ventouse on the stomach and navel. It does indeed thin out the limb, and it warms it up, and dislodges pain because it dissolves that viscosity.
It is also placed over the kidneys when there happens to be swelling or stones in them. By the virtue of its power of drawing, it perhaps opens up the swelling or removes the stone from its place.
And it does likewise when placed over the liver or spleen for dissolving the viscosity in both of them.
And these leeches are administered empty with incision only. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in pleurisy illnesses; it is such that the leech will be filled, and it will be large, with hot water alone or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of leeches administered with fire.
Its opening be the width of two open fingers, as we made it; and its depth be half a palm's length; and there will be on its side in about its middle a small hole according to the size that a needle can go through; it is made of brass or bronze with smooth edges, thick, even, clean; so that it may not hurt the limb where it is placed over it; and let there be across its middle a transverse bar of brass or iron on which a candle with fire will sit.
And now this great leech is made, larger than we described above, and somewhat smaller than that one according to the illnesses and age of the person using it.
The windsickness in children and those with a frail constitution is different from that which affects men and those of robust physique.
The quality of applying this windsickness with fire to the member is such that you light a wick with fire made of decent linen or a small candle made of wax; and place it on the middle of a transverse rod which is in the centre of the windsickness; so that the lit fire is approximately at the lower part of the windsickness, so as not to burn the body of the patient.
Then it is placed on the member: and your finger should be over the hole I mentioned, until we hold the windsickness; when we need to, we remove our finger, and vapour will come out of that hole, and the windsickness will immediately heal.
Then light the wick in its proper manner, and repeat this if you need to.
In the windsickness which is administered for pleurisy with water, there is no transverse rod and no hole; it is only administered because it is filled with water, and placed on the member alone.
And this is its shape.
And the larger this windsickness is, the more it can hold lots of water, the better it is.
On the suspension of leeches.
Leeches are not administered in many cases unless it is impossible to position windsicknesses on the member because of its delicacy, as with the lip and gums, and things similar to these. Or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger or nose, and things similar to these.
And the quality of using them is such that you must select leeches from those found in sweet waters, free from rot.
They are then left for a day and night in sweet water until they become hungry and there remains nothing in their bellies. Then the body is emptied first with bloodletting and then with blistering. Then clean the member of the sick person until it becomes red. Afterwards place them on top of it.
When they are full and fall off, and it is possible to suck the place with a blister, then it is most complete in helping; but if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with much water, rub it, and squeeze it out.
But if the course of blood is prolonged after the fall of the leeches and it is dripping; then immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the drip stops.
If the blood increases, then sprinkle over it powdered dry eggshell or gallnuts and things similar to them that have astringent properties; until the blood stops.
Or place on the spot half a peeled bean; and leave it until the beans stick to the spot for the blood has stopped.
And if it is necessary to repeat leeches when possible, change them.
But if the leeches are prevented from hanging on, then wipe the place with fresh blood. Either fix the needle in place until some blood flows out. Then apply [the poultice], for they themselves when they sense some blood, adhere immediately.
When therefore you wish for them to fall off, sprinkle over them some powder of ground aloe or salt or ashes: and they will drop off immediately.
This chapter too is often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is about restoring fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
Know, O Sons, that fools among the doctors and laity boast about this chapter, and those who have never examined an old book, nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason, this method is neglected among the sciences in our land. And I myself never encountered any good in it at all, and did not achieve from it what I achieved except through the length of reading old books and my study to understand them, until I extracted that knowledge from them.
Then I clung to experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have described to you from it in this chapter all that my knowledge contains on the subject: and above what has passed by way of experiment with me, after having shortened it for you, and relieved it of the burden of prolixity, and abbreviated it by way of concise brevity, and shown it by way of decisive declaration: and I have depicted in it many figures of the forms of instruments that are employed in it, since it is a matter of supplementary statement, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter 2.
We must say at the beginning of this chapter that we state in summary form and briefly the issues whose understanding is required first by a surgeon regarding any operation: namely to know or learn this noble skill for yourself as well as teach others.
I say therefore that when a person has a fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall then you must go quickly to perform bloodletting and give laxatives, or both together if nothing prevents it such as weakness of constitution or the patient is either a child or a decrepit old man, or it's a time of extreme heat or severe cold.
Next you should restrict them to their diet, cold vegetables and the meat of birds or kids and forbid wine and coarse meats and allow filling foods and any food that fills the veins with blood. Until you are sure that the swelling has cooled and there is no fear of pus spreading to the limb then the patient can return to their normal diet with which they are accustomed.
When the broken bone begins to heal then the patient should be fed nourishing foods with plenty of nutrients that are weighty and heavy with a degree of viscosity such as cooked wheat-based dishes in water or rice and heads and feet and stomachs of fowl and eggs and fresh fish and thick wine and similar. When this regimen is followed, fracture healing occurs faster and better.
Also know that fractured bones, when they occur in men who are in their old age and decrepit, cannot always heal and consolidate according to their nature due to the desiccation of their members; instead, they heal and consolidate as if they were those of small children.
However, nature binds to the fractured bone from all sides a substance similar to glue that has some thickness and adheres to it and holds it together until they adhere to each other and bind with one another; until in time, strength and stability return as before, so that nothing hinders its function anymore. For this reason, it is necessary for you to provide the patient with nourishing food that has weight, viscosity, and thickness, such as we have mentioned.
Also know that the types of fractures are diverse, depending on the different members of the body; for a leg fracture is different from one to the head bone, and a chest bone fracture differs from a back bone fracture, and likewise all other members differ from each other. And I have come with an exposition in its own chapter of every type of fracture set apart from another. And the types of bone fractures also differ within themselves.
Because its fracture is curved, other than when pieces fall out of it. And sometimes its fracture occurs along the length of the bone; and there are stepped fractures within it, that is, pieces, and projections proceeding from them as in a reed when it is cut with a knife to write with. They do not proceed: it is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head; and it is a small crack fracture.
And for every type of fracture there is a specific tool or instrument to repair it, as will be recalled later and explained at its proper place.
And from what is known of bone fractures, there are its twisting and prominence; and their appearance to the sense and sound when you press them with your hand.
When, therefore, there is no apparent twist in place nor sound at your touch when you feel the bone with movement and the patient does not find great pain; then it's not a fracture but rather likely a twist or small crack: thus, one should not move it with hand and pressure but apply over it from medicines which will be recalled later, after some time appropriate to that place and then bind it with fine bandages.
And know that when the place is bent and split into two parts but without any other accident to it while all its parts are removed from their fellow; then you must begin your treatment of it from the start by equalizing it before a hot abscess occurs.
However, if an hot abscess occurs then leave it for several days until the abscess subsides. Then equalize it according to whatever way you can from its softness and nature.
And know that its repair and equalization is easier than that of a bone with other accidents.
Then bind it according to what will be recalled to you.
If there are fractures in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, if it is a hand or foot; or with your own hand, if it is a small limb; or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb over an equal spot, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken limb are extended: then try to bring back those additions with all skill, and in whatever way you can to their places; and beware, according to your strength, lest there happen upon the sick person due to your operation pain, or injury; and try, according to your strength, to fit together one of two bones with its fellow, according to the best shapes.
And it is necessary at that hour that you attempt to grasp and touch it with your own hand. If therefore you see something awry there, correct it, and equalize it according to the measure of your strength.
And beware of violent stretching and strong compression, as many fools do. For many times they cause to happen through their operation a hot abscess or contraction in the limb, as we have often seen from their operations.
Then bind up after the equalizing and proper operation, and the setting of that limb, and rest, and tranquility; and advise the sick person regarding it. And make him beware, lest he move it in the hour of his watches and sleep regarding its revolution and agitation and at excretion and all his movements with his utmost strength. And he should take care that there is no position of the limb where pain follows. Which is because when he feels pain or injury in a particular limb position, then it should be changed to another where there is no pain.
And you should advise him to ensure that his position is equal and straight so as not to cause any curvature when the limb is restored.
And the quality of the fracture in the broken limb is as I describe it.
You should be aware that broken limbs vary according to their smallness or largeness, and shape.
So those that are small, like the arm, finger, toe, and similar, then a soft, fine linen bandage should be used. But those that are large, like the thigh or leg, a wide, firm bandage should be used.
Because the wide bandage joins together a large limb and tightens its edges equally on all sides of the fracture so that nothing protrudes.
Then you should start putting on the appropriate ointment after your cleaning from the centre outwards with soft lint over the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to bandage over the place of fracture itself with three or four turns as is appropriate for the limb, and tighten your hand a little with the bandage.
Then go with him to the upper part from where you bandaged the fracture site and tighten less than the first bandage. Then extend yourself with a roll from the fracture site for a while, and gradually loosen the structure until you grasp something substantial from the healthy spot.
Then take another strip of cloth and roll it again over the broken spot with rolls. After that, go down with the roll to the lower part below the fracture. And let your procedure be in the tightness of the roll and its loosening as we said for the first upper roll.
Then place between the rolls some soft linen or cloth to even out any curvature of the fracture if there is one; and if not, do not put anything into it.
Then roll another strip over the same spot. After that, arrange warm compresses on these rolls immediately if there is neither swelling nor a hot abscess at the site.
But if there is swelling or an abscess, then place over it what sits on the abscess and removes the swelling; and leave it for a few days. Then bind compresses tightly over them at that point.
And let the compresses be made of half-sized hollow reeds, scraped and shaped with skill; or they can be made of wood used for making sieves which are made from pine or gerahd i.e., palm branches, or calingi; each compress should have equal breadth, according to this shape and figure.
However, the compress that is placed directly over the fracture should be slightly thicker and broader than the other compresses; and its length should match the limb according to its size and smallness.
Then tighten it over the aster with another piece of thread, according to the same first binding. Then bind it from above with off-centre threads, as we have said about binding: and [ensure] that your binding is over the site of fracture; the more you elongate [the wound] away from the fracture, make the binding tighter.
And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and they are to be made from soft linen.
Because if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the work of fools who use their own threads made from twisted linen cord, it is a great mistake; for the binding fails with them outside the realm of effectiveness.
And fine threads also are not suitable; for you will not achieve with them the binding that you wish to attain.
And it is not necessary for there to be less than a finger's breadth between the aster and the next one along.
If the patient is injured by the ends of the asters after binding them to healthy sites; then place under them soft tow or crimson wool until nothing hurts from it.
When there is a fracture with an overlying wound, and it happens that there is disruption of the skin, I will come to this in chapter two with particular reference to its uniqueness.
And you should know that not every broken limb must be bound with asters from the first day onwards. This is because when a limb is large, you need not place asters upon it unless after five or seven days, or more, according to your judgement about the hot abscess-like development.
This is the way of making dressings by which the ancients restored those bones that are broken and dislocated.
A method for making an abbreviated common plaster that restores broken bones and is suitable for many different constitutions but especially women and children since it does not succumb to heat or cold.
It is made from the flour dust of the mill and the flour dregs that cling to the walls of the mill near the motion of the millstone: and you mix it as it is, except that you sieve it with an egg white sieve: and lay its mixture neither thick nor thin. Then apply it.
A method of plaster that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists. Take almess, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugwort; of all sucks take 10 oz., of myrrh and aloe each take 5 oz., and of althel take 20 oz.; grind everything together and sieve it and mix with althel water: or with egg white if the patient's constitution is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, quickly restores broken bones, and suits many people.
A method of plaster that also suits fractures and twists. Take mugwort, mess, and white lilies; of all take 10 oz., of myrrh and aloe each take 5 oz., acacia takes 6 oz., and Armenian bole takes 20 oz.; grind everything together with great care and sieve it and mix with water or egg white: and apply.
The method for applying a plaster to joints and bones separated from their places; it relieves the pain that occurs in them, [treats] bone dislocation and fracture. Woolen cloth should be soaked in vinegar and boiled oil, then applied to the site.
This plaster has no restorative properties but is good for soothing hot abscesses; it specifically alleviates pain.
Method of a plaster that restores a broken bone. Take the leaves of the fig tree and wild poplar; grind them all together and make a plaster from both.
Method of applying an abbreviated plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture; when you want to resolve residual abscesses. Take one portion each of marshmallow root, chamomile, violets, and the herb plantain; grind them all together then mix with wine unless the limb is hot [inflamed].
If the limb is hot [inflamed], mix it with moist coriander water or water instead and use as required.
Another method with a stronger plaster for resolving [hard abscesses] than the previous one, when an abscess develops during limb restoration. Take one portion each of marshmallow root, linseed, balsam, honey locust, water-plantain, violet flowers and chamomile; grind them all together then mix with willow water or fresh water or wine. All of this should be done according to the temperature of the limb and calming its heat [inflammation].
Hippocrates, however, did not say in his book that anything other than a poultice made of clay and oil should be placed on a broken limb during its restoration; he described it as being of moderate thickness.
Galen considered that substances with drying and warming properties, such as myrrh, aloe, and frankincense, along with similar substances from those we have mentioned, should be applied to a broken limb during its restoration.
Recipe for an ointment that relieves injury and pain. Take equal parts of mugwort, chickpeas, human hair clippings or bird feathers, nettle, and salt; grind them up, sieve the mixture, and process it into an ointment.
The length of time for which a dressing should remain in place before being removed depends on considerations such as the absence of pain, itching, or movement of the broken bone from its position; if these do not occur, it may be left in place for many days. If the patient experiences severe itching, disturbing pain or swelling at the site of the dressing, it should be removed immediately; take a soft cloth or a moistened marine sponge and soak it in warm water to gently wash the area until the itching subsides and any pain is soothed.
If the patient experiences severe itching, disturbing pain or swelling at the site of the dressing, it should be removed immediately; take a soft cloth or a moistened marine sponge and soak it in warm water to gently wash the area until the itching subsides and any pain is soothed. After that, allow the limb to rest for an hour. Then apply a piece of woollen felt soaked in vinegar and oil or rosewater over the limb and bandage it there for one night until you are assured that the heat blister has subsided, any swelling of the limb is quieted and its pain has been relieved.
Then repeat this on a fine structure, and apply a small plaster; do not tighten it with your first compression, and keep the fine bandages with it until it heals.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling, and all other symptoms have now completely disappeared, and you need a plaster and bandage, then repeat this process as you did initially.
If none of the things we have mentioned happen to the limb, then do not remove it unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when you remove it after twenty days, depending on how the limb appears upon its release, as we have mentioned, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh approaches over it: then also add in a bandage greater than your first compression altogether; also add to the enlargement of the patient's diet, according to what has been previously recalled.
However, if you see that the place of fracture is already becoming dried out and more weakened than it should be, then know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching it. Therefore immerse it with warm water at every release you make of it, and let this occur over the course of three days; also ease off on the bandage somewhat.
By this process therefore nourishment reaches the limb and it heals quickly.
But that which unskilled surgeons do when restoring a broken limb with another bone instead of the original one, because it is not restored properly at first and then has to be restored crookedly: this error arises from their procedure, and causes great fear; and if it had been correct they would have said so in ancient texts, and acted upon that.
And I have not seen any traces of them there at all, and it is better that it should not be done.
Regarding the treatment of head injuries:
Types of fractures vary widely, with many different shapes and forms, and they have diverse causes.
One type of fracture occurs due to a strike with a sword; the strike removes the entire bone up until it reaches the marrow beneath the bone, similar to how an axe splits wood; hence this particular kind of fracture is known as axial.
Or the sword cuts into a bone and grazes its surface without penetrating all the way through; this kind of fracture is called *kala'an*, or absolute levation.
And it is an injury with two fractures, either large or small.
There is another kind of fracture that involves crushing or grinding; this occurs due to a strike with a stone, a fall onto one, or similar incidents.
This fracture can also be penetrating, approaching the marrow beneath the bone; or it can occur on the surface of the bone itself. It is likewise an injury with two fractures that are either small or large.
There is yet another type of fracture that is hidden within the bone itself, as thin as a hair; it is a small split and thus named *capillaris*.
Another fracture occurs from a fall or strike with a stone and similar incidents that cause a piece of bone to enter the body cavity; it creates a hollow space there, like what happens in bellows when they receive a blow, allowing some air to pass into their insides.
And it happens most frequently in the heads of moist bones, such as those of children.
And all these types of fractures occur separately, and I will come with a recollection of that whole thing in its place.
And we recognize all these types of fractures by examination upon them and investigation with probes, as well as removal of the corrupted flesh that is above them.
The capillary type is recognized by this: that which is detected over the bone and wiped away and lined above it with cauterization; for the fracture appears black.
However, in treating a fracture, consider first the patient's condition: then if you see from their conditions that they indicate clearly by vomiting of bile and fainting, as well as prostration, loss of speech, syncope, acute fever, giddiness, flushing of the face, and similar symptoms in many situations, certainly it will not heal; and if you see non-frightening conditions, and hope for recovery: then begin its treatment.
That is, if the wounded comes to you when first wounded: and it occurs during the winter days, then you must aim at removing bone before the fourteenth day according to every situation.
And if it is during the summer days, then you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is beneath the bone from the flesh decays and those symptoms that we described occur.
If the bone fracture has already reached the membrane touching the brain and is with shreds and stripping: then you must cut away the comminuted and stripped-away part as I tell you.
And it is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded person; and expose over the bone according to whatever manner is possible for you; and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light on the sick one.
If it should happen to you during the exposure of bone that there is a flow of blood or a hot abscess: then oppose it with what is appropriate. And it is necessary that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess settles down, and be assured of no more flow of blood. Then begin with the cure of bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
One method is that you cut the bone with an Incisory of a sharp iron: and this is its form.
Then apply another Incisory, after the narrower one, somewhat wider: and this is its form.
Then apply yet another Incisory that is even wider than the last one.
The second method is that you have a number of different Incisories with some being wider than others and some shorter than others; and they should be very sharp at their ends, and made from iron or steel: and strike gently on the Incisory so as not to shake the head and hurt it.
But if the bone is hard and strong: then it is necessary that you drill around its edge before applying Incisories with Terebras which are called Non-deepening Drills; they are not so named unless because itself does not penetrate through the end of the bone to what is beyond it, since the Drill has a round tip on top of which is like an edge and small circle underneath prevents sinking in, and passing through the thickness of bone.
You should take many of these drills from those bone chisels, each suitable for the thickness of a bone, until you have a drill for every part of the skull; the length and width of the pointed end of which corresponds to the thickness of that part of the skull.
These are three forms of drills or trepans.
The technique of drilling around the circumference of a broken bone is to place the drill on top of the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then change the drill to another place and put in between any hole the thickness of a finger or about that much.
Then cut with knives what is between any hole in the bone and make it as thin as you can at that end of lightness, as we have said, until you scrape out the bone, either by hand or with some other tool which you prepared for that purpose such as forceps and fine scissors.
And you must take every precaution that the drill or knife does not touch any of this soft matter.
When you have therefore drilled around the bone and separated it from that soft matter, if they are still joined together then you must cut and scrape equally the end of what remains in the bone with another similar knife-like instrument. However it must be thinner and finer than the other knives.
If there remains any small pieces of bone and gristle then take them out carefully with the tool you have at hand for that purpose. Then treat the wound afterwards with dressings and ointments as we have described.
Another method of operation is easy, completely removed from fear: which Galen said and praised it with great praise: and these are his words. It is necessary for you first of all to begin to expose the bone in that place where the fracture is more violent and apparent: until when you have exposed this part and placed under it one end of this Lenticular Knife whose form is thus.
And the Lenticular part which is blunt does not cut anything: and its sharp part on both of its sides tapering to a point as you can see: so that the lenticular part may be applied against the bone with its cutting edge acute towards the bone.
Then strike upon the Knife from one side with a small mallet until you have cut through the entire bone as it turns: and be sure to stand clear of the knife so that no accident happens there which you greatly fear.
And if the physician were not a more ignorant and stupid person he would not be asleep now: then if any portion of this membrane still remains attached to the bone in certain places he should cut it away from that with one end of the same lenticular knife and free it from there easily. It is freed from this without injury and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not extend through to the membrane and that which is torn away from the bone is its surface while roughnesses and fine ridges remain in it: then you must scrape off this roughness and remove those ridges with very delicate scrapers from which you have prepared a number of different sizes so as to be able to apply from these those most convenient and suitable for each place according as your operation leads you and the fractured bone itself and its shape. You must sharpen your blade more than those of the other razors. Next, use the finer one after that.
You must sharpen your blade more than those of the other razors. Next, use the finer one after that. And do not stop doing this until you reach the stage of sharpening the thinnest and finest of them all.
However, for each of the other small hairline fractures and fine breaks, you must take care to sharpen according to what leads to their correction.
And this is something that cannot be hidden from anyone who has any interest in this art, and they will have stood over what we have written and shown regarding large breaks.
But if a piece of membrane is found and retained when you remove the bone: then you must take a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Next, take another piece of cloth, doubled or trebled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, place it over the first piece of cloth, and make sure you do this as easily as possible so that it does not rub against the wound.
Then apply over this a wide bandage and do not tighten it unless the amount is such that it just holds the wound together; leave this for one day or two until you are sure the hot inflammation has gone. Next, remove this bandage and apply afterwards medicines that are appropriate for excessive dryness such as lilies roots, herb flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; and it is best to make a powder of these medicines which you can sprinkle over the wound like a dry dusting.
And generally administer to it all medicine that has the property of cleansing and not stinging. And ensure that according to your virtue, the wound is clear during its treatment; there should be no grease stains or dirt.
And ensure that according to your virtue, the wound is clear during its treatment; there should be no grease stains or dirt. Nor should you allow any pus to accumulate on it; for when pus accumulates over the brain's membrane, it corrupts and putrefies it, and a great malice befalls the patient after that; this has already happened in the case of head syphilis, where the bone is cleansed by it, especially if its treatment is neglected, then blackness occurs on its surface.
Therefore, consider that if the patient experiences any of the conditions we have mentioned, know that it is undoubtedly harmful.
And if blackness does not occur unless it is caused by the medicine that is applied to it and if it is in the virtue of that medicine to cause such blackness, then you must take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and line them with a cloth. Then apply it to the syphilitic sores; afterwards treat it with curative spices that are suitable until it is healed.
The chapter heading "On the restoration of a broken nose" is not in sentence format, therefore I am unable to translate it into English. Please note that my instructions state that I will only translate complete sentences from Medieval Latin to English.
You should know that only the two superior parts of the nose are broken at once or one of them; for it is composed of two bones: since its lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break and nothing happens to it other than abrasion, twisting, and indentations.
If one of its two parts is broken, then you must insert a small finger into the nostril hole, and with your index finger and thumb, realign that fracture until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this skillfully, with ease. And beware, lest by your operation that pain upon the patient occur.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you must use the end of a rod, one that is a small thickness.
If however the fracture is in both parts, then do likewise; and be quick to restore it on the first day of the break, if possible. And if not, then after seven or ten days when the swelling has cooled.
Then insert into the end of the nose a linen thread if the break is in one part; or insert two threads if it is broken in both parts; and have the thread as thick as to fill the nostril hole.
And some of the ancient restorers said to immerse the threads in butter, changing them every day. That however does not seem right to me; instead the thread should be soaked in the white of an egg, mixed with mill dust. Then leave the thread until the bone hardens and the cartilage strengthens.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nose instead of the thread, after it is wrapped in soft cloth; this holds the broken nose more firmly so that the patient can still breathe.
This thing is not necessary. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, do Licinius's work.
If it happens that, while operating on a hot swelling, the nose of Naso becomes inflamed again, apply to his nostrils either a mustard plaster or a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil, or daiquiri.
If the inflammation does not occur then it is necessary that you apply plasters made with sesame flour and powdered incense mixed with egg white. Next put a soft dressing on top of that; and do not bandage his nose at all.
However if Naso's bones are broken or shattered by a small fracture then you must cut open above the break and extract those bits with suitable instruments. Then sew the wound shut; and care for it with whatever promotes healing and consolidation of the flesh such as suitable plasters or ointments.
If ever there is an injury between the nostrils then you must treat it with strips of linen; and insert a lead pipe until healed.
On restoring the lower jaw when it is shattered:
When the lower jaw is shattered and there are no other injuries; then if its fracture is external only and not split into two parts, then identifying it should be straightforward.
If the fracture is on the right side then insert your left index finger into the injured person's jaw; likewise if it is their left jaw that is fractured then use the index finger of your right hand instead: and with your other hand push inwards from behind towards the outside at the swelling of the fracture, pushing gently until you feel the bones meet.
If the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two pieces, you must perform an extension from both sides according to its straightness until it can be equated.
If there is already damage to the teeth or they have been displaced, then fasten those you hope will remain with gold wire, silver, or silk thread. Then place pulp on the fractured jaw. Then place a doubled cloth over it, and on the cloth put a large unevenly shaped tile or a piece of leather equal in length to the jaw.
Then bind it from above according to how you have prepared the bandage for him and its application is suitable until the jaw is no longer broken; advise the patient of calmness and rest; and give him soft, easy-to-swallow food.
If you think the shape has changed to some extent, then be quick and remove it on the third day. Then correct that which has been changed and make a plaster with flour of barley mixed with egg white or sesame seed flour after you have removed the pulp; and place on the plaster some soft wool.
While that plaster remains attached to it without changing the position of the bone, leave it in place and do not remove it until healed or until the fracture is secure. This fracture is often bound for three weeks.
If there is a warm abscess in the meantime, then apply that which we have said many times for its reduction until it is removed.
And if there's a fracture with a wound, consider it. Now when the piece of bone has been separated from the limb, either by sawing or cutting; then you must make use of the appropriate fine instruments to remove those pieces of sawdust which suit your purpose for their removal.
If however the wound opening is tight, then widen it with a lancet according to the extent of your need.
Then when you have removed the sawdust and none remains of it, sew up the wound if it is wide; and if not, place on top of it a plaster that suits this purpose, and apply flesh to it until it heals.
On restoring the fork when broken.
The fork is indeed most often broken on the anterior part of the arm; and its fracture occurs according to one of three modes.
For it is broken either into two pieces without any sawdust getting caught in it; and thus its restoration is easier.
Or that sawdust gets caught up within the bone; and its restoration is difficult.
Or that there's a fracture with an open wound alongside it.
When a fork is fractured without an open wound, the procedure is as follows: you must have two assistants; one of them holds the broken fork while the other extends their arm towards the side.
Then align the fracture with your fingers until its shape is correct and even; and there should be neither prominence nor hollows.
If you need more extension, then you should place underneath the patient's heel a pad made of cloth or wool; its size should be according to your needs; extend and raise the fork, and shorten the pad with your hand until the fracture is reduced as required.
If you cannot draw the end of the fork outwards because it has come out too deep, then the patient should be made to lie face down over his own neck; place under his shoulder a pillow of medium size and have an assistant press his shoulder downwards until the bone of the fork that is buried deeply is raised up; then reduce the fracture and align it with your fingers.
If you feel slippage of the fork and it is moving, then you should cut open above it and remove that displaced part with ease.
If it is retained by the bone, then introduce into its incision one of the knives you have prepared for this purpose; after you place under the fork a protector, and the protector is either wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a spoon that has no hollow.
Its width should be according to the size of bone you need it for and its fragility. Its length should also be according to what is possible for you in the procedure.
It should have two ends as you see it: one end is wide, the other narrow.
If however the wound you opened when removing that displaced part of the bone is large and you are afraid of abscess because it is warm, then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the rupture is small or you fear a hot abscess: then fill the wound with cloths and plugs according to the size of the injury's tear.
If a hot abscess occurs, then soak a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of the abscess.
However, if there is a bone fracture without any wound or break, you should apply a plaster made from flour and egg white to the bone. And place soft rags on top of it. Then put a ball under their armpit if they need it. Next take a hemmeter, which is the wheel that the Saracens use and which is very long; its width should be one palm or around that size. Then place a doubled plug on top of the rags and plaster. Next take a thin board whose width is three fingers wide and its length likewise. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the board in it around the place of the hemmeter which lies over the fracture and site. Then place the hemmeter over the fracture as it was rolled up and wrap it around their neck, under their healthy armpit, and then under their injured armpit; bring it back to cover all parts where you see that the bone has been misaligned. It should not be concealed from view above and should cover everything so that the board is not removed from over the broken bone. And for this reason, you should look after the sick person every day. Whenever you see the bone already starting to move away; then straighten it out and tighten the ligament.
Then place the patient's pillow under his back and put another small pillow at night under their head to elevate it on that side. Raise the fracture of the forearm by raising up the shoulder.
Or bind the patient's arm to their neck and do not release this bandage unless there is an accident at that site due to itching or from a sore until twelve days have passed.
Then renew the plaster if you see its surface has become exposed. And add to the bandage and leave it until it is healed and hardened.
The fracture of the forearm is most often bound up and strengthened within twenty-eight days, sometimes sooner for some patients.
### On healing a Fracture of the Jawbone.
The jaw is rarely broken except over its widest part; but if it does break then only the edge of it breaks off.
When the jaw is broken at this site and breaks right through its middle so that it cannot be seen from outside; then according to where exactly the break lies, you must try to set it in place. And restore its shape as much as your ingenuity allows you to do so.
Then place over the wound powder from a mill with egg white, and soft lint, and cover it all with a little pad made of doubled cloth. Then place over it a flat splint made of thin wood according to the size of the whole spatula, or slightly larger.
If there is any hollow under the splint in one of the spatula's places, then fill that hollow evenly with soft lint until the splint sits level.
Then bind it tightly from above with a long bandage of the proper tightness and firmness to hold the splint in place until it does not move.
And check the binding every day. Whenever the binding becomes soft, tighten it, and adjust the splint if it has moved from its place; also have the patient lie on their healthy side.
The splint will heal within twenty or twenty-five days.
When that number of days is complete, then you may remove the binding; and you will be safe. For it is made of bones whose fracture or dislocation need not be feared.
If however, a piece of bone projects from it and pierces the skin, then split it open over that spot and remove the projecting piece. And do as we said with the fracture of the collarbone for a warm poultice from an aposteme if something similar happens.
On restoring fractures of the ribs.
The chest sometimes breaks in the middle of itself, and this rarely happens. Its limbs indeed break and shatter the most from its accidents.
When its middle breaks, which slopes downwards to the lower parts, and it suffers severe pain, difficulty in breathing, and a cough; perhaps vomiting blood, with concavity evident on the broken bone, and not hidden from perception, its restoration is for the patient to lie on their back with a pillow placed between their shoulder blades.
Then press their shoulders and bring the ribs together from both sides with your hands; and carefully align it as evenly as possible and appropriate until the shape of the bone returns as it should be.
Then place a plaster and a poultice on them, and put above it a star made of thin wooden board from willow or hazel, and similarly light ones, after you wrap it in cloth. Then carefully bind it above the broken bone so that it is not moved; and go around with the binding according to the roundness towards the back several times, tightening it with a suitable bandage.
Then check the bandage every hour and whenever it loosens, tighten it; and if its need provokes its removal due to itching, or corrosion which occurs in that place, or pain, or abscess: then hurry, and remove it, take off the plaster, and address what happens with an appropriate treatment method.
Then bring back the plaster if you see its face; and attach to it a bandage until it is healed.
The restoration of ribs when they are broken.
You know that a rib fracture does not occur except in the thick parts which follow the back and at their ends from the front part. And they do not suffer dislocation because of this, since they are made of cartilage. Recognition of it is not hidden from the sense of touch during examination with the fingers.
And its restoration is done in this way: equally align the fracture with your fingers as best you can until the shape is equalised as it should be. Next apply plastering, and bind the broken bone with a splint if it needs one.
And if the rib fracture is towards the inside of the body, then the patient experiences severe pain and piercing, like that which occurs in pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lung, and they also experience difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting a lot of blood: and this condition is difficult to treat.
Ancient physicians have devised many techniques for this condition, and among them are those who say that you should feed the patient foods which cause inflammation and wind, so as to inflame the abdomen and push it outwards, thus forcing the fracture towards the outside.
We however refrain from doing anything which might cause a quick-forming hot abscess if it does not happen. But if it has already occurred, then an addition is made to it.
Some of them said to put something windy on the place, then suck it with strength, and this is more similar to logic. However, there is a fear that it may draw superfluous humors to the site due to its weakness-inducing properties.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the site should be covered with wool already soaked in warm oil; and let wads be placed between the ribs until full, so as to have an equal binding when you wrap it around according to its roundness.
Then the patient should be treated with treatment for pleurisy from food and medicine.
If the illness afflicts the patient severely in a way that is not tolerated and the wound stings with a harmful jab, and we fear for the patient; then it is necessary to cut open above the site, and expose the broken rib. Then we should place above it the instrument that preserves healing, whose description preceded; and cut the rib with ease, and also cut said instrument.
Then we should bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with stitches; and we should treat it with plaster until it heals.
If meanwhile a hot abscess occurs, then hurry and insert wads into rose oil, and place it on the site; and let the patient be treated with what is appropriate for an abscess.
Meanwhile they should lie on their side of the wound until it heals.
On the restoration of spinal fractures in the back and neck.
The bones of the neck sometimes suffer fracture, and rarely do they undergo attrition; similarly with spinal vertebrae in the back. When it happens to someone and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider the following... If you see their hand already softened and numb, lifeless; they cannot move it or stretch it out nor clench it, and when you squeeze it with your fingers and prick it with a needle they feel nothing and experience no pain: then know that this person will not heal, and in most cases this is fatal.
But if they can move it and feel the squeeze of your fingers and the prick of a needle then know that the bone's neck is still intact and this patient will heal with treatment.
If it happens in the vertebrae of their back and you want to know if they will heal or not then consider their feet; if they are also soft and lifeless like their hands were, then when this person is lying on their back air escapes them without control, and when they are on their stomach waste comes out without control: when they turn onto their back again they cannot urinate although wanting to: know that this is fatal. Therefore do not trouble yourself with treating them.
If none of these things happen to this person then the case is less severe.
To treat this patient you should try to reduce the hot abscess's inflammation by putting rose oil alone on a rag over the affected vertebra or with roast lamb entrails.
Do this several times a day until the hot abscess is reduced; then put one of the tightening, drying plasters on it and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest and keep calm. He must not sleep on top of the side where he finds pain until it is healed.
If this happens when there is erosion of the bone or something which has already come away from it: then one must cut above the skin and remove it. Then draw together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches. Then treat it with some red ointment until it heals.
But if the last bone of the leg is broken and it's the end of the tailbone: then one must put their left thumb into the anus, and with the other hand equalise the broken bone as far as possible according to what alignment you achieve.
Then place something over it and remove it; and treat the wound with whatever treatment came before until it heals.
On the restoration of the hymen.
Chapter 11.
It's rare for the bones of the hymen to break. If they do break then the break is not a fracture but an erosion at their ends; and they split lengthwise and curve into the inside; and it happens that there's pain for the sick person in that place and a pricking, and the leg which was broken goes limp.
Its restoration is to spread your hand over it until you feel above the break like its shape suggests.
But if the break is only at its ends then equalise that break according to what alignment you achieve until it's like its natural shape again.
If the fracture is along its length or has already shifted inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach until you prepare to set that fracture. When you have therefore leveled it, place a plaster cast on top of it; then put on top of that a splint made out of wood or leather, and tighten the bandages over which you fear neither any change in the fracture nor displacement of the splint.
And equalize their concavity with that which fills it up until the bandages grasp it according to evenness; and instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
But if a hot abscess should occur, then desist from extending it and setting it until the hot abscess subsides; then put on top of that which has subsided just as before, then return to its setting; and tighten it as you ought.
But if an arrowhead has penetrated the bone or shattered it, extract it.
On the setting of fractures in the arm.
The splint is that which lies between the elbow and the head of the spatula.
If it breaks therefore, then its setting is according to one of two ways.
One of which is: that you take flat wood of medium thickness in this shape, as follows.
And bandages will be tied at the two ends with two bandages.
Then it will hang from an elevated place; and the patient shall sit on a chair. He should then throw his broken arm over a wooden support until he reaches the armpit, where there will be an attached curved piece of wood in the middle.
Then hang something heavy above it to stretch the assistant downwards. Then the doctor should grasp the fracture with both hands at once until it returns to its original state as it ought to be.
And another method is for the patient to lie on their back with their neck; then hang their arm from their own neck using a ligament. Then instruct two assistants to hold it; one above the fracture with his hands and another below it, each stretching in their own direction.
And if you wish for a stronger stretch then tighten below the fracture with one ligament and above it with another; let each of the two assistants stretch in their own direction.
If the fracture is close to the shoulder joint then a ligament should be placed under the armpit and another beneath the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow then a ligament should be placed on that spot and over the actual elbow itself.
Then adjust the fracture easily without difficulty until it is aligned as it ought to be and heals well; then tighten it if no hot inflammation occurs.
But if hot inflammation does occur then release the tight bandage until the seventh day. And place over it a dressing of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the inflammation quiets; then tighten it again with an ointment on the fracture.
Then place a bandage made from new cloth over the plaster. Then bring the arm alongside for support, and place their open hand over their shoulder.
Place a cloth and bind it tightly over the supporting arm, so that the arm stays in place as splints: if nothing prevents you from doing this, nor will anything shift within your broken bone.
If you fear that something might shift within your broken bone, then use splints: and it is best to place over the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And place between the width of all splints a finger's breadth: and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture, with an additional three finger-breadths on each side.
Then bind tightly over the splints using the method I described at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is important that your binding be tighter over the site of the fracture. And the more extended the fracture is, the less tight should your binding be.
If therefore you see that the placement of the splints and binding is as we have described, then do this when restoring the limb immediately: and if you fear a hot abscess, then loosen the binding and remove the splints until the seventh day, as I said before.
Then check the binding on all three days, so that an itching or swelling does not occur at the site, nor is food prevented from reaching the limb due to excess binding. Therefore correct it all according as I have said.
If, however, it is not certain that something will happen, then do not remove the ligature until after three days or more.
And if the patient is sleeping on his back with his hands over his stomach, place under the support cushion full of wool evenly.
And consider every hour of the night or day to ensure that the position of the broken limb is not altered nor the ligature loosened. Therefore, correct all this with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned earlier; let the first foods be soft until his jaw begins to tighten, and then you must thicken his diet.
For it is the custom that a splint and crutch should be worn for forty days; at this point, it must be removed, he should have a bath, and be anointed with ointments that straighten the limb.
But if the fracture is foul and crushed, do not remove from it the splint and wooden wedges until fifty days or even two months.
On the restoration of the broken limb of the arm.
The arm is made up of two bones which are called the forearm bones.
One of these is small, being the one that follows the thumb. The other is large; it lies beneath the smaller bone below.
Perhaps only the larger forearm bone is broken, or perhaps the smaller one, or maybe they are both broken together.
When therefore the lower jaw is broken in a minor fracture, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower jaw is broken in a major fracture, its injury is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it gets worse when two bones break at the same time.
If therefore the bone that is broken is the lower jaw in a minor fracture, then it behooves the physician to attend to its restoration by applying gentle traction until it is even.
If however it is the large lower jaw that has been broken, then he must apply a very strong traction to restore its position.
And he must place the palm of his hand in position for its restoration, with an extended stretch above the pillow. And let the thumb of his hand be higher than all the fingers; and let it act as a joint to all the other fingers, or at least some of them: and let the sick person sit square before himself, with the pillow in front of him, or directly beneath him, at such a height that he incurs no effort.
Then the attendant must extend the arm from below with either his hand or a cord. And another attendant must likewise stretch it from above.
Then the physician should level the bone until he reduces its position to as good a figure as possible.
If there is bending to the bone fracture, then strive to bring every piece back into its place by your might.
If however you find the dislocation to be separated and it punctures through the skin, with no hope of restoration for you, then bind it up, and remove it according to what we have described above.
If there is a fracture with a wound, I have already done that in a separate chapter, so take the cure from there.
If at the beginning of your restoration a hot abscess occurs, then soak a cloth with a cerate made of rose oil, and white wax, and let it be medium between thickness and thinness: and bind the cloth onto it with a tight bandage until the abscess subsides: then remove the cerate, and apply a plaster prepared with flour of millstones and egg whites. Then apply splints, and let the splint that is placed over the fracture itself be a little wider, and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most cases: whether there be a fracture in one shaft or two shafts together.
Then apply your bandage over the fracture site more tightly and forcefully, and somewhat tighter again with the bandage above or below the fracture: or apply a softer bandage to it slightly looser than its tightness as mentioned at the start of this chapter.
And let the cloths that wrap around the fracture be soft and moist: and not hard or rough. And let the thread with which it is bound be linen, and medium between thin and thick, as we have described.
And consider the limb and its ligaments after a day. If there is something that requires correction, such as itching of the limb: then you must embrocate the limb with warm water until the itching subsides, and release the limb from its bandage until it calms down, then repeat the binding.
If the tightness has already softened and the bone is removed, and similar matters to these: then straighten it all with your skill, and consider again.
If nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness, then you must soften it somewhat and leave it for a few days until the nourishment reaches it, afterwards tighten it.
If none of the things we have mentioned happen to the patient, then it is not necessary to loosen it, unless after twenty days or thereabouts.
Then the patient's hand should be hung from his neck. And let his neck be straight, and it should be kept steady by his skill to avoid violent movements. Make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture heals within thirty days or thirty-two days and perhaps it is healed after twenty-eight days. All of this is according to the dispositions of one's constitution and their skill.
On the healing of broken bones in the hand.
Know that broken bones rarely happen in the knuckles of the hand or at the joints of the fingers. It does not happen to it unless there is repeated attrition (i.e., rubbing together).
So when there is a fracture or attrition of the heel bone (i.e., calcaneus), then the patient should sit square and opposite him/her should be placed an equal seat. Then place his hand on it, extended.
Then the assistant should extend the broken bones, and the doctor should align them until they join with a good connection.
At this point, it is necessary to apply the plaster cast and bandage, unless a hot abscess occurs. Place the splint over it according to the size of the area, you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
However, if the fracture is in the lower part of the foot near the sole, then make a ball out of cloth and ask the patient to press his broken foot against it; afterwards it should be secured with a long piece of linen.
The splint should be made of soft leather so that it conforms to the shape of the foot; tighten it as required.
If the fracture is on the outside, you should place a splint over it and another underneath at the sole of the foot; make sure that the hand is extended and open. Then place bandages as you would for a hand injury; extend the binding between the toes.
If any of the toe joints is broken, if it is the big toe then align as required. Afterwards it should be secured with the foot; if necessary, apply a straight splint to prevent any elevation of the fracture and ensure that there is no movement.
If the other toes are broken (such as the middle, index, little or ring toes), then they should be aligned and bound to the next healthy toe; alternatively all of them can be bound together which is better. Place a small asterisk on it as we mentioned before, on the thumb.
Consider the restoration process and following your arrangement of the warm poultice: address any complications that arise as described in his account.
On the restoration of hip fractures.
The hip bone often breaks and is easily detected because it twists towards the inner and back part of the body.
To restore this injury, bind a bandage above the fracture and another beneath it. Let the patient lie prostrate on their face.
The assistant then stretches every bandage to its limit on each side evenly if the break is through the middle of the bone.
However, if the break is near the hip bone's root, a bandage should be placed at the ilium so that its stretch goes upwards and another beneath the fracture.
Similarly, if it is close to the knee, place the bandage near the knee so its stretch goes downwards.
The doctor should then align the bone ends with his hands until it returns to its original shape and join them in a good union.
Apply a plaster cast and bandages if no infection develops in the limb. If an infection develops there, you should leave it for a few days until the warm swelling subsides before returning to your treatment.
Its stricture should be such. You must roll up the bandage over the fracture of the dura mater; that is, you should double it twice or three times, and there should be a remainder from its surplus. Then roll up the leg until you reach the heel at the root of the buttock.
And introduce a long thread between the thigh and leg near the knee to the underside, and let the ends of the thread come out from the upper part of both parts. Then roll up over the leg and thigh what remains from the other bandage.
Then place over the thigh at the site of its fracture some splints, and put one splint above the leg bone.
Then fill the gaps between the leg and thigh with soft cloths until you equalize the tightness.
Then start with a strong bandaging from the middle over the site of fracture by three or four turns. And the more you extend with the bandage from the site of fracture, let your binding be tighter and softer, and gentler.
Then reach the two ends of the thread that you introduced between the thigh and leg. Tie with both [ends] three splints which are above. Then go with both ends of the thread to the underside until you reach the heel of the foot. And with both, bind also the ends of the splints from the other side so that the bandage is not removed from its place.
Release the constriction over it while it remains, so that there is no corrosion of the limb, nor abscesses, nor inflammation, and similar things to them. If anything should happen as a result of this. Wash it with its remedy and correct whatever happens as a result entirely, just as we have said many times.
But if there is a splinter of bone from the bone that is protruding: then you must cut it out equally, as much as you can. And if not, place something over it, and remove it; and treat the person whose symptoms have occurred before, until they are cured.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is compressed, besides which splints are added to it, as we have said about the arm and shoulder.
However, when this fracture is restored, there is no limp in the patient. And if it is restored alone, apart from the fact that another leg is applied to it, then there must always be a limp in the person whose it is.
And know that the hip is compressed within fifty days, or a little more, or less; all of this is according to variations in constitutions and other conditions.
### On the restoration of the fracture of the knee cap.
Know that the knee cap rarely experiences fracture but is subject to wear many times.
If it does experience fracture, then there is no other than either a crack or a hole in its parts. And it happens with a wound and without a wound. And he stands over it whole with his senses.
And its restoration is such that what has been broken of its parts will be levelled with fingers until it is united and joined as well as possible by levelling and smoothing, and shaping.
Then place a plaster of sesame flour or mill flour with egg white: and put over it a round wooden board, if you need one: and press down upon it with a binding suitable for that purpose.
Then consider all the treatments we described for other fractures: such as hot inflammation and similar conditions; so that you apply to every incident whatever is suitable for it until it heals.
 On restoring the fracture of a leg.
Know that there are two leg bones, one of which is thick and named the shin bone; and another fine one, called the calf bone.
And it happens to both of them by type as what happens to the two bones of the arm; and because of this its restoration is equal to that of an arm, and the operation is one and the same.
If both bones break at once, the leg turns into all pieces.
And if the finer bone breaks, the leg turns forward.
And if the thicker bone breaks you will find it lower down; and it is one of those that are not hidden from view.
Then administer extension, equality and binding of the stars equally according to that.
However, if the leg fracture is a severe one, with many ligaments involved, your extension should be smaller and gentler.
And in the leg there is something from the operation over the arm, and it is such that when you equalize the stars and complete all your work, then take two pinewood splints used to make roof tiles placed under the rafters; choose those which are neither too thick nor too thin, and let their length be according to the leg's length from knee down.
Then wrap each splint with two layers of bandage according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side and the other part on the opposite; let them be from knee down to foot.
Then bind the two splints together at three places: both ends, and midway. For with the binding in place the leg sags to both sides and maintains good position.
Now let there be made a cradle of wood according to the leg's length; place the leg in it so that it may keep itself from moving.
Indeed one must make sure to do this for the fracture when there is an open wound as well.
Then check the leg every day, and pay close attention to any infection, inflammation or other complications. If any of these occur, then treat it with what is needed until the leg heals, God willing.
On fractures of the bones of the foot and toes.
The heel bone is not fractured at all.
The bones of the foot sometimes become fractured, and also there is a slight fracture of the toes; but they are never broken except by attrition in various places.
But if the bones of the foot are fractured and you see these bones raised one above the other then let the patient put his/her foot on a prepared piece of ground as when walking.
Then stand yourself and place your foot on that which is raised up from these bones; afterwards press it, or stamp on it; and equalise them until they return to their places.
Then place on it a plaster cast and some cloth above that; then place under the sole of the foot a small board with two flat ends.
Then bind it together with appropriate bandages after you have wrapped it up with cloths and other things as required.
When therefore three or four days have passed then untie the bandage. For you will find that the bones have become level if they were broken or dislocated. So therefore there is treatment for them as you see.
But if some of the toes are broken then restore them and equalise them as I have described to you for restoration of the fingers of a hand. Then place a splint alongside the toe according to its length and let it be slightly wider than that; then put under this foot the board which I described to you before and bind them with appropriate bandages.
If the bone that is broken consists of two pieces or three or more, then place a splint of appropriate size over each finger wrapped in linen cloth, and bandage it to a board underneath the foot; let one end of the board extend beyond the stomach of the foot so as to hold [the splints] firmly.
And it is necessary for you not to forget that you should consider all the things I have said about other types of fractures from the accidents we mentioned; and apply them as appropriate in each case.
Regarding the fracture of a woman's collarbone and a man's ribcage...
When a woman's collarbone is broken, make her sit on a square-shaped seat. Then tilt her slightly towards the side of her back; let someone hold her from behind.
The midwife should then fill her collarbone with cotton wool until it is completely full; the collarbone will become like a sphere as a result.
The woman should then be shaken slightly; her back must be raised gradually afterwards. The cotton wool will emerge from this side until it becomes a sphere in front of the collarbone; the broken bone will be rejoined as a result.
Then place a little pillow on her back. When she wants to urinate, the cotton wool should be removed gently; let her go to the toilet and then replace it as you first put it inside; afterwards, she can return to her pillow.
She should do this for seven days or so; the bone will be restored in that time.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and bind over its opening a reed tube, and insert the entire bladder into his anus. Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder inflates inside his rectum, for it will burst again.
Then fill it with cottage cheese and let it remain there for several days, as we have described, until he is healed.
And when the bone of a man's or woman's pelvis breaks, then apply what we have described for the repair and equalization of the pubic bone.
And the anus is not concealed by these nearby fractures which are of little consequence, especially to someone who has some interest or use for it.
And understand this book of mine very well because the fracture itself shows you, in many cases, a straight path to repairing and tightening it: so understand it.
When a man's penis is broken, take the gullet of a goose: and insert the penis inside it. Then place over it a wrap made of cloth, and it should be bandaged up and left for three days or thereabouts, and he will recover if God wills it.
On the repair of bone fractures when they are accompanied by wounds.
It is appropriate for someone who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip, or the supporting bones, or something similar to them, that you hasten and immediately have him bled by a phlebotomist; if he meets the conditions for bleeding as we described above.
If the wound discharges blood, then you must promptly proceed to its excision, applying crushed zege powder onto it, if no other [powder] is available.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not postpone it unless an abscess occurs.
But if there is a hot abscess, then postpone the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess settles down. And do not approach it on the third day or fourth day at all, because you would cause bad things to happen to it.
However if the broken bone is protruding through the skin then it must be attempted to reduce it by aligning it with your hands gently and with minimal extension.
If however its extension is not prepared for, nor its alignment with your hands then reduce it with this instrument. And the instrument is made of iron with a length of seven or eight fingers and its width according to the size of the wound. And for this reason it is necessary that the physician take three or four according to how many he needs of them for each type of fracture treatment.
And it is round with a small thickness so as not to double up during compression on it at the time of operation and has sharp edges with bevelled ends. And its upper half is thickened from the middle to its lower end.
And this is its shape.
In this operation it is necessary that the curved sharp end be placed over the protruding bone and push with it in one motion until the bone returns to alignment.
Attempt to align the fracture's ends with each other.
If its end is broken too finely and does not take the tool well, then you must cut down that bone's end until the tool has a good purchase on it.
But if you cannot reduce them with what we have described, then cut it open with one of the knives that suits it best, as we said before; or saw through it with any one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
Then smooth out what remains of roughnesses and small splinters from the bone.
When the bone has been put back and the patient afterwards experiences severe pain, you know that it is not in its proper place again.
Do so, then. For you give the patient great relief when your restoration of the bone is complete.
Then immerse some cloth in black styptic wine. And especially if it is summer. And do not apply any sort of poultice to the wound nor anything oily; so that it does not cause rot and corruption there.
Then give your patient aster leaves an hour after you have finished restoring the bone. And leave the wound open; so as to cut an opening with scissors into the wrappings according to the size of the injury.
And take every care not to bind up the wound tight around the fracture. Many times indeed have these foolish physicians done it: they caused to happen over their patients either death or decay, or suppuration, that is, pus. And if your fracture is soft, gentle, different from other types of fractures.
But if the wound is bad or a large one, and you fear some of the complications we described might occur, and you find pain in the suspended site; then it should not be necessary to put weights on top. And make for them rolls of hard cloth at the place of the weights, and tighten it with these.
However, after one or two days when you see the wound begin to generate pus; then take away from it the cloth which you placed on top with wine. Then apply liniments and ointments with which we are accustomed to treating wounds: such as the four-ingredient ointment, and similar ones.
It is appropriate for you to loosen the bandage. And examine the wound every morning and evening until it is healed and consolidated.
And the limb should be prepared in such a way that pus may flow easily from it downwards.
But if many days pass by the wound and it does not consolidate nor is the pus separated from it; then you may know there are small splinters of bone within. Why you must probe the wound with a tent. How many of those small splinters have been removed, take them out and extract them. And those that are not separated from them and pierce the limb and cause pain, try to cut into them, and remove them in every way possible for you.
If a wound occurs with an abscess or ulceration, that is, with a tumor, or some other sign of corruption and putrefaction: then you should apply to each one of them what corresponds to it regarding its treatment, the description of which has been narrated earlier in its own chapter.
And from this, in what my speech should stand on, and to which you should direct your attention when a bone is broken and protrudes beyond the skin, like the bones of the hip, the arm or similar large members: it is that you must not presume its traction, for many times death occurs from it; rather leave it alone until it rots.
Indeed, perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days.
Then therefore treat the wound if it seems appropriate to you; otherwise, leave it be.
On the treatment of swelling in the track of a fracture.
This swelling often occurs along the track of healing from a fracture. Especially when it is close to the joints; and the shape of the limb is distorted by it. And perhaps prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Therefore, consider that if the swelling is recent, you should apply medicines with astringent properties to it, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, gum Arabic, acacia, and similar substances.
Take some or all of them; prepare them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar; and place them on the swelling wrapped in lint, securing them firmly with a good bandage.
Leave the bandage in place and do not remove it for many days. Then loosen it and apply another one, until the swelling is gone.
Or bandage over it a piece of lead foil. For lead has the property of drawing out any noxious matter from the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned to stone and is bound up, and there's a pressing need to remove it quickly: then make an opening above its upper part, and cut off any protruding mass; or scrape it with some scrapers until it is gone; and treat it until it heals.
Now concerning treatment when the limb is restored but remains thin, not according to its nature.
When the fracture of bone is healed but the limb remains thin and weak: this happens for many reasons. One reason is an excess of the solution used for bandaging and tying it up not being as it should be; either through over-tightening of the bandage so that nourishment cannot reach the limb; or too much ointment applied at the wrong time; or because there's little blood in the patient's body, and weakness.
Treatment is to feed the patient nourishing food, and make his body soft so that the blood multiplies within him. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and happiness to him.
Then place a peg on the limb: so that it will draw pus towards itself in great quantities. And frequently anoint him with warm water until the pus runs out and his limb returns to its natural form.
On curing broken bones when they have healed crookedly.
When it happens that a limb which has already healed after its cure of crookedness and projection of the broken bone or knotting, and is disfigured by it, but nevertheless the limb does not prevent from its natural movement: then you ought not to listen to him who thinks that the limb should be broken again.
And there have already been many foolish physicians and bone-setters who did that in our country.
And this operation is truly blameworthy, leading to death or great fear so that the patient be terrified of dying.
But if the lameness and knotting are recent, then it is necessary that he be anointed with warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as althea leaves, and its root, and *mellilot*, and those like them. And make for him a plaster with softening plasters, such as *dyachylon* done decently.
Or take the mucilage of althea root, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil: and plaster him with it.
They should take plump figs and mix them with pigeon dung and similar substances which are called among medical men bone-softening agents.
And sometimes the knot unties itself with steady, ancient, gentle friction which is done with moist hands. One should move the limb to every side at all hours of the day.
But if the curvature has already advanced and become strong and turned into a stone-like hardness, and it is necessary to treat it with iron, then one should cut above it from the top and detach the connected bone, and cut away what is superfluous of the knot or bone with delicate Incisors; and ease in that be applied with care and diligence.
On dislocation (lit. 'joint-displacement').
A dislocation is the displacement of any joints from its place. Because it is prohibited from movement and defaces the figure of the limb. And it causes severe pain and injuries to occur in the weak person.
Therefore when it happens to someone that a dislocation has occurred, one should rush to restore it and not delay at all.
For if the treatment is delayed, then the place becomes calloused and perhaps with it the reduction of the dislocation.
For this reason it should not be moved nor stretched at the time of its callousing. For it often causes spasms and painful injuries to occur.
Indeed, when that happens, one must hasten to perform a bloodletting on the patient. Then they should be discharged until the abscess subsides.
Afterwards, the limb should be bathed with warm water and oil. Then they should be discharged until the abscess subsides.
And every limb should be treated with whatever comes to mind when recalled in its proper place.
I have already arranged the chapters on dislocations, as well as those that came before regarding fractures, from the upper to the lower parts of the body.
On the treatment for dislocation of the mandible.
Two jaws rarely dislocate unless they do so to a slight degree.
And the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways. Either they are removed slightly from their places, or they become somewhat softened. Or they are completely dislocated until the parts soften towards the chest; when it reaches the patient's saliva and they cannot hold onto that or close their mouth, and their speech is wrapped up with their tongue.
But when its dislocation is slight, it returns to place by itself in many positions with little trouble.
If however it is completely or fully dislocated: then one must hasten to its reduction and not delay at all; the minister should hold the patient's head and the physician insert the thumb of their hand into the root of the dislocated jaw between their teeth, if the dislocation is on one side. He should insert both his thumbs at once if the dislocation is from two sides. And the rest of his fingers should be kept outside, with which he tests (it).
And tell the patient to clean his jaws and thoroughly rinse them out for eating on all sides. And the doctor should test (the jaw) and push the jaw until it returns to its place.
If its repositioning is difficult, especially if both jaws are involved: then apply a hot fomentation with water and oil until the repositioning of both becomes easy; and do not delay the repositioning of both at all, as we have said.
When they therefore return and are tested, and the patient's mouth is closed, and there is no softening: then place over them pads of cloth with a cerate made of wax; and rose-scented oil.
Then it should be bound gently with soft bandages.
And the patient should sleep on his back; and his head should be made to rest between two pillows so that he cannot move it from side to side; nor should he attempt or be forced to chew anything: rather, his food should be given by gentle sucking until such time as the pains subside and the jaw is healed; then let him eat what he wishes and give it to him without difficulty.
Let him not work on the task of opening his mouth at mealtimes and drinking, nor yawn, until the jaw is healed and restored to health.
But if the repositioning of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places; then from this many fevers often occur with a continuous discharge, and perhaps the patient's stomach becomes relaxed, or perhaps he vomits pure bile.
When you see that, then know it is a lost cause, and many times the one afflicted dies within ten days.
On the reduction of dislocations of the fork-bone and shoulder joint.
The fork-bone does not dislocate from the inner side due to its continuity with the chest. And it sometimes dislocates outwards, which is evident by the sense of touch.
And its restoration is for the patient to lie on their back and stretch out their arms. Then squeeze the area with your palm firmly, for it will return to its place.
After that, apply a plaster and splints on top of it, and bind them tightly.
The extremities that follow the elbow, and which are connected to it, do not dislocate unless rarely. If it has dislocated at any point in time, then it must be reduced and aligned as we have said, and as is prepared for you.
After that, apply a plaster and splints on top of it, and apply tight bandaging. And instruct the patient to adhere to rest and tranquility until they have healed.
And with this same treatment the shoulder joint is reduced when it too has become separated from its place.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder joint.
You know that the humerus is dislocated only in three ways.
One of which is that it is dislocated towards the side of the coracoid process on the lower side. The second is that it is dislocated toward the side of the chest. And perhaps it is dislocated towards the upper part of the humerus, which happens rarely.
It does not dislocate backwards because of the shoulder blade. It also cannot be dislocated forward due to nerves.
It indeed tends to be most often dislocated and exits towards the lower side of the coracoid process, especially in those whose flesh is sparse. Since it exits quickly from them and also enters rapidly.
But in those whose flesh is abundant, it happens contrary to that, namely because it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps there are some people who suffer a blow or fall and the humerus becomes swollen with a hot swelling, which is thought to be because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore it is necessary that you examine this until you are certain of its cause, and then proceed to treat it.
A dislocation is recognized when it is towards the lower side of the coracoid process, and you must distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy one. For you find an obvious difference between them and discover in the head of the dislocated humerus concavity, and under the coracoid process, near where the head of the humerus should be, as if it were an egg; and the sick person cannot lower their hand to their ear nor move it with all its motions.
Similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards, then you will find a clear indication by touch, and it will not be hidden.
The reduction of this particular dislocation is easily achieved when it is recent or the patient is a weak child.
The reduction method involves the assistant lifting their hand upwards. Then place your thumbs under their armpit and lift the joint with strength upwards to its original position; meanwhile, the assistant lifts their hand and stretches it upward. Then lay them down; for they return quickly on their own.
However, if it does not return as described and many days have passed since the dislocation occurred; then it is necessary for the patient to bathe in warm water and be given an embrocation that softens and soothes, such as when Althea roots, fenugreek, and meadowsweet are boiled in water and administered.
Then the patient should lie on their back; and under their armpit should be placed a sphere of wool of equal parts softness and firmness.
Then the physician should place their heel on top of the sphere and lift the patient's shoulder with strength while pulling their arm downward.
If you wish, reduce it in this way; and that is for a taller man to be present who stands on the patient's side and inserts his shoulder under their armpit: then he should lift the patient's armpit upward until they are suspended in midair. The other assistant should pull the patient's hand toward the lower part of their abdomen. If the patient is slight in build, then something else must be hung from them to weigh them down; for otherwise the dislocation will recur immediately.
It can also be done in another way: by fixing into the ground a long pole whose head is round like a pestle handle; this should not be either too thick or too thin. Then the patient should be placed on top of soft cloths that have been laid out under them, with their body aligned along the length of the pole.
Next his hand should be pulled toward the lower part of his body from one side, while on the other his whole body should be extended with force; for in this way the joint quickly returns to its proper place.
If all the above-mentioned methods prove ineffective for reducing it, then try this treatment: take a pole whose length is equal to twice your forearm's length, its width equivalent to four fingers, and its thickness two fingers; this should have a rounded head like the one shown in the diagram below.
Then soft cloths should be wrapped around its rounded head to prevent it from injuring the patient.
After that the pole should be placed under the patient's dislocated joint so as to extend their hand or arm down onto it and thus reach its lower end; then tie the pole firmly in place, securing both the assisting hand/arm and the injured limbs extremity.
Then the patient's arm should be placed along the width of one step in a ladder, their hand extending down to its lower edge; while on the other side their body remains suspended as before. The junction enters immediately.
Therefore when its opening is complete in any possible way, you must place underneath the needle a woolen sphere of equal quantity. Next place the prepared plaster made of flour powder with incense and egg white all over the shoulder like it rolls down from above.
Then bind it underneath the needle with a suitable bandage, and roll its strap over the plaster from above; his hand is tied to his neck, and [the patient] is left without moving their hand for seven days.
The patient's diet should be restricted until the limb regains strength, for this expedites its healing.
Then after seven or five days an elastic bandage should be put on, and movement exercises are performed. If the limb is firm and not soft then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to moisture or for another reason then a three-hole caustic should be applied as described above regarding caustics.
If all this is done and the bandage removed after seven days but the joint isn't firm and plaster and bandages are reapplied several times without it becoming firm and falls again and cannot raise itself above then you know that its nerves near the head of the shoulder have been severed or stretched or softened, and you will know that the joint never be set in place.
As for a dislocation towards the chest and breast or one that is reduced to the back then it is done with an impulse and stretching using hands until it returns; then the rest of the bandage and treatment are applied until healed.
If, after recovery, there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use a bath frequently until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
On the cure for dislocation of the elbow.
You should know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty too; it can be dislocated in all directions, but especially forward or backward.
And its dislocation will not be hidden from you; for it falls under sight and touch, whichever way it is dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow with a healthy one, it will be evident to you. For the joint will be bent, and it cannot bend its arm or touch its shoulder with it.
And you must hurry and reduce the dislocation immediately before a hot abscess occurs in it.
For if an abscess occurs in it, its reduction will be difficult; and perhaps it may not heal at all, especially when it is at the back. It is worse than all other forms of dislocations and causes greater pain; and frequently death comes with it.
And when its restoration is possible among those that can be reduced, it should be done by extending the patient's hand with both hands; and their arm should be spread out, and the doctor's hands are above and below the elbow; and he pushes on the joint with the thumbs of his hands together, or with the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or the dislocation is forward: then he returns so that he doubles up his hand with its own hand, until he strikes with the root of his palm the elbow which has been dislocated.
If the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer a strong and violent extension: it is for two assistants to extend the arm; and let two assistants also hold it so that it cannot be moved during the extension.
Then the arm is turned around to every part after a folded cloth or a wide bandage has been wrapped around his hand.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should grease it with oil so that it is one of those things which assist in lubricating the joint with ease. Then he should push the joint with a strong thrust until it returns.
And after its reduction it must be placed over it a plaster which contains an astringent and a drying agent with egg white, and it should be bound with a suitable bandage. And the arm is to be suspended from the patient's neck, and left there for several days.
Then it is released. So if the joint remains firmly in place then remove the bandage from it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not properly bound then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for several days until it binds. Then release it.
If however there is weight and stiffness after the reduction of the joint and it is fixed in movement: then apply moistening in bathing and gentle friction, and compression until it is eased or place over the joint fat from the rump, that is, rich lamb. Then it should be bound and left in place for a day and night. Next remove the splint, and immerse it into a bath. Once it has sweated, then rub the affected area with tempered friction liniment. Then repeat the process with an eased voice once, twice, thrice with immersion in a bath until it softens.
And if you wish, apply cow dung that is moist, warmed with butter, and wrap it around the affected area.
Do this several times. For it will soften and return to its natural state.
 On the treatment of dislocations by Al-Mahas.
The hand (which is connected to the arm by way of joint) often becomes dislocated.
And reducing its dislocation is easy. Unlike that of the other joints. However it is necessary that the speed of its reduction be done within the hour in which it was dislocated before swelling sets in; otherwise a hot abscess will occur.
And reducing the dislocation is done by placing the weak hand of Al-Mahas on a table and having an assistant extend their arm; and then the physician will place their palm over the joint's prominence and push it until it returns to its normal position.
But it should be considered that if the palm has already receded towards the belly of the hand then place the weak person's back (of their) hand on the table for its extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding toward the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be internally on the table, i.e., the inner part of the hand should be placed on the table so that the physician's hand falls upon the prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then bind it with a soothing poultice to draw out the inflammation, and leave it be without further interference.
If however it does not tolerate this and you are unable to achieve the reduction because time has passed, yet the joint remains according to its original deformity; and nothing is harmful to an infirm person except that the hand becomes weak, and they cannot grasp anything: then know that nerves have been severed or damaged.
It is thus not to be treated with anything but the caustic near its origin. And perhaps nothing will benefit it.
Thus if Almahassem does not return, then apply over it the poultice which we have described. It should then be bound, and left for five days; afterwards it may be unbound and left, while the hand is exercised.
If however it loses its motion, and something heavy happens to it; then treat it gently with warm water and frequent massage until it is soothed.
On the treatment of finger dislocations.
When any of the fingers are dislocated towards either side, or towards the back of the palm or its base; then extend the finger and push at the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the finger's head, and suspend it towards the side to which it is dislocated; and leave it thus for two days.
Then hang him up and stretch him until he equals his usual straightness.
So when it's night, bind him according to the same account: and do not cease unbinding him by day: and exercise him with movement: and bind him at night.
Do this for several days until it becomes firm.
And do likewise with it if the wrist is dislocated towards the belly side; bind him to that part and perform your first procedure on him until he is healed.
And do the same when it's dislocated towards other parts.
 On the treatment of spine dislocations in the back.
When someone has a complete spinal or neck dislocation, or many vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no cure for it since death approaches the sick person.
And its sign is that the sick person's ejection happens without their will and they cannot hold it back; and often some of his limbs soften from this, or both legs, or both arms, or one of them; or a single vertebra moves out of place.
For often it is moved that which is often dislocated towards the four quarters.
So what moves backwards is called gibbosity.
However, the cure for it is to consider then that if gibbosity happens from childhood, there is no cure and absolutely no recovery.
In those cases that occur due to accident, or impact, or similar causes, the ancients have already spoken of the methods of treatment in great detail. Of which little returns with profit.
I, however, have already abbreviated that which has little excuse for its abundance due to my close proximity to the intention: and by my exposition in which I explained it, and formed his instrument in a manner different from that in which they presented it, and exposed it.
I say, therefore, that in the hump which occurs from the front part, there is neither a remedy nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which appears on two sides as well.
And they are not cured of them, except for that which occurs on the back itself with what I relate: and it is such that the invalid should be extended on his face onto a level platform near to the wall: and a moist covering should be spread beneath him so as not to injure his chest.
Then let a straight stick be placed fixed into the ground at the end of the platform near his head: and another stick about his feet at the other end of the platform: and the assistant should hold the stick, which is not firmly anchored into the ground. And another assistant should hold the other one.
Then roll over his head and underneath the patient's armpits a soft but strong belt or strap: and extend the end of the strap to the stick which is by his head: and tie him to it.
Then tighten the other strap over his waist, and over his knees, and near to his ankles. Then gather all the ligaments and tie them to another piece of wood that is by his feet.
Then each assistant should pull on a piece of wood from the side of the ligaments and not remove the two pieces of wood from their original places where they are fixed; however, as we said before, they must not be secured.
And the doctor should place their palms on top of the vertebrae with strength until it returns to its original position or they can put a plank over them instead. Then the doctor should attach their feet on top of the plank until it returns to its original position.
If however it does not return with this cure then you should take a plank whose length is about three arm-lengths. And the hole we spoke about earlier that is located on the wall near the weak spot should be where the end of the plank fits into it. Then place the middle part of the board over the vertebrae. And then the doctor should put their feet on top of the other end of the plank. And pull hard until the vertebrae is tightened back into place and returns to its original position.
Then if you like, use the drill that is powered by hand and it is as though you are pushing into the ground at the head of the patient two pieces of wood whose length is one arm-length each; and again at his head with another two pieces of wood at the other end of the plank.
And the distance between each piece of wood should be one hand-span; and now it is made so that there are holes at every place where the drill will pass through them and all the pieces of wood must be very well secured into the ground to ensure they do not move at all.
A round piece of wood is introduced and there are two pegs on which a cord may be twisted that go through two holes of the two pieces of wood.
At its end is a hole into which a piece of wood the length of one's palm is fixed to be wound around; similarly there are two other pieces of wood on each side for this purpose.
Then tighten the cords you have tied around the patient's chest with a peg by their head, and those that are binding their legs with a peg at their feet.
A helper should stand by each peg and turn the handle with which it is wound; the physician meanwhile adjusts the bone as we have described.
This is the form of the pegs that follow.
Then, once the bone is returned to its place and adjusted, it must be fixed there with a drying plaster and egg white. Next, apply lint. After this, place above the plaster a splint of wood that is three fingers in width or thereabouts. Its length should be sufficient to support the place of prominence as well as the healthy portion of the bone above it.
Then bind it with the cord we have described. The patient should be fed soft food until they recover.
If there is any remaining prominence at the end of healing then softening and easing medicines should be administered with a long-term course of the tablets we have described. And now a sheet of lead is applied to it.
And sometimes there is a lump at the very end of the spine; it is thought that this is due to a dislocation and indeed this bone already protrudes. Why it is not appropriate to presume that he will be healed by this medicine; for perhaps it may cause death.
 On the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
You should know that a shoulder or arm joint can only be dislocated; unlike other joints they do not become slightly displaced or concave.
Indeed, the shoulder joint becomes dislocated in four ways. That is to say it may be displaced either forwards or backwards.
Most often the shoulder becomes dislocated inwards; it is rarely displaced either forwards or backwards.
The treatment for a shoulder dislocated inwards is as follows: when you join the healthy leg of the patient with their injured leg, it will be longer; the knee of the injured side will also protrude more than on the other side and they cannot bend that foot up to the groin area. There will be a place below the groin which has become swollen due to the head of the thigh bone now protruding there.
A shoulder that is dislocated outwards will present the opposite of these symptoms.
For someone whose shoulder is dislocated forwards the symptoms are as follows: they will stretch their healthy leg fully but cannot bend it at the knee without pain; when attempting to walk they are unable to take steps forward and instead drag that foot along the ground, even stepping on their own heel in doing so. Their urine is retained and the groin area becomes swollen.
And the sign of dislocation to the rear is that they cannot straighten their knee nor bend it until they have bent their hip; and their leg is also shorter than the other; and their hip is softened, and the head of the thighbone is by the groin.
The reduction of these types of dislocations is as follows: consider then that if the dislocation is old and has existed for some time, the one who has it. Then if you administer the reduction of it, and it remains as it was before: then there is no cure for it at all. Therefore it should not be assumed that an operation should be performed on them.
But in the case of one whose dislocation is recent and is among one of four types of dislocation: then hasten to this, that you roll the joint, and extend it towards the inside and outside, and move it right and left; perhaps it will go back into place, and no further treatment will be needed.
If however it does not go back in this way, then you should prepare a strong assistant, and have them stretch their leg from below: either with their hands or with a strap which is tied above their knee; another assistant stretches out their hand on top, so as to put their hands under their toes. Then bind with a soft strap above the hip joint, and hold one end of another strap.
And let the direction of the stretching be either from the front of the hip to the side of the pelvis, or from behind towards the back.
And let all of them stretch at the same time until the patient is raised from the ground with their body and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common type among the four types.
If then the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then for every type it is necessary that I speak of the proper cure.
In its proper reduction, when the dislocation is inward, the patient must lie on their healthy side. Then place a bandage over the root of the hip bone, at the point between the hip joint and the area beneath the groin. Then extend the bandage upward from the groin area to the higher part of the body, toward the fork.
Then let another strong assistant take hold of his arms, reduce the thick area of the affected hip, and extend it outward with a vigorous extension. Now it has returned to its place.
And this type of treatment is easier than the other types for reducing this limb.
But if it slips away from you and does not obey your attempt with this type of treatment, then the two feet of the patient must be bound together with a strong yet gentle bandage over the two heels and above the knees; each length should measure four fingers' breadth from its corresponding point; and let the affected leg remain extended two fingers' length beyond the other.
Then let the patient be suspended from the head of a wooden beam within the house; its length should measure two arms' lengths from the ground.
Next, instruct a strong youth to secure the hip joint; let another person be present with the patient; and have this other youth push against the one securing the hip with strength because the joint returns swiftly to its place.
In his own reduction, when there is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary for the patient to lie on a bench as we described for one with a hunchback. And the strap should be tightened over his leg, that is, the patient's, and over his chest.
Then place two sticks, one at his feet and the other at his head. Then put an additional stick in the middle of the bench, fixed well; over which are wrapped wet cloths so as not to hurt the patient; and let this stick be between his thighs, so that he is not pulled down during the extension.
Then let each assistant pull on their side, while the physician adjusts the reduction with his hand.
If it therefore yields to its return, it will be good.
And if not, place him on the same board again, and press it as we said for hunchbacks, evenly. However, the patient should lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward, then the patient's leg must be extended quickly; and it follows according to this same narrative on the bench: and the physician should place the palm of their right hand over the patient's groin. Then grasp it with the other hand, and while grasping, place him extended downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is backwards: then the patient need not be extended downwards and raised off the ground; instead, he should be placed on a hard surface; just as it must also be done when his hip is dislocated to the outside, according to what we said about his lying on two boards: and he is on his face, with straps extended; as we recently stated.
The compression must be applied with a board over the area where the joint extends when reduction is completed as required.
Its sign of recovery will not be hidden from you; this is when you extend the patient's two legs and observe them as equal in length, and the patient tightens their leg muscle, flexes it without assistance; then you know that already the limb has returned to its proper position. Then bring together the patients two thighs, apply a bandage, and tighten with an imemati, that is, a pulley-wheel, so that no movement of any kind occurs at the joint; and the patient should rest for three or four days.
Next, release the ligature and bandage, compare the patient's leg with their other one; then if you observe them as equal length in this position, know that already the joint has been set fast; therefore discharge the patient to walk.
And if you observe any degree of softening; then reapply a bandage and tighten it according to your original technique; release the patient after three more days.
Then release it again and make the patient slow down their walking over both legs for a few days until they strengthen well.
On dislocations of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outwards, inwards, and downwards - that is, backwards.
And it does not dislocate forwards.
The sign of its dislocation is when you instruct the patient to bring their leg up against their hip. If it does not adhere to the hip: then know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration for all types of dislocations is to make the patient sit upright so that they can now stretch out their leg if possible over it and attach your back to their face; then place their foot between your feet.
Then attach their knee to your palms and straighten them between your fingers above their knee. Then press with your palm the two sides of their knee firmly. And have another assistant stretch out their foot until the knee returns to its place.
The sign of recovery is when the leg adheres to the hip with ease without exerting effort.
Then bandage it, and make sure that the leg adheres to the hip. Afterwards bind them together with thread for three or four days. Then untie them.
The patient should not walk for several days until they have fully healed.
If however it resists reduction, then apply strong traction with the bandages described earlier in treatment for hip dislocation until it returns.
# On the Treatment of Heel Dislocation #
The heel bone is sometimes slightly displaced, and at other times completely dislocated posteriorly. And its dislocation occurs either towards the inside or outside.
The sign of its dislocation is that you see an inflamed heel bone proceeding towards the side to which it has been dislocated.
The cure for its removal is an easy return, and it is to be stretched with ease by hand until it returns into place.
In its cure when it is dislocated according to the limb, you must have the patient sit upright and have a strong assistant hold them firmly from behind at the middle of their back.
Then you hold his foot with your right hand from its upper part and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot where the instep is located.
Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand. Then pull it with two fingers of your left hand.
Then stretch it out with the left hand, and push the sole of the foot towards the leg without effort.
Do this twice as we have described.
Then push the sole of the foot towards the leg for a third time, you then pull on the instep.
If it then returns by the first or second finger according to this method and you see the foot aligned, it is good; if not, then repeat the procedure on it since it has returned.
If however the reduction is prevented with what we have described, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground and fix a pole firmly into the earth so that it falls between their hips; you should already have wrapped a cloth around him so he isn't hurt.
Then let one assistant take hold of his hip; afterwards let another assistant stretch out the foot, either with their hands or with a strap that is tied around the ankle. Then let all the assistants stretch in opposition to each other's stretching: and a stick should be held between the patient's two hips, preventing their body from being pulled down towards their feet during the stretching.
Then let the doctor reduce the dislocation with their hands, while another assistant holds the patient's healthy leg down towards their feet. A dislocation returns swiftly.
When the dislocation returns and you are informed of its return: then apply a plaster and bandage, binding it tightly with strips, and tie the foot to the leg with a strap.
You should also be wary of nerves that are above the back of the heel so as not to place a strap over them tightly and damage them.
Then let the patient rest for two or three days. If the strap loosens, tighten it; then release it on the third or fourth day and prevent the patient from walking for forty days. Should the patient attempt to walk before this time has passed, it is not safe as the strap may come undone and the joint will be damaged beyond repair with no hope of future recovery.
If the patient develops a hot swelling then it is necessary to apply cold compresses as described previously at another point of this guide, and an ointment, until it resolves.
On the dislocation of the toes of the foot and its treatment.
It is necessary that what has been dislocated from them be reset with a little extension without effort: and this indeed is not difficult, but rather easy.
If however the dislocation is in certain joints of the foot's back; then it is necessary that you make the patient sit their foot on an even spot on the ground or on a board: and they stand like walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot on what protrudes from those joints. Then push it with your foot with strength until it returns, and you see it now evened out, and the protrusion is no longer visible at that spot.
Then place under their foot's belly a board with two ends that fits the whole foot. Then bind it tight with an appropriate binding for three days. Then loosen it and have them rest from walking for many days until they are bound fast and secure by the resetting.
Regarding types of dislocation with injury or fracture...
When something of this sort happens and you attempt its cure and restoration, death often ensues; because of that it is not appropriate to presume upon curing one such as this unless you are wise in the art through long practice, merciful, pious, cautious, not rash or presumptuous; and so you should use at first only medicines which cool hot swellings: and leave the patient to divine judgement. Unless you perceive, or hope for recovery from ruin with mildness of illness, and where there appears something of hope. Try therefore to reduce it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before hot pus forms.
If therefore the member returns as we wish, then administer a regime that settles the pus: and treat the wound with what suits it from drying ointments.
If the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture, and separate splinters occur in the bone, then attempt their removal, and make in it what we said earlier regarding simple illnesses that precede them in those places.
And beware according to your virtue, and guard yourself from entering the path of fear: as my earlier admonition to you stated.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and safer for your body among them during your time.
