After completing for you, my sons, this book, which is the final work on medical science with its complement, and having reached the end of it through his expositions and explanations, I saw that it was necessary to complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of practical application, that is, surgery by hand.
Since practical work with the hands has been abandoned in our region and our time: until perhaps its knowledge is lost, and its traces are completely erased; and there remain only small descriptions in old books, which have been altered by hand: and these have suffered errors and uncertainty, until their intentions are misunderstood and their meaning distorted; I saw that it was necessary to revive it with the ordering of this treatise on practical application according to the way of exposition, explanation, and abridgment: and to come with descriptions of the forms of cautery instruments and other tools for the work: which is done by adding explanations and detailing what is necessary.
The reason why a good practitioner of this skill with his own hands is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long, and its author must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, as described by Galen, until he knows the helpful parts of members, and their shapes, and their joining together, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, sinews, and their number, and their course, and the pulsating and quiet veins, and the places where they exit.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that the name is great with a name but little with a deed, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have indeed spoken of this in the introduction to this book.
Since those who are not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy cannot be evacuated without already falling into error, by which people are killed: just as I have seen many of them who are taught in this science and boast themselves about it without knowledge and without experience.
What happened is because I saw a foolish physician cut away a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck and he cut some arteries in her neck: therefore the woman's blood flowed until she fell down dead between his hands.
And I saw another physician who presumptuously attempted to remove a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large. It therefore happened to him that he removed it along with a piece of the bladder. Therefore, the man died on the third day.
And for my part, I had already been called to remove it; and upon seeing the size of the stone and condition of the patient, I knew he would die.
And I saw another physician who was taking a fee from one of the Dukes of our land for his services: and it happened that a black eunuch who belonged to him suffered a broken leg near the heel; and with great haste, due to his ignorance, the doctor bound up the fracture over the wound with bandages and with strong splints that did not permit any discharge from the injury.
Then he discharged him according to his desires. Afterwards he let him go a few days later and instructed him not to loosen the bandages; and so he stood still until his leg and foot were abscessed, and it came about that he was lost.
I was called to him; I hurried to release the ligament; and tranquility followed, and he escaped from his pains.
However, the corruption was already established in the limb; and I could not restrain it.
Therefore, the corruption ceased to walk about in the limb until it perished.
And I saw another physician who pierced a cancerous abscess; and it became ulcerated after days until its evil was magnified before its owner.
This is because when it is a pure cancer from melancholy humour, then one ought not to approach it with iron at all unless it be in a limb that can bear having the whole of it cut off.
And for this reason, o sons, it is necessary for you to know that operations with the hand are divided into two divisions, namely, an operation associated with a cure and an operation which involves danger in many ways.
And I have aroused you already in every place of this book where an operation comes up which involves fear and dread.
Why it is necessary for you to beware of this and put it aside so that fools do not find a way to talk about it and bring dishonour upon it.
Take therefore the measure with care and protection, and your patients with ease and firmness, and take the better way leading by the grace of God to salvation and commendable succession; and put aside severe illnesses difficult of cure, and remove from yourselves that which makes you afraid so that hesitation does not enter into your faith and your advantage.
It is indeed more beneficial for your glory, and higher status in this world, and ultimately for your wealth.
Galen has indeed said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat an evil disease, lest you be called bad doctors.
I have now divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
Chapter one.
On cauterization with fire and acute medicinal cauterization, categorized by part of the body from head to toe, along with the shapes of instruments and tools for cauterization; and all that is necessary for its execution.
Chapter two.
On incision, perforation, bloodletting and swelling; on the extraction of arrows and similar objects; all categorized by part of the body from head to toe, along with the shapes of instruments and tools.
Chapter three.
On the restoration of bones, their dislocations and treatment for torsion; all categorized by part of the body from head to toe, along with the shapes of instruments and tools.
But before we turn to the actual description of how this is done, it is necessary for me to explain about the harm and benefit of cauterization; on those of complexions for whom it is suitable and at what time; whether with an iron or gold tool.
I say, therefore, that discourse on the quality of cauterization and its harmful effects is extensive, subtle, scientific, and an esoteric secret.
There also spoke a multitude of sages about it, and they disagreed among themselves; as for me, I have had enough from their discourses, fearing the length.
I say, therefore, that cauterization is generally suitable for all constitutions, whether they are with or without matter; excepting two constitutions, which are the warm constitution without matter and the dry one without it.
However, they disagreed about the warm-moist and dry-moist constitutions. For some said that cauterization is beneficial for it. And others said the opposite of this, namely that cauterization is not suitable for an illness caused by heat and dryness; since nature's fire is heat, it is unsuitable to heal a hot-dry illness with hot-dry means.
And he who said the opposite stated that cauterization is beneficial for every hot-dry illness occurring in human bodies; since when you compare a human body and its humours to a fiery constitution, you find the former cold.
And I say according to his discourse, for experience has already proven this to me several times.
However, one ought not to apply it unless he is already proven and practiced in the final exercise of cauterization; has understood the variety of human constitutions, recognized the nature of illnesses within themselves, their causes, incidents, and duration.
Among other constitutions, there is no need to fear for you; especially in regards to cold and moist illnesses. For indeed all physicians have already agreed upon them; and they did not dissent from benefiting with cauterization on these.
And know, my sons, that from the secret of curing with the cautery by fire, and its superiority over the cautery with burning medicine is evident; for fire is simple, whose action does not reach unless to the member which is cauterized: and it does not harm another member joined to it, except with a small injury.
However, the action of burning medicine reaches that which extends from members: and perhaps it causes to happen in the member a difficult-to-heal illness, and perhaps it kills.
But fire, because of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do this unless it is excessive.
Indeed, this has become known to us through experience because of the length of our service and study with the art, and our position above truths of things; and I am excused from the length of my words.
And if it were not for the fact that this book of mine does not allow me to bring you the hidden secret in fire and the quality of its operation in bodies by its expulsion, by which it expels illnesses with a demonstrated philosophical discourse sharpened by your minds.
And know, my sons, that they themselves dissent about the time when it is appropriate to perform a cautery, and set a better time according to truth.
And I say that a cautery is appropriate at all times; because any harm caused by the timing is submerged by the benefit gained from the cautery. And especially if the cauterization is due to pains arising from necessary, strong, urgent pains that do not tolerate delay: for it is feared that a greater evil may occur which is more harmful than a slight injury left untreated for some time.
And do not let it enter your minds, O sons, that which is not esteemed, except by the common people and foolish doctors, namely, that for an illness being treated by cauterization, there is not always a relapse: and they assume its consequences, but the matter is not as they think; for cauterization is nothing other than a local medicine, which alters the complexion, and dries up moistures which are causes of pain.
However, cauterization surpasses medicine due to the speed of its cure, and the power of its operation, and the intensity of its dominance: and it is possible that an illness may relapse after some time according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of their illness, and its strength; and also what has been prepared in the body through the accumulation of excesses in it, and what has reached them in their acquisition from food, and similar causes, unless the illness is one where cauterization is administered.
A subtle illness in a limb with few excesses and moistures, such as dental cauterization due to pain, and similar instances can possibly not relapse with that same pain. But this occurs in few cases.
However, the common people's talk that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is correct; not for what they intend in it, because they believe there is no cure which can accompany medicine or anything else after cauterization has been performed.
The reality, however, is the opposite of that, and the intent is that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, not unless we apply the methods of treatment for a particular illness and those medicines do not help; then we use cauterization as a final recourse, and it helps. Thus, it follows that cauterization being the last resort in medicine is not according to the intent understood by the masses and many foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than with iron, and they did not say this unless because of the equality of gold and the loftiness of its substance; and they also stated that a cauterized area does not form pus. But that is not absolutely true; because I have already proven it and found that cauterization does indeed form pus in some bodies but not others.
And cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you ignite the gold cautery tool with fire, it does not indicate to you when it has reached the desired temperature due to the redness of the gold; and when it quickly becomes cold again, if you add more heat to it, it melts into the fire and turns into flakes.
That is why the craftsman falls short with it and, because of this, iron cautery instruments are faster and more convenient for us to use in practice.
And I have indeed arranged this Chapter on cautery according to topics and ordered them from head to toe so as to assist the seeker in finding what they want.
Chapter Two.
The cauterization here is attributed to the dominance of moisture and coldness in the brain: which are two causes of melancholy, and the abundance of humors flowing from the head into the eyes and ears, and an overabundance of sleep, and toothache, and sore throat; and universally every disease that occurs due to coldness, such as paralysis, melancholy, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The method of cauterization is to instruct the patient: to first evacuate their head with a purging medicine for three or four nights, depending on the strength of the patient and his age and habits.
Then instruct them to shave their head with a razor. Then have them sit between your hands in a square position, such that they've already placed their hands on their chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their eyes. Wherever your middle finger arrives, mark that spot with the cautery iron.
Then fire up the cautery iron, which is of this shape.
Then place the heated iron on that marked spot, pressing it down until your hand is contracted little by little and you're turning it around. Then lift up your hand quickly and inspect the spot.
If you see that the depth of the cauterization has reached the thickness of a bean or the length of fingernail, then lift your hand up. If not, repeat this process with your hand and the same iron instrument or another one if that has become cold; until you see the bones I mentioned to you.
Then take some salt, dissolve it in water, soak the dressing in it, and place it on the wound; leave it for three days.
Then place the dressing soaked in butter on top of it and leave it there until the fire-phlegm is destroyed. Then treat it with the four-ingredient ointment until it is healed.
They have already said that the longer a wound stays open, the more it discharges pus; which is why this way is better and more helpful.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized all the way to the bone; and that the cautery tool must be held there until something solid from the bone burns.
Then after that part of the bone which has been burned is scraped off; it should be treated.
And others say that the cautery must be applied to the very end until it makes a mark on the bone like the imprint of a seal; so that this part of the bone falls out and becomes like a mould for making small bells: or an instrument which women use to stamp letters onto wax; and they believe that vapours from the head come out through this place, so the wound must be left open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it is healed.
But to me, these two types of cautery do not seem effective except perhaps on people prone to fearful temperaments.
I will let him go, for his well-being is more important to me.
The head weakens due to the disruption of its natural continuity; as we have observed with other body parts. This is especially true when the patient's head is naturally weak and I find the first type of cautery procedure safer and better, so that is what I use. Therefore, proceed with caution for the well-being of the patient.
Head, Chapter 3.
When a patient experiences persistent head pain that continues for an extended period and they have tried various treatments such as herbs, leeches, clysters, oils, and emplastrums without success... And especially if the patient has already been treated with one type of cautery as we described earlier and it has not brought them any relief, then you must consider... But if the patient's head is naturally strong and not weak, yet they experience extreme coldness, then cauterize with a different type of cautery, but only slightly. Cauterize the entire horn of their head with this cautery, but do not penetrate through the skin and expose the amount of bone as we described earlier. Cauterize it with one type of cautery on the back of their head, in the spot known as 'vas', which is where the windpipe is located. Raise your cautery here and do not expose any bone. For the patient will find this pain to be severe and different from the pain of all other types of head cauterizations.
And I shall call this cautery by its proper name: it is a cautery that is used for the horns of the head and the back of the skull; it must be gentler than the one used to cauterize the middle of the head.
Chapter Four.
When pain and swelling occur on one side of the head or extend to the eye, and it is evacuated with cleansers applied to the head, and the rest of the treatment that I mentioned in the classifications of diseases does not bring improvement; then cauterization is performed according to two methods: either with a caustic medicine or with a knife.
The cautery with a caustic medicine is performed by taking one other person's tooth, removing its bark, and cutting off its ends on both sides. Then cut the area of pain at an opportune time with a broad lancet until there is formed beneath the skin a space where the tooth can be placed.
Introduce it beneath the skin until it is hidden; then bind over it with a suitable ligature and leave it for fifteen hours before releasing it, and remove the tooth two or three days later; afterward, apply to it a poultice submerged in butter until the area forms pus; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do it with certain caustic medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on Caustic Medicines,
The cauterization with iron is done in this way. Cautery by fire, which has this form.
And it is called a claw because the shape of its head is like that of a nail, which has some curvature, and in the middle there is a small bump.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand; turn the iron slowly with speed; and let the amount burnt be equal to half its thickness. Raise your hand so as not to burn the artery below and cause bleeding.
Then dip the cautery in salt water and place it on the spot; let it be there for three days; then apply butter; afterwards treat with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicrania with the knife-like end of the cautery. And beware of cutting the artery in this hemicrania, not an old one properly.
On the way of cauterizing an old hemicrania.
When you treat a hemicrania, with what we said in the previous cure, and what we said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not get better; and you see from the illness that it is not enough for it what we said about the first cautery with medicine, or with fire cautery, then one must use the knife-like cautery until it turns white after you marked on the spot of pain a line whose length is half your finger, or nearly so; and remove your hand once, and press it until you cut the artery, and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the mandible, which moves during chewing, lest the side be burned or the nerve that moves it, whence a spasm may occur.
And be mindful of the cost and caution against arterial blood loss from the severed artery. For its severance entails fear, especially for the one who is ignorant of what they are doing and is neither studious nor experienced, and abandons the operation with him first.
And I shall come with the reminder of the treatment for accidental arterial bleeding as it is described and in its place in this book.
If you see from the ailment that it is not sufficient for this cautery and you see the patient's body enduring the cautery at the center of the head as we described, tend to the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, apply the cautery as we said in the chapter on arterial ligation with a cautery having two blades. For this type of cauterization is better and more effective.
On the method of cauterizing earache.
When there is an earache due to cold and it is treated with a solution and the remaining treatment we described in the section on external applications, and the pain is not removed, then use a cautery by fire: and this is what is called a Point, whose form is thus.
Then make points with it after its ignition all around the ear as it is turned; or all around either one if pain is simultaneously in both. And extend yourself with the caustic iron from the root of the ear for a moment, after you have marked the places with the encaustic; and let the amount of the caustic be ten points on each ear, and so forth.
Then treat those places until they are healed.
The method of cauterization for the torticollis.
Chapter Seven.
The torticollis that is treated with cauterization is not anything but the kinds which happen from excess phlegm, according to what we have said about the divisions of illnesses.
And turn the cauterization towards the kind that happens from desiccation and nerve spasm.
When you treat this kind of torticollis with eardrops and head-purgings and gargles, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three caustic irons: one near the root of the ear, a second just below the earlobe, and a third at the joining of the two lips.
And place your caustic iron on the opposite side of the affected part. Because softening does not happen unless it appears on a healthy part.
And the form of this kind of cauterization is that you cauterize with a caustic iron at the outer edge of the upper ear, just below the horn of the head; and again on the earlobe itself, whose length should be according to the length of your thumb. And leave your hand with the caustic iron until half the thickness of the skin has been burnt.
And this is the shape of a cautery, and it is a type made from a surgical knife, whose form was presented above; however, it is not any finer than that, as you can see: and there should be a knife inside it that is slightly thicker than usual.
Then treat the places with what has preceded; until it heals.
A paragraph on the method of cauterizing an old apoplectic condition.
When an old apoplectic condition is treated and you treat it with what we have said, and your treatment does not help, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries over each corner of their head, and one in the middle of the head, as we have said, and one at the back of the head, according to what has preceded; and make the cautery according to what has been said before.
It is also cauterized with a cautery over the mouth of the stomach; and this is more effective.
Then it should be treated with what has been said before.
Chapter 9.
It is necessary that the patient first be given large amounts of liquor, and cleansing pills for the brain.
Then shave the patient's head entirely, and place on their occipital bone a plaster of mustard seed described in the treatise on plasters; and put it there several times.
For this is the way of cauterization; and do it in the same manner that I have described there.
If it heals through this, it is good. If not, then perform three cauterizations on the back of their head, which should extend from the top of the head down to the lower part of the eye; and leave a finger's width between each cauterization.
Then treat the cauterizations with the same method as before.
If you wish to add more and the patient can tolerate it, then perform a cauterization in the middle. If you wish to add more, cauterize it above the two corners (i.e., the temples).
Then treat it until it heals; let the cauterization be oiled according to the form which has been described.
On the method of cauterizing for paralysis and softening (i.e., scar tissue).
Chapter 10.
It is necessary to proceed with cleansing the head using urine, and what we have said before (i.e., cauterization).
Then shave the patient's head; afterwards cauterize it with a cauterization in the middle of the head, and one above each corner of the head, and one at the back, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
If you need to soften the patient's body in many places because of a strong illness, and they can tolerate it: then cauterize them with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of their back; and for the last one, burn through as much skin as possible, but raise your hand before causing injury. Then treat it until it heals; oil the cauterization in this way.
The method of cauterization for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless it is one whose epilepsy arises from phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cleanse his brain first with hyoscyamus, and with the other treatment we mentioned in the division; when the patient is large or can tolerate the acceptance of medicines.
But if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then give him gargles and cleansing chews for the brain, many days beforehand with an improvement of diet.
Then shave his head and afterwards cauterize it with a cautery once on the middle of the head as previously mentioned; with another one on the back of his head, and over every corner of his head. If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I mentioned in having paralysis, and soften his body over the vertebrae of the neck and the back; and let the cautery be olive-oil as described previously.
But if the patient is a child then put on a fine cautery in this way.
Chapter 12.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt humours and thick phlegm then cauterize it with the cauteries that we mentioned for having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess downwards to the melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give him in drink something that cleanses his brain as mentioned previously; afterwards shave the head of the patient and make a pad from decently made linen like a circle.
Then place it on the middle of the head; and let the patient sit square being held from every side.
Then present the ointment. And it is more worthy from old egg butter. And warm it over a fire with moderate heat, as much as the finger can bear when inserted into it. Then evacuate it onto the middle of their head in a circle, and leave it until it cools.
Do this to the patient once every week along with the rest of their good regimen until they are healed.
Or if you wish, cauterise it by making very small multiple points on it, except for where you hold the hand with the cauteriser: let it be fumigated below.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with moisture.
Then place on it a poultice soaked in butter or chicken fat.
On the method of cauterising downwards towards the eye.
Chapter 13.
When you are told that there is a beginning of water in the eye by signs, which I mentioned in the division, then begin and let the patient drink with what cleanses their head.
And keep them away from all moisture, and make them sit in a bath fasting for some days.
Then instruct him to scrape his head, and cauterise it on the middle of their head. Then cauterize it above the two temples with two cauterizations, if there is an onset of water drainage from both eyes at once; or from one side, if there is water drainage from one eye only: and cut off with the cauterization all the veins and arteries that are under the skin; and let the cauterizations be as long as the width of the temples; and beware of any bleeding.
If you see anything coming out of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I will come with wisdom regarding the extraction of arteries, their cutting, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, below the two bones, with two cauterizations applied at the very end.
On the method of cauterizing for old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and persistent: and they appear on the veins and arteries that are visible on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is due to excess cold and phlegmatic humors; then cauterize with the same cauterization method I described at the beginning for water drainage, applying a cauterization in the middle of the head, two cauterizations above the two temples, and two cauterizations on the neck below the two bones. And if you require additional treatment, then cauterize it carefully on every side of the eye, at the end of the eyebrow with a small cauterization tool.
On the method of cauterizing for nasal odor.
When you treat it with what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not take effect; then hasten and give him an infirmocochias potion for three nights: then shave his head and cauterize it with a central cauterization using an olive oil cauterizer. Then cauterize it with two clavicle-shaped cauteries, above the two eyebrows a little under the hair.
And guard against the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the shape of the clavicle cautery.
On the method of cauterizing a softened eyelid.
When the eyelid of an eye softens due to illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with a single cautery, with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on each side; and they extend from the two temples: and let the length of every cautery be according to the lengths of the eyebrow; and do not remove your hand with the cautery, but according to the amount that is burned away of the third eyelid.
On the method of cauterizing an eyelid with inverted hairs that irritate the eye.
The cautery is of two kinds; either with fire, or with a caustic medicine.
But in the case of a fire cautery, tell the patient beforehand to let his hair grow if he is one who keeps it clean-shaven, until they lengthen and equalize. If however they prick him at their roots, then bind his eyes with a cloth so that they do not move until they are born.
When they are born and equalized, then place the patient's head in your lap; next, brand over their eyelids with a cautery iron, marking it in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the brand be near the eyelashes.
Next, place over their eye a poultice soaked in egg white; or use linseed mucilage instead.
Then heat the following type of iron with fire.
Next sear the skin around that mark with many slow touchings of the iron until its surface blisters over completely in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And you will see your operation has been successful when the eyelid is seen to twitch and the eyelashes by it rise up.
So raise your hand then, and let them go after three days.
Next place over this a poultice with butter in it until the scar is sloughed away. Then treat them with an ointment until they recover.
If any of the eyelashes grow back afterwards and the eyelid becomes flabby, then repeat the cautery on that place as you did at first.
But if the eyelashes are on their lower lid, then sear it until they rise up to their proper place; and equalize them so that the lashes do not prick the eye.
Let it be that you advise the patient to leave hair alone until it grows back and becomes even again. Make from cloth a piece of paper shaped like a myrtle leaf.
Then take of known soap and of lime not slaked from each one ounce in weight or as much as that; then pound them together well and make it with haste so that it does not cool down. Then spread from that onto the paper you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf and place it over one eyelid or two. And put under the eye wool soaked in egg white; and let the patient's head be in your lap.
And put your index finger on top of the medicine and press it down for a moment. And you will move it as often as the patient feels a sting from the medicine because its sting is like fire.
While therefore he persists with this thing which he found to be a sting, then leave the medicine and move it with your finger. When therefore the sting calms down then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And consider then if you see the eyelid is raised like it has been with fire or with a cut; and if not then repeat on it the medicine where the medicine did not stick, nor darken until your operation becomes even and the eye contracts.
Then put on it wool with butter until burnt skin is removed. Then treat it with diaphanicon ointment, or another, until it is healed.
And when performing the operation, you must be careful to protect the patient's eye, lest any of the medicine fall into it.
If the eyelid becomes softened after a few days and there is still something fighting to come out of the eye, then repeat the application of medicine on that specific area which has become soft due to the eyelid, as you did initially. Then treat it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And you should know that human eyes vary in size and smallness. Therefore, let your consideration be according to that: the way of righteousness is not hidden from one who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the tear duct.
When you treat a fistula as we described in the section on diseases and your treatment does not take effect, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this way.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap and have your assistant hold their head securely between their hands so that it cannot be moved or shaken.
Then place a caustic paste made of gallnut extract or flaxen mucilage on their eye; afterwards, use this form of cautery instrument.
Let it be a hollow cautery like the shape of an eagle's quill feather from one end with which the cautery is done; and if you want to make it penetrating right through to the other end, so do it. If you wish to make its point upwards, so do that instead.
However, this cavity is better for your operation.
Next squeeze the abscess, if it is open, and remove its purulent fluid, then dry it out; and if it is not open, then open it up, and extract its pus.
Then place upon it a very hot cautery.
And hold your hand with it for a moment near the cautery from the eye, towards the side of the nose, so that your hand does not stray, or the patient is disturbed; and place the cautery on the fat of the eye, and burn it.
If therefore you penetrate with your cautery right up to the bone, then that will be good. And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, if you need to; and leave it for three days.
Then apply a poultice with butter, and treat it with drying ointment until it is healed.
But if forty days elapse and it does not heal: then place on it a caustic medicine until the bone is exposed; and scrape it according to what was said in your chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for abscesses, which some ancients have described. Attend to the place of the abscess, and find it; then place into its fissure a slender probe, that is, a fine cannula, whose form is this: [illustration]. And pour into it the quantity of a drachma's worth of molten lead, and hold your hand with the cannula firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that [the lead] does not run or reach his eye.
You must place a poultice infused with egg white over the patient's eye, or in water.
For lead burns the site of the fistula, and heals it with a wondrous healing.
If the fistula is healed, with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal hole, and redirect the fistula towards the nose's passage, according to what will come to its proper place.
On the method of cauterizing cracks in the lips.
Cracks often occur in the lip, which are called "pili," especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks, as we have said in the division of ailments, and the treatment does not take effect, then use a small knife-shaped cauterizer with fire, according to this form.
And let it be hollowed out according to the thinness of the knife.
Then place it, burning hot, quickly into the cracks themselves, until the cauterization reaches the deepest part of the crack.
Then treat it with a caustic [substance], until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing an oral fistula.
When an abscess happens at the root of the gums, or on the palate, or at the roots of teeth: then it makes pus and ruptures; afterward, it festers and runs with pus, and becomes a fistula: then you treat it, but the treatment does not take effect in it, then you must use a cauterizer according to its size which will fit into the fistula. Insert the heated iron into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand there until the hot iron reaches its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards with what we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
If therefore the pus discharges and heals, it will be good. And if it does not heal, then you must uncover the location and remove the rotten bone as will come to its head.
On the method of cauterizing gums and softened teeth.
When the gums are softened by moisture, and the teeth become loose, and you treat them with medicine but it does not help; then place the patient's head in your lap.
Then use the cautery fire with this shape, so that you place a pipe over the tooth; and quickly insert in it a heated cauterizer: and hold your hand there for some time until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of their tooth.
And lift your hand; then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
Then have the patient fill their mouth with salt water, hold it there for an hour; and spit it out.
For the loose tooth is firmed, and the softened gums tighten, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
On the method of cauterizing for toothache.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there are worms within and treatment with medicine does not help, then cauterization on the tooth itself is done in two ways: either cauterization with butter, or cauterization with fire.
The cauterization with butter is done by taking goat's butter and boiling it in an iron spoon or pot. Next, take the cauterizing instrument (a red-hot iron) and wrap it with a cloth at its end. Then dip the instrument into the boiled butter and quickly place it on the painful tooth, holding it there until it cools down. Repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
If you wish, you may also dip wool or a cloth into cold butter and place it on the aching tooth; then put a red-hot iron on top of that until the heat reaches deep inside the cavity of the tooth.
The cauterization with fire is done by applying either an air pipe or an iron pipe to the area. If there is any thickness on the body of the patient which prevents the sharpness of the fire from reaching their mouth...
Next, take the fire cautery of this shape and place it on that tooth; hold your hand there until the cautery cools down.
Repeat this several times; for the pain will be relieved either that same day or on the next day.
The patient should fill their mouth with good butter to cover the mark of the cautery and hold it there for an hour; then spit it out.
And this is the form of cauterization.
Cauterize with any end you wish according to what is possible: and this is the form of the cannula.
On the method of cauterizing with a hot iron.
When the ulcers are due to phlegm and cold humours, and they do not yield to medicinal treatment, and you wish to bring about their quick cure: then use a concave cautery of this form.
Having two tight ends so that the smoke may come out at one end of the cautery: and place it burning on the ulcer once or twice if you need to until you reach the bottom of the ulcer.
But if the ulcer is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the ulcer.
Then leave it for three days, and place on it cotton soaked in butter until what the fire burnt is removed.
Then treat it with tooth-alkali ointment until the form of the cannula heals.
On the method of cauterizing for hoarseness of voice and shortness of breath.
When humours gather over the trachea and especially when there is coldness of constitution, then it ought to be evacuated first by means of dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it by night at the root of the throat in a hollow place: and take care not to reach with the cautery the gullet nor the skin unless some of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery near the neck joint at his last vertebra, finishing [the operation]: and let the cautery be a clavicle-shaped one similar to the previous one.
Then treat it with what preceded until it heals.
On the method of cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors, the patient has no fever nor any sign of phthisis, and it is an old disease: then cauterize them with two cauteries above the clavicle in shallow, soft, empty spots. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples: and let this second cautery be cannula-shaped like the previous one.
And if you wish your cauterization to be performed by pricking with a cautery called "the Point", whose shape was mentioned earlier for earache pricking: and let the number of points be from thirty up until almost forty.
Then treat it with what preceded until it heals.
And now let the cautery have three branches: like this shape. Why is the cautery mitigated with what you do with three cauteries at once?
Chapter 27.
When the head of the humerus is dislocated because of moisture and it does not return to its place at once upon being relocated until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it dislocates from a slight movement as we have already testified that this happens, then you should relocate the joint first. The patient should then lie down on their back, or on their healthy side. Then elevate the skin that is inside the elbow towards the upper part with the fingers of your left hand: and if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
Then have a cauterizing fire with two rods. Its form is as follows.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and there will appear a figure of cauterization with four cauteries.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three rods, so that the figure of cauterization appears as six cauteries; and the rods are chosen according to their fineness.
And this is the form of the three-rod cautery.
And sometimes one is added to this configuration, resulting in eight cauteries.
Then place crushed leeks with salt on the cautery. Then make sure to keep the patient calm so that they do not move their limbs until they are healed.
And if the dislocation is upward, which happens rarely, then you should cauterize it on the shoulder with a ball-shaped cautery, or by pricking it with several small cauteries.
For the joint is made firm again, moisture removed; and the patient heals.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When there is coldness and excessive moisture in the stomach until it is removed from its own constitution, and catarrhs begin to increase towards it, and frequent modes of treatment are applied without benefit: then the patient should be laid supine on their back with their legs and arms outstretched. Then cauterize with three cauterizations; with a sub-spoonful cautery of the chest the size of one finger alongside a clavicle cautery, and two additional cauteries below from either side by one cautery until the shape of the cauterization becomes triangular. And leave some space between each so that they do not join up when they produce pus.
And the depth of the cauterization should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cauterizations should be as follows without addition, and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach it should be shaped thusly; let the device that performs this cauterization have one circular shape like so.
And the stomach is cauterized by being pricked with a needle which has been heated red-hot in this cautery; and it will be done such that you prick onto the stomach as many times as desired with an iron; then cauterize each spot with a single point cautery; afterwards treat each of them according to the treatment prescribed until they are healed.
On the method of performing a cold cauterization on the spleen:
When there is pain in the spleen due to coldness and moisture, or from thick wind, until it leaves its natural constitution with an excessive discharge, and the patient is treated as we have said but makes no progress; then they should be laid supine on their neck, and you should mark out three cauteries like so, of this size, at the same place beneath the spleen from where a man's elbow reaches down to: let there be between each one a space equal to the thickness of a finger, and let them all be as long as a straight line; do not press your hand very much on the cautery.
And let the amount that is cauterized be in proportion to the thickness of the skin, with half its size not added; and let the patient stand on his own feet.
But if he cannot stand, then let him lie down, having already stretched out his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
And it is indeed possible for you to use these knife-cautery techniques with the actual cautery iron when you have skill and wisdom in this art.
And be careful not to go too far in your cauterization, and that you do not burn through the entire thickness of the skin, for if you do it will burn the whole body and reach the intestines: for the skin there is thin, so you must know this.
On the method of cauterizing liver abscesses.
When it happens and you wish to know whether the abscess is in the liver's flesh or its capsule, then if it is in the liver's flesh, the patient feels a dull pain with weight but no sharpness; and if it is in the liver's capsule there is pain that has severe acuteness: and already you see how wearisome this cure was to his physicians.
Therefore, the patient must lie on their back with their neck exposed. Next, mark the abscess site with an ink-burn; then take a fire-heated cautery iron that is like a rod. And this is its form. Cauterize with that one iron until all the skin is burned and it reaches the bone, until all pus has come out; then cure this with the cure for discharging sores, until he is healed.
And one should not use this type of cauterization unless their studies in the art of medicine are prolonged, and these ailments have rushed through their hands with some experimentation; then indeed will they dare to perform such an operation.
But as for letting it go, in my view, it is better with me.
[Regarding] the method of cauterization in [the case of] pleurisy.
The ancients said, "Cauterization with the roots of *Aristolochia* for cold pleurisy in this way. And it is such that you should take from the dry roots of *Aristolochia*, one longer root which is found within, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil, and light it on fire. Then cauterize with one large cauterizer where the collar bone meets the neck, and two small ones slightly sloped downwards towards the side which is under the jaw.
And with two more cauterizers on the spot between the fifth and sixth ribs sloped slightly towards the back, one in the center of the chest, and another over the stomach. And three more from behind; one between the shoulder blades, and two on either side of the chest, the lower one again being between the shoulder blades.
And you must not press your hand with the cauterizer, rather it should be held away from the skin, sniffing the smell.
And some ancients have said that there are those who use an iron cauterizer like a radius (a bone in the forearm); they light it on fire and insert it between the ribs until they reach the abscess, and pus flows out, as we have said with regard to liver abscesses.
But in this perforation, when using a caustic, there is the fear that either the patient dies immediately or a fistula occurs in the place, which has no cure.
On the method of cauterizing the spleen - Chapter 32.
When you are treating a spleen disease, as we have mentioned previously when discussing the different types of illnesses, and your treatment is not effective, then cauterization on it can be done in three ways, all of which are appropriate.
One of which is to make three or four caustic applications by lining them up along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the liver cauteries described previously.
And let there be between each caustic application an amount equal to the thickness of a finger or more or less.
And let the method of caustic application be as described for liver cauteries equally.
And do not press your hand when applying the caustic; let the patient be lying prone on their back.
Another method of cauterization is to use a caustic with two prongs as we described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder: and lift the skin that is over the spleen where the patient's left elbow reaches; and let your lifting be such that you raise the skin according to the width of their body so that the caustics fall along the length of the body.
Then introduce the two ignited prongs until you pierce through the skin on the other side; then withdraw the caustic; thus four caustics are made.
And if you wish to use another type of caustic with three prongs.
Then treat the cautery after you discharge it to emit pus for many days: it is more beneficial than the rest of what preceded in the cure.
On the method of cauterizing with hydropsy.
The cautery does not fall out in hydropsy unless it is proper to the ascites.
When you treat hydropsy with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and the cure does not improve, then it is necessary for you to cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery over the stomach, another over the liver, a third over the spleen, two behind the back between the vertebrae, one directed at the chest, and the other at the stomach: and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the open cautery so that it emits pus for a long time.
And you will not discharge the patient from treatment after the cautery with it, which must be applied to him twice: and healing will hasten towards it with God's help.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be a nail according to its previous form; and that of the one used for the back an olive-leaf according to its former shape.
On the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When there are blisters on the hydropsy and they are filled with yellow water, you must cauterize over the back of the foot in the night-watch between the auricular and annular [phalanges]: then raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; afterwards raise your hand, and do not repeat it at all.
The yellow water should be boiled and used as a caustic in this form.
Then make two caustic irons over the two legs, with a knife-shaped tip on each iron; and let one of these be made according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other beneath that one, roughly in the middle of the leg; and then two more caustics over the entire thigh. Leave the irons open for some time without treatment: so as a little water may boil out of them: then treat it with the rest which we mentioned earlier.
On how to cauterize an open belly wound.
Chapter 35.
When an open belly wound is caused by cold and moisture, until it weakens the retentive and digestive faculties which are in the stomach and intestines; and when you treat it with conventional remedies but it does not heal: and you see a patient bearing the caustic iron on account of his superabundant vitality, then cauterize him with a large caustic iron over his belly as mentioned before for cauterizing the stomach with a circular caustic iron, and four small caustic irons around the navel, with a needle-like caustic iron; and with one or two large caustic irons on top of the alchosos.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient bearing it well, then cauterize him with a caustic iron over the spine; and another one over the entire flank: perhaps also adding two small caustic irons on top of the belly near the large one.
It is indeed a successful treatment where its benefit does not go astray.
On how to cauterize haemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus or just one that is caused by thick, cold, and corrupt humors, and it does not heal when treated as we said before: then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower spine below the shoulder blades a little triangularly, and with another cautery under the navel about two fingers long.
And if you think that their stomach is chilled and the food is not being digested, and you see that their face has pustules, then cauterize them on their stomach with a large cautery as previously described; also with another cautery above their liver, and one over their spleen, along with one at the clavicle: leave the cauteries open for some time. Then treat them until they are healed.
Chapter 37.
When you excise the hemorrhoids, then ignite a cautery that resembles a spoke. Then insert the ignited cautery into the excised hemorrhoid; and keep your hand there until you reach the opening of the vein from which blood is flowing: do this once or twice.
If therefore there are many hemorrhoids, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described. Then treat them with salves that suit them until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the navel, it is more effective for improvement.
The method of cauterizing a fistula in ano.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not obey the incision and operation that we have described in its proper place, and is afraid of it, he may perhaps be cured with a cauterization.
So when someone gets a fistula and it becomes old, pus runs from it, and there are corrupted fluids. It is appropriate then that you should examine it with a thin probe. Then determine the depth of it with the probe.
Next heat up the circular cautery. Then introduce yourself, heated, into the fistula itself, for as long as the probe went in.
And repeat the cautery on it, until they burn all those corrupted parts of the body - once or twice or three times, depending on how much is necessary.
And beware of burning the nerve if it is there or a large vein - or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the intestines, then take care from all these places.
And do not do it unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think that it will not penetrate.
Then look after the place until it is healed.
But if the place is sealed up, and materials are cut off from it, and this remains so for a long time - then you know that he has now been thoroughly healed.
And if they do not cut away the matter from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted bone deep inside, or almost like one of those: whose description will come in its place.
On the method of cauterising kidneys.
When there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or thick windiness and it weakens because of that, then one ought to cauterise them over almethenem on top of the kidneys themselves with a clavicle cautery, whose description has preceded this.
And perhaps we cauterise it again within the almeidat itself. Why three lined ones will come. Thus they shall be more beneficial as the last resort.
On the method of cauterising the bladder.
When there is weakness and softening in the bladder due to cold and moisture such that the afflicted person cannot hold urine, then one ought to cauterise it on the lower part of suminis over the bladder where hair starts to grow with a right-handed sumin cautery and another from its left; and let its length be according to the size of the thumb's knuckle; and cauterise it further down the back with one or two cauteries if needed, and let them be as per the preceding clavicle cautery.
On the method of cauterising the uterus.
When cold and dampness occur in the uterus, preventing conception, and her menses are corrupted, and their onset is delayed, and she experiences pain at their arrival, then she ought to be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of vesico-uterine fistula, and a cautery below the back over the sacrum, or two cauteries; and let the cautery be clavicle-sized.
On the method of cauterizing the ancle in dislocation.
When the mucous moistures are poured out onto the ancle-bone and become the cause of its exit from its place; and its sign is that the leg is lengthened over the other when they are compared with each other, and the place of dislocation is found to be empty in it.
It is necessary therefore that you cauterize the weak above the ancle-bone with a cautery of similar circle: after you have marked it with encaustics around the ancle, as it rotates; and so that the bone itself falls into the middle of the circle.
But if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large oil-lamp cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of all the skin.
Then treat it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing sciatica.
When there is pain in the hip joint and its cause is cold and moisture: treat the patient with what we have said in the section on divisions, but if treatment does not help and the problem persists, you must then relieve the patient of thick humors using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills and similar substances. Then cauterize them.
And there are two methods of cauterization: either with medications that burn or with fire.
Cauterization by fire is done in many ways.
One of which is to place three triangular cauterizations on the hip joint in this shape. And make them either deep or shallow. The space between each cauterization should be the width of a finger, and they should be made with an olive-oil cautery iron.
Sometimes there is also a cauterization in the center, right above the head of the hip joint. Because these four cauterizations form a cross-shape.
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, whose form was previously used in the cauterization of hip dislocations, ensure it is a circle that contains the entire hip joint.
Burn away all the thick skin entirely.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when there is pain attached to the hip joint that does not reach as far as the thigh and leg.
However, if it does extend to the thigh and leg, then cauterize them with two cauterizations on the thigh over the spot where they indicate pain is present; add your own fourth cauterization four fingers from the extremity using a knife-shaped iron.
The depth of the cauterization should correspond to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends close to their toes, then cauterize them there where they indicate with a point, three, four, or more cauterizations, as required.
And if they indicate the pain is below the knee towards the leg, then cauterize them there with a single knife-like cauterization.
And take care in all your cauterizations not to go so far with the cauterization that you burn a nerve or large artery and cause great harm or contraction to the patient through it.
And I myself have seen one and another, among those who cauterized above the shin and overdid it in their cauterization, and the leg became swollen until the swelling reached the foot, and it was all perforated and completely corrupted; then there occurred a rupture of the belly and death afterwards.
If the pain is in two places at once, cauterize both in this way.
And some wise men have said about the cauterization of the hip that this is its method. Make a tube-like instrument from iron whose diameter is half the width of your palm; and let it be at its opening as thick as a thumb or slightly less; and inside this instrument there should be another smaller one.
And let the space that is between each instrument be of the length of a knuckle; and they should all have openings at both ends; and their height should be as long as one or two knuckles; and attach a handle to them made from iron, which fits awkwardly.
Then it is heated in fire until it reddens and throws sparks; then it is placed on an earthenware vessel with the weak lying down propped up on the healthy side. Therefore, cauterize him with three round cauteries one after another.
Then leave him alone for three days. Later, apply ointments with butter; and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says, with this type of cauterization, my sons, we have used it rarely due to the fear of its appearance; and also because there are few whom we find willing to endure it.
However, it is among the good cauterizations for him who endures it; and he will find its place.
But if you want to make a cautery with medicinal smokes, then make two pieces of wood having a perforated ring into which descends the hinge of its door made out of brass or iron as long as the wall; and at their height let there be two knots, or something similar.
And let there be the space between each one of the thickness of a finger; and let them be open at the bottom and top; and let them fit into each other according to this form.
Then place it on the earthenware vessel with the weak lying down propped up on the healthy side. And press your hand hard over the earthenware vessel. Next, immerse the two circles in warm water, which has been heated for a short while with fire, and hold it there for an hour's time; the patient can withstand its bite and burning since he finds its bite like that of fire until the biting stops.
Next, lift your hand with the instrument, and wipe off the warm water from the entire wound with fresh water; then leave it there for three days.
And place butter on top of it until the blackness of burning is removed; leave it there for a few days and pus will drain from it. For this is indeed the last part of treatment.
Next treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if the pain extends to the hip or leg; make for him an apparatus on that part which contains water, as you did for the wound equally.
And this is the method of warm water; and I have already written it down in my book on medicinal preparations. Take one part alkali and one part unslaked lime; grind both of them, and put them in a new pot whose lower part has a single small hole according to the size that will be taken up by this radius; place under the base of the pot another worn-out pot; throw over the alkali and the lime from fresh water which should submerge both by one finger's breadth; after you have pressed it down with your hand firmly; leave the pot until cold water comes out of the lower part of the worn-out pot.
Next collect all that water and throw it over another lime; stir until it is renewed.
It will then have great sharpness, which is applied to many medical procedures and to the cauterisation of other body parts. Because it makes fire do its job.
And from medicine are those with which they cauterise the ankle, just like with thuya and nut butter, and lime mixed with soap so that both can be applied together.
Galen indeed told the story of a man from ancient times whose treatment cured ankle and sciatic vein pain, and praised its effectiveness greatly. He said that no other treatment was needed and he had healed in one go until he told how the man perhaps entered a bath carried by others and left it completely healed.
And it is to be made from green thuya and if not found fresh then take the dry one instead; grind a lot of this with some fat and apply it over where the pain is whether ankle, leg or hip bone: bandage this on and leave for three hours but let the patient remove when they feel enough burning. Then put him into the bath.
When his body is then moistened, place him on a couch. For the pain goes away and he heals.
And you should know that no one must use the cautery with these medicines unless after a bowel movement.
And Dioscorides who said this also stated that goat droppings, when mixed with the above and used to cauterise a sciatic vein, help it heal; and so is made this kind of cautery. Let wool be taken and soaked in old oil, then placed on the deep spot which is between the big toe and the next one, closest to the latter.
Then take dry goat dung and set it on fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place the charcoal over the wool and leave it there until it is extinguished. Then repeat this process. Keep doing it until sensation returns to the ankle area via touch and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called Goat-Brand Cautery.
On the cauterization of back pain:
Back pain can arise from many causes, such as strain, blows or excessive discharge, and by the introduction of cold moist matter; cauterization is only used for this last type of pain.
It is therefore necessary to apply foul pills and the like on the back, over three lines of width corresponding with the patient's waist, after which you mark each line with five cauteries or more according to the amount that comes out depending upon the endurance of the patient; perform a needle-cautery cauterization.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries in a central row, according to this pattern: [insert illustration of the pattern].
On the method of cauterization for beginning hump formation:
This illness occurs many times in small children.
And the sign of its onset in children is: that it happens to him with a tightness during breathing upon elevation and movement; and you find at the lower end of the spine and its knots, which has now begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When therefore you see it, and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with a cautery which is a circle of this shape.
And let the cautery take hold over the entire area of the vertebra equally; and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebra, use a point cautery in two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Then treat the place until it is healed with what we have said.
And beware, do not apply the cautery to a hump which forms from a nerve spasm.
On the method of cauterization for podagra and joint pains.
When joint pains are from cold moist humours which are poured into any part of the body; then when they happen in the feet it is customary for physicians to call this podagra specifically.
When therefore podagra from cold causes is treated with therapeutic methods, and the pains are not removed; then the cautery removes them.
And it is as if you cauterize him after evacuation around the joints of the feet with multiple cauteries; and let the cautery be an Olive-shaped one.
And if you need to make an incision on the surface of the foot, then make punctures with the cautery. But if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints and this often happens, then cauterize it over the entire knee with three cauteries, or four on all sides, using the same Clavulanic cautery.
If however you need more of this cautery, then cauterize it further. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, rather let it be about as thick as the skin.
If however the pains ascend to the knees and back: then apply what we have said about the cautery in its own chapter.
If the pains are in the hands alone, then make incisions around the wrists where two lines revolve.
If any of the pain remains in the fingers, then make incisions on them, over every knuckle with an incision and over the comb of the hand.
If however the pains ascend after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both on all sides.
And do not discharge the sick person from their good diet or from taking their medicines. For if a good diet is kept and the phlegm is discharged, he will be cured by God's help with this cautery.
On the method of cauterization for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and the intestine or caecum descends towards the testicle and it begins to draw near, then you must instruct the patient to fast for one day. And he should use laxatives so that the stool descends from his abdomen.
Then have him sit between your hands on his back and tell him to hold his breath until either the caecum or intestine comes out.
Then bring it back with your fingers and mark with cauterizer under the rupture on the pectineal bone with a sign whose end is similar to half of a circle at the top of the body.
Then heat the cautery of this shape until it turns white and starts to give off sparks. Then return the caecum or intestine to its cavity. Then have the assistant put his hand over this place so that the intestine does not come out: and you now open between the patient's legs, placing a pillow under him and another servant holding down the patient's legs while one holds their hands on their chest.
Then place the cautery back over that mark with your hand holding it straight. And hold it there until you reach the bone with it or repeat this process again if you did not reach the bone on your first attempt.
Carefully observe the exit of the intestine when you are cauterizing, lest you burn it and cause either death or great harm to come upon the patient.
And you should understand that when your cauterization does not reach the bone then this operation is of no benefit.
The tool should be delicate and proportionate to their size for infants.
Then treat it with the rest of the ointments until it is healed.
And if he has been lying on his back for forty days until the wound seals over.
You must provide nourishment for the length of his treatment with a gentle food to ease his stomach; so that it doesn't leave his intestines during straining and defecation.
Then when he wishes to get up after forty days, then apply a bandage made too loose and keep it on for another forty days.
He should be spared from work, and over-eating or drinking, and shouting loudly.
For when he follows this regimen, thus he recovers with a complete recovery.
And I shall describe the treatment of ruptures involving incisions in its own chapter.
When however ruptures occur in the rest of the belly and are starting out, if you wish that they not spread, then cauterize his rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let what is burned be from there on like one third of it. Then treat it with that which we have described; and it will not spread.
And now some early writers have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this shape.
After it is sealed with caustic, and you place a line which runs across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. Place your hand in the middle with a heated iron.
But first, the iron is easier and better.
On cauterizing sores caused by an accident or a blow.
Chapter 48.
When there is pain in any limb caused by an accident or blow and the pain persists for a long time without healing with medicines, then it must be cauterized with a point cautery.
And let the iron be of a size proportionate to that of the limb and its thickness and weakness and strength and the place of the twisting and pain from it.
If therefore it heals with the first cauterization, it is well. If not, then repeat on it the cauterization.
For it is customary for these pains to shift from the limb to that which adjoins it. Why you must follow up on them with the iron until the patient is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in leprosy.
However, sometimes lepers benefit from the greatest aid of the iron. And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: when you wish to cauterize it, consider this.
If therefore the leprosy is in its beginning and you have treated it with that which we said in the division, and it has neither descended nor stopped, and you fear for the patient, lest corruption should spread over his entire complexion: then cauterize him on the head with five iron marks: one in the middle of the scalp; a second below it towards the front at the hairline; two above the two horns [temples], and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And with your hand holding the cautery for a short while, until it leaves on the bone a small impression and the chips are dislodged from it: so as to ease the exhalation of large vapors from this wound, cauterize also right above the spleen with the same cautery.
But if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, you should then cauterize with these same cauteries which we have mentioned in the head, one on the tip of the nose, two on both cheeks, two on the nape of the neck, six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one above the coccyx and another over it itself at almeidati: and two on the hips - that is to say, a single one over each hip and two on the knees - one for every knee; and two on the shoulders, two on the elbows, two on the tenderness of his chest, and cauterize him also over all joint junctions, especially those of the fingers of both hands and feet: and cauterize too over both heel bones of their feet and palms of their hands.
Be careful to avoid the nerves which lie over the heel bone so as not to burn them.
Sometimes you must cauterize with one cautery over the breastbone, another over the stomach, and yet a third over the liver.
Know that the more you apply of the cautery, the greater is its benefit and efficacy.
And know that the patient will not experience pain from the cautery as healthy people do because their body is already numb.
And the cauteries ought to be of sizes and smallness suitable for limbs and joints as required by types of tools.
Then treat the cautery with herb flour and honey, and continue with the remaining treatment until it heals.
On how to cauterize for stupor.
When any member is stunned and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but does not heal, then cauterize the stunned member with a cautery according to its size or smallness.
And let your cautery be as thick as the skin. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Sometimes it is also cauterized for a kind of stupor that happens to the hand and foot, at the vertebrae of the back near where nerves emerge which move that member, and the stupor goes away.
But do not venture this unless you are knowledgeable about the anatomy of members and where the nerves emerge which move the body.
Chapter 51.
When albaras lasts long and you apply nothing from your medical skills to it: then cauterize right on it with a deep cautery according to the thickness of the skin until its whiteness is removed and its colour changes.
Then treat it with herb flour and lentils with rose oil and arnoglossae leaves and pigeon blood and swallow blood; let there be equal parts of each one: mix all these things together and apply them on a cloth and let it stick in place until it heals.
On the method of cauterization for cancer.
When cancer is beginning, and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as if it were turning.
The wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
That does not seem right to me, because I fear that it may be ulcerated; and indeed I have seen this happen several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle, as we have said; or with multiple cauteries.
On the method of cauterization for abscesses.
When someone has an abscess that is delayed in maturing, due to excessiveness causing it, or because of the age and little blood of the patient, or because of time constraints when you wish to hasten its maturation, then cauterize around its circumference with multiple small cauteries by puncturing. Then leave it be. For itself will hasten with its own maturation.
If you wish to make an opening in it with the cautery, then heat the cautery which is of this form.
And place it on the abscess until it penetrates the skin; and let the patient be from one who follows, so that his path may be alleviated.
Treat it until it is healed.
On the way of cauterizing a corrosive sore.
Chapter 54.
A corrosive sore is nothing but an ongoing corruption of the limb, and it corrodes itself; like a fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a corrosive sore in a place that can tolerate fire-based cautery, then use many hot cauterizing irons of different sizes and lengths, depending on what is suitable for the location of the sore.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate the entire corruption, leaving nothing of it remaining whatsoever.
After that, leave it for three days, then apply powdered sulfur mixed with oil over the cauterized areas until all scabs and any remaining corruption is eradicated.
Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
If you see healthy new flesh generated after three days with no sign of corruption, it is good.
And if not, then repeat the cautery over what remains of the corrupted areas.
A corrosive sore is sometimes treated with an acute medicine. For that medicine arises in the place of the cautery.
However, fire-based cautery provides quicker relief; and I have indeed mentioned its use with acute medicine previously - take that where it is needed.
On the way of cauterizing warts and corns.
Chapter 50.
Many times this disease occurs in the lower parts of the feet: it is a thick, filtered substance that injures the foot.
And indeed the cautery on them is according to two methods: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
As for the amount when using fire, make a flat cautery like an eagle's feather: it should be made of iron and sized to hold a nail on all sides; and let its edges be thin.
Then place it, heated, on a nail. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the nail until it reaches the depth of the nail; and leave it there for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then plaster it with crushed wild apples mixed with salt; and leave the plaster on overnight. For it will indeed eradicate itself from its roots.
Then treat the place with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
If they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on hands and feet; then apply to them cautery with hot water: you should take a pipe made of brass or iron or an eagle's feather; and place it on a nail or althelul. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the pipe; hold your hand and turn it with your thumb pressure for a moment so that the edge of the pipe is pressed against the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to reach deep down, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait a little while over this application of hot water for about an hour.
Then release it, for the nail is pulled out with its roots.
Do this to one after the other until you have come across all of them that are in the body.
Then treat them after they have been removed with what generates flesh from the ointments.
On the method of cauterization in tremor.
When someone experiences tremors due to cold affecting the nerves or from quartan fever or other causes, you should cauterize with four or five cauteries on the dorsal vertebrae and one between each vertebra, one on their chest, and another on their abdomen.
For the tremors indeed calm down with an oily cautery, and the cure of a cold disease becomes hastened.
On the method of performing cauterization according to Al-Bahir.
Chapter 57.
Sometimes Al-Bahir's foul ones, that is to say, pustules which are formed from coarse corrupted matter, appear on the body.
So when they appear, it is necessary that you first cauterize over the entire head of the pustule with a fine myrtle wood cautery whose end has been ignited by fire. Or with the root of long aristo-luchia. Or with a disk-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized while still emerging following this method, and do not increase but the superfluity which produced them is broken down and they heal.
However, it is necessary that this should be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterizing the flowing blood from an artery in a wound.
It often happens that there is a flow of blood from an artery which has been cut at the site of a wound which occurs externally or at the edge of an abscess or when cauterizing a limb and suchlike procedures; and it becomes difficult to stop it.
So when it happens to anyone, then quickly reach with your hand towards the orifice of the artery and place your index finger over it; press on it hard until the blood is dammed under your finger and nothing comes out from it.
Then place small olive oil cauterizing irons into the fire and a great number of them; blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one of them, small or large depending on the wound and where the artery has been cut; place the cautery iron on that vein after you quickly remove your finger, and hold it there until the blood stops flowing.
But if the blood is forced out when you lift your finger from over the artery orifice and you put out that hot iron then quickly take another one of those which are prepared in the fire.
Thus do not stop doing this with one after another until the blood stops flowing.
And be careful not to burn any nerve which is there or some other injury will occur for the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to cut it off; especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or by cauterization, as we said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends contract, and the blood is cut off. Or it can be tightly tied with a strong binding thread. Or place on it medicines with the property of stopping blood, and bind it with a suitable compress.
He who causes its ceasing with a binding and compression using a cloth, or the positioning of burning objects and similar things, does not bring it about completely, except rarely.
If it happens to someone and neither a doctor nor medicine is present: then begin with the placement of the index finger on the vein's orifice as we described, and compress it strongly until the blood is obstructed from the upper part of the wound and over the artery. And the finger must not be removed from it with cold water of intense coldness always until blood solidifies and swells and is cut off.
And meanwhile one should consider what it needs of cauterization or medicine.
On incision, perforation, and bloodletting for wounds and similar things.
We have already mentioned in Chapter One, every illness that is suitable for treatment with fire and burning medicine, and its opportunities, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I placed chapters there from the top to the bottom.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same path, so as to relieve the enquirer of his quest.
And before I begin it, you must learn, O sons, that this chapter contains nothing of the terror of what is in Chapter One about cauterization.
And for that reason, greater care must be taken because the operation in this chapter often involves evacuation with blood, which is essential to life when opening a vein or making an incision over an abscess, ulceration, wound, or extraction of an arrowhead, as well as incisions over stones and similar procedures; all of which cause trembling, fear, and death for many.
And I warn you not to fall into hesitation on this point because sometimes there present themselves to you in this art different types of people with different types of illnesses. Among them is the one who becomes angry with his illness and for whom death is light; because of the intensity of what he experiences from his illness, and the length of its duration. And with sickness is fear that signifies death.
And among them is the one who offers you his flute player and enriches you with it, hoping for health while his illness is deadly.
You must not agree with him who comes to you from among them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be more intense than your greed and avarice. Nor should you presume anything about it without subsequent certain knowledge which verifies among you that for which the outcome is praiseworthy.
And employ for all your patients the art of prognosis and indication concerning what is conducive to their recovery appropriately.
For in that lies for you help in acquiring fame and glory, memory and praise.
May God inspire you, my sons, with his understanding and not withhold from you guidance and insight: for that is in his hand.
And I indeed arranged this Chapter by distinguishing it into Chapters, as preceded in the Chapter of Cauterization, from the neck down to the feet: so that your search for what you want from it and need may be alleviated.
On the treatment of water that accumulates on children's heads.
Chapter 1.
You should know that this illness often befalls children at birth: or when the midwife grips the child's head without carefulness.
And whenever it also happens from an unknown hidden cause which is not known.
And I myself have not seen this sickness among others but only in children; and death hastened for all whom I saw it in; therefore, that sight seemed to me to preclude intervention in the matter.
And I have indeed seen among them a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head was growing larger every day until he could no longer sit up by himself due to the size of his own head; and this wetness increased until he died.
And this dampness, it either gathers between the skin and skull; or it gathers beneath the skull bone above the brain.
And the procedure for this is that if there is dampness between the skin and skull, and the abscess is small, then you must make an incision into the middle of the head in a single line across its width; and let the length of the cut be about two finger-widths long until the liquid runs out.
And this is the shape of a sharp, thin knife.
If therefore the dampness is more increased, and the abscess larger, then make two such incisions in this manner.
And if the dampness is beneath the skull bone and you can tell because you see the joints of the skull opened on all sides; and water is pressed down when you compress it with your hand towards the inside, and this is not hidden from you: then you must make three incisions in the middle of the head, arranged like this.
And after making the incision, extract all the moisture. Then bind the incisions with cloths and rags. After that, apply wine and oil to it from above until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bindings and treat the wound with stitches, and ointments.
And do not leave off binding his head with bandages. Feed the invalid with dry food of little moisture until his member is strengthened and healed.
Another method of incision is to consider where the size of the abscess appears and the collection of water.
Because sometimes it is more in the occipital bone or in the forehead, or on the right or left side.
Therefore, ascend with the incision where the abscess and water accumulation appear to you, and split it as best you can.
Take note not to cut an artery and cause a flow of blood; the invalid may die from that flow with evacuation of moisture.
On incising the arteries which lie behind the ears.
Chapter 2.
When catarrhs happen to a person's eyes or chest and it is protracted and the treatment with medicines does not help, then the ultimate cure for that person lies in incision of these two arteries.
Therefore when you want to make an incision into them, the invalid ought to bow his head down. Then scrape the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear. Then let the invalid bind his neck tightly with any piece of cloth he has. Then consider where the vein pulses. And their places are the depressed areas behind the ears; rarely is it hidden except in some people.
Then mark with wax on both; and cut each with a spatoula sharpened on both sides, the incision reaching to bone, and let it be as wide as the head.
And if you wish, introduce the spatula beneath the artery, and cut it open towards the upper side with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out in pulsating manner, jumping up frequently into the inside.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of three finger-widths. Then mark it with encaustic wax, and find up to the bone.
And that which ought to be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps you emit more or less of it. All that according to the quantity which appears to you from the strength of the patient, and the fullness of their artery.
Then look at the wound. Then if anything remains down to the bone, then cut it away so that a warm abscess does not occur; then bind up the wound with linen cloths.
Then take care of it with ointment until it is healed.
On the extraction of arteries which are in temples.
Chapter III.
When it happens to a man that he has an old hemicrania, or acute catarrh on account of acrimonious humours, and hotness in the temples, or ancient soda, very severe, and things similar to them: and when one is treated with methods of medical cure, but does not recover from it: then we have come across in these sicknesses extraction of arteries out of the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have related.
The method for this operation is to shave the hair from the cyst and direct attention towards the artery which can be seen protruding from it. It is apparent to you from its pulse and rarely hidden unless in a few men or severe coldness.
If it is hidden from you, the patient should tightly bind their head with any cloth; then rub the area with a rough cloth. Alternatively, they should steam the place with hot water until it becomes apparent to you by clear signs. Then take the spatula I made earlier. Use it to scrape away skin easily until you reach the artery. Now drop a hook into it and extract it upwards until you remove it from the skin and make it escape all the clothes underneath.
If however, the artery is thin; then roll it up with the tip of the hook. Next cut away from it according to the length its ends extend and retract so that there is no bleeding. For if it's not cut away and severed, the blood will not stop flowing entirely.
Then remove six ounces of blood until three remain.
If the artery is large you should tie it in two places with a double strand of strong silk thread or tough cord so that putrid matter does not spread to it before the wound heals and cause bleeding.
Then cut away the excess tissue between the two ligaments. Do it at that moment, or soon after.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a knife-shaped cautery tool down to the bone; until its ends have been cut and it remains in place of the same operation.
And this is better unless if the patient has a fever or a warm constitution. For the cautery is one of those things which help to dry up moistness. So it provides better assistance.
And after the arteries have been extracted, it is necessary to fill up the place with old cotton; and irregular pegs should be placed on top of them.
And after cleaning, it should be treated with dry medications that promote flesh growth; as well as lint dressings until the wound has healed.
If during the operation a flow of blood from an artery should occur, then hurry to cut it off with the cautery tool or fill up the place with wax; and squeeze your hand until the bleeding stops. If none of these is available to you, then place your finger over the spot until the blood clots. And bathe the place with very cold water until the sharpness subsides and it contracts as needed.
And for the easier and gentler method of extracting arteries, it is to cauterize the vein with this tool having two knives; with the sharpness of the two blades similar to that of almagdate. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. Since if they were as sharp as two knives, it hastens cold for both: and does not cut meat with speed. As there is a bit of thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held within and meat is cut quickly; with this, therefore, work is better, lighter, and easier.
And here is the form of the caustic.
And let the space between the two knives be equal to the thickness of a finger; after you have marked two spots with encaustic: place both very hot until they reach the mouth and cut the vein at two places, so that what is between its ends is extended. For these do not heal completely with this caustic.
Chapter four.
Paragraph on treating constant acute inflammation of eyes with tears.
When tears are constant and there is a flow from veins that are on the outside of the head; if you do not apply any medicine to treat it with drugs, and see that the patient's face has already turned red, feeling ants crawling in their forehead: and their eyes are strained, wet so that now their lashes have been worn away by corrosion, and eyelids heated from the sharpness of tears. Then ancient doctors required this operation for treating them; they named this treatment 'with a sword'.
And it is as you prescribe to the patient to shave hair that is on their forehead. Then make three incisions on the forehead evenly spaced along its length; let each incision be about two fingers long and have one incision at the midpoint of the forehead equidistant from the nose in length, a second according to the length slightly from the movement of the lizards, and a third from another side: and beware of cutting any arteries which are on either side; extend your hand from the junction of the two jaws, and let all the space of the incision be three connected fingers in quantity: and have ready for you a piece of sponge or many dry cloths with which to dry the blood.
Then introduce a spatula with two sharp ends of this shape that follows. From the first incision that is from the side of the temple up to the second incision, and scrape with it all the skin which lies between the two incisions, together with any scar which may be over the bone. Then do likewise from the middle incision up to the second one. Then extract this spatula and introduce into the first incision again another implement which is called a sharp scalpel with one side blunt, not sharp on the other side. And this is its shape.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh and bone attached with skin, and its blunt side towards the bone; push it until you reach the middle incision; and cut through all the vessels which run from the head down to the eyes: except for what continues beyond the incision up to that point where the skin appears.
Then do likewise in the middle incision up to the other one.
And after an equal quantity of blood flows out, squeeze the areas with clotted pieces of sponge.
Then place a piece of old cotton lint over every crack and put on top of it compresses soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And see to it that no hot abscess develops.
On the third day, loosen the bandage and apply a great deal of liquid with warm water. Then treat it with healing balm and other things that cure wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of acute tearing and catarrh affecting the eyes due to internal head conditions.
When someone has acute, bitter, persistent catarrh and you see their eyes are tired, small, and their vision is already weakened; and the eyelids have become ulcerated, hair falls out from them, and there is sharp, painful head pain in the depths of the skull causing sneezing: then take from these symptoms that this material and the catarrh do not arise except from many veins.
And the best cure for them is this: And it is necessary to advise the patient to shave their forehead. Then make an incision in the forehead, one crack in the middle or another slightly across, and start with a fissure from the left temple to the right; let the incision be made down to the bone; stretch out your hand from the temporal muscles which move during chewing until you feel the bone. Dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the crack with old cotton or linen strips. Then press down from above with gauze pads; soak the pads with wine and oil to prevent hot abscesses.
And when you remove it, and see that the hot abscess has now diminished; then it is necessary to rub the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that makes flesh grow; for instance if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and prepare a plaster from these, apply it to the birth of flesh on such wounds.
Chapter 6.
On the cure for that which falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone; or something like a stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a liquid substance, such as water, vinegar and similar things; or some kind of animal.
When therefore a stone or stony substance falls into the ear from something that is not added to it nor grows in the ear, expose the ear to the sun; if you then see the stone, drop into the ear some of either oil of violets or jasmine. Then perform its extraction and make him sneeze with a powder puff, and close his nostrils at the approach of the sneeze after you put around the ear a wad made from cloths or wool, and stretch out the ear upwards.
Many times it comes out with this cure.
But if it does not come out, then perform its extraction with forceps (or pincers); which look like this.
If he walks with it, it's good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a slender blind hook of little curvature.
If therefore it does not exit through that, then make a copper tube, and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole very deeply, and plug what is in the circuit of the tube with softened wax mixed with oil, so that there may be no way for wind except by the tube; then extract it by your strong drawing force of breath.
For indeed many times it exits with what we have related. But if it does not exit this way: then take from helkalimbat, or from wisco, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught, a small thing: and place it at the end of a stick after you wrap around it a rag decently placed: then insert it into the ear hole with ease, after you dry out the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not exit with all that we have related, then hasten to cut before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the way of cutting is such that one should weaken it first with a leech on its head: and draw out blood from it according to the measure of its strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn their ear upwards, and find a small cut in the root of the ear by its fat in a depressed place there: and let the cut be of lunar figure until you reach the bone: then remove it with what is possible for you from instruments.
Then sew up the cut by your hour with speed, and treat it until it is healed.
If the substance that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains which grow and swell up, then proceed with its removal.
If it does not yield to you for its removal, then take a thin, slender spatula like this one: [insert diagram here].
Use it to scrape out that type of grain which has fallen into the ear and do not attempt its removal until you think that the grain is softened by the moisture of the ear canal; instead, break it up into many pieces first: then remove these fragments with a hook or a slender probe or through suction, as we have said, for its removal will be made easier.
For water which has entered the ear, the patient must first sneeze repeatedly while holding his nostrils closed; he should then fill his ear with warm old oil and lie on the side where the water is. If it comes out through this process then it is good.
And if it does not come out: then take many stones the length of a finger, thin and smooth, and heat them slightly over fire; and the patient should introduce one of these into his ear canal and jump on to his foot on that side while striking with another stone against the stone which is in the ear. He must not cease doing this with stone on stone until all the water comes out.
And once the water comes out like this, you should take a piece of dry straw or reed and introduce one end into the ear canal while lighting the other end with fire until it is mostly burnt away. Then repeat with another reed and do this several times until all the water has come out; and remove it along with the cannula as described above, from the stone.
When extracting an animal that has entered the ear, if it is of a small body, such as a flea, and similar to it, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it is of a large body, which can be sensed: then proceed with its extraction using forceps and hooks; and its removal will be easier than all those that are retained inside the ear.
When extracting worms that have been generated inside the ear, and you treat it with what we said in the division and in the treatise of distillations, and your treatment does not work; then you must examine the ear in the sun. If therefore something of the worms appears there, then remove it with forceps or with fine hooks.
If however nothing appears there, then take a cannula of this form, narrow below and wide above; and introduce the fine end into the ear to the extent that the patient can tolerate it; then suck strongly with it. Do this several times until all the worms have come out.
If however they do not obey you with their exit, then wrap some wax around the circumference of the cannula as I said for the stone.
If they do not come out with what we have said, then apply the distillations that the ancients already knew for killing worms; and you will find it in the treatise of distillations.
And let your discharge be with oil and medicines poured into the ear using this instrument, whose form is depicted here. Make it like you see it from silver or brass, narrow below with a small hole, wide above.
Let the plunger that is inside the cavity of the pipe be eccentrically made from brass. And if you wish, take a rod and wrap its end with cotton suitably; then pour oil or juice or any of these medicines that you want into the pipe; let it be placed in the ear; then insert the rod with the cotton above and express it by compressing it with your hand moderately until oil is pushed into the cavity of the hearing organ, and the patient feels it inside; and what is infused into the ear should now be heated a little over fire: and avoid anything that drips cold into it; for medicines do not tolerate such.
Chapter 7.
 On the cure of obstruction of the ear.
Sometimes some infants leave their mothers' wombs unpierced.
And it also happens that some people have blockage of the ear due to injury or tissue growing inside them.
And this blockage sometimes occurs at the bottom of the ear cavity which sight cannot follow; and sometimes it happens towards its outer openings a little, where sight can trace them.
Therefore the one which occurs at the bottom of the ear and which sight cannot grasp is difficult to heal in most cases.
And for the one which follows vision, you must place the patient's ear in the sun, and look into it; then if you see an opaque appearance, open it with a fine spatula whose form is as follows, its end being somewhat wide and slightly pointed: and let the remaining part of the spatula be two smooth sides so that it does not injure the ear.
If therefore the opacification is flesh born in the ear canal: then grasp it with a fine hook, and cut it gently but firmly until all the flesh is removed.
But if the opacity is deep within the ear: then take a fine and smooth probe, heat it with fire for a moment, and insert it into the ear canal.
If you perceive the opacity with the instrument which the patient found difficult to hear, attempt its opening gently; and be careful not to injure the ear nerves.
Then place into the ear a linen plug to fit the size of the opening you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed.
Or take linen, soak it in rosewater, sprinkle over it some pounded Egyptian ointment powder and use this.
But if you see the ear already forming a pustule, then remove the linen and leave it with another piece of linen which has been wrapped in cerate made from rose oil until the abscess becomes warm; after that take care of it until it is healed.
If however there is an outflow of blood, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear; and use the rest of the treatment described previously in the section on distillations to stop bleeding.
The treatment for inflammation of the eyelids.
Chapter 8.
These inflammations which occur on the eyelids of the eye, sometimes are wet, and sometimes they are dry.
Therefore you should hold them with forceps; or with a hook, and cut them out from their roots with a small knife. Then place on the affected area some powdered ginger.
But if any blood flows from them, then cauterise them with a fine lens-shaped cautery iron.
And to cauterise them is best after cutting. For often they return when some of their root remains. And when they are cauterised with fire, those roots are burnt, and do not return.
The treatment for pimples on the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter 9.
It often happens on the eyelids that there is something similar to a pimple in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called a pimple; and it is an accumulation of thick moisture on both upper and lower eyelids.
The operation for them is as follows: you should then consider whether it is a pimple proceeding from the eyelid which appears on its surface and moves around in every direction, and whose substance is soft.
Therefore make an incision across it lengthwise. Then scrape out its contents from every side with ease until nothing remains. Then hang it with a hook and cut it off.
However, if its removal is not prepared for you unless after you penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision, then it harms the patient somehow.
But if the crack is large: then gather it with stitches: and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For the ointment restores it and fleshes it out.
And if the pebble is sloping towards the inner depths of the ear towards its interior surface, then turn the eyelid back and hang the pebble with a hook; besides which you need an incision, and press it from every side.
But if the eyelid is stretched by an incision, it does not harm at all.
Then wash the eye after the pebble's incision with saltwater: and take care of the place along with that which fleshes it out until the patient heals.
On curing axillary swelling in eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axillary swelling is fat that forms under the eyelids of the upper eyelid; it happens most often to children, and it burdens their eyes, cataracts occur in them at daybreak, and they are unable to look at sunlight because tears run into their eyes, for this reason you see them lying down on their faces all the time, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are wet, which inflammation has already covered; and indeed the eminence of Axillary Swelling is apparent to the eye, and when you press that place with your fingers, you feel axillary swelling between them.
The method of this operation is for the patient to place their head on your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare some lint on it, and make from this lint a circle of the same size as the area around the navel on all sides. Then place this on them and press with your fingers from all sides so that the navel gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of this moisture with a knife-like scalpel for splits across its width and do not make a split greater than that made during bloodletting in depth.
Or you should split the skin entirely until you reach the navel because in many cases the navel proceeds from a split according to the shape of a piece of white suet.
Extract it therefore with a cloth that you have saturated between your fingers to the outside and turn your hand back and forth until it has been dispersed and take care not to insert into any splits so as not to reach the eye with your knife-like scalpel and damage it.
But if the navel does not appear to you at the start of the split then insert into it a little with some ease until the navel proceeds. Then extract it as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water and place them on this spot, and bind it with bandages.
And from some people there are those who rub salt and place it into the cavity of this split so that what remains of this moisture is dissolved.
Then treat it until it has healed.
If there is a warm abscess on a location, treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
The ways of the twitching eye, that is, when the eyelid softens the eye, causing it to wrinkle as it shouldn't.
Chapter 11.
When extra hairs grow on the eyelids beyond the natural course of hair growth and they thicken: these then harm the eye and cause symptoms such as frequent tears, softening of the eyelids, and whiteness until it becomes a reason for loss of sight.
The twitching eye is indeed treated in four ways. Or by cauterisation with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterisation. The twitching eye is treated by incision and suture. Or with tubes, as I will explain.
It is necessary to place the patient's head in your lap. Then turn the eye's eyelid with your left hand.
If it is thus turned, that is good. And if not: introduce a needle into it, which has a thread attached from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle with thread penetrate from above, and have this be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid where the hair grows: and draw the thread upwards along with the eyelid, and turn it with your finger.
Then find on the inner side of the eyelid under the added hairs with a spatula inserted from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct.
Then extract the thread and place underneath a small piece of cotton or cloth; then mark over the eyelid with hot wax in the form of a myrtle leaf.
However it is necessary that the shape be made according to its size and elevation of the eyelid; since this differs among people.
For there are some who require that an incision be made from the eyelid of significant size according to the amount which softens from the eyelid.
Then with a spatula find the two lines which you marked and begin from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct and let there be one fissure close by the natural hairs, of about the thickness of a spoke.
Then introduce a hook into one of two corners of the skin. Then scrape all of it off. Then bring together the two lips with a needle and fine wool thread; wipe off any blood and stick down any excess threads over the eyebrows using some sticky stuff if you wish to do so; otherwise don't worry about it.
Then leave the suture and threads in place for three or four days; afterwards care for it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without suture and care for it with something that dries and tightens it. For the eyelid will be raised by the seal of the wound and its closing; but it shall be better still.
The ancients taught this method of treatment.
However, there is concern for the patient, and it results from good work, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another method in Ataxmir as well: it is to make a sign on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we described.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or combined hooks, according to this shape that follows, then cut away what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this shape, with equal cutting.
But if you are unable to hold the hook and it does not equalize: then take a needle in which is a thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure; and insert another thread near the larger lachrymal, and a second thread near the smaller lachrymal; and gather between your fingers the threads with equality.
Then lift your hand with equal elevation; and lift the skin over which is marked the boil, as we described.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
If however an abscess occurs at your incision or a crack: soothe that abscess with a compress and similar things, from soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens also to the eyelid, that its hairs turn inwards.
It is therefore necessary that you use on it what we said about incisions; but stitching is more artistic for both. On the treatment of Ataxmir with tubes.
And it is necessary that you turn back the eyelid and split open the wound inside, as I have described. Then craft two thin canes or sticks with a length equal to the eyelid and a width less than that of a spatula, and you have already cut into both ends on either side where you hold the thread.
Then gather each of them carefully over the excess eyelid tissue and tightly bind together both canes on either side with a strong strapping, leaving it in place for several days. For the skin will die off once bound, it will darken, and rot away until it falls by itself.
If then you delay, cut it with scissors. Then care for it until it heals.
Once consolidated, lift the eyelid, but do not pluck any hairs.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this figure, with respect to length and width.
Chapter 12.
Regarding the removal of hairs inside the eye using a needle.
The procedure is to take up a thin needle and thread it with fine, soft silk. Then gather its ends together and knot each with a very fine knot; the length of thread should be one palm.
Then fasten another thin thread with flax underneath at the short end, and knot its ends if you like.
Then have the patient place their head on your lap and be close to the sun so that the operation is illuminated: since it is a delicate or minute operation.
Then introduce the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above a natural eyelash.
Then pull the eyelash upwards using the thread and introduce that eyelash into the needle; if there is one or two or three, no more.
Then pull your hand with it until the eyelash exits along with the thread from the eyelid alongside a natural eyelash.
But if the thread is pulled and the eyelash does not exit with it, pull the thread downwards with the filament you have tied onto it until the thread exits from the upper hole and see it by eye; then pull the thread and filament and extract both of them, close the eyelid and leave it closed for two or three days until the eyelash attaches to its place and flesh grows over it.
If the eyelash is short then either attach to it a long one from the natural eyelashes and lift them together or leave it until it grows longer and then raise it.
Chapter 13.
When this abscess occurs in the eye it is called a Leporina.
And this abscess is either natural or accidental.
An accidental abscess thus arises from the healing of an injury or incision or cauterization or similar things.
And the method of operating on it is for you to cut open that union and separate its lips, and place between them a linen covering, and bind it until it is healed.
And you should not use things that dry and constrict for its treatment; for if you do so, the Alxatrati will return worse than it was before. Instead, use things that soften, such as fenugreek: and gargle with water in which althea has been cooked, flaxseed: and diaproton ointment, which has been liquified with one of the oils: and wrap with this linen covering, and treat (the wound) with it.
And your aim is to use all skill at your disposal to ensure it does not heal with the same form as before.
And this operation we have described is not a complete correction of the Alxatrati, so that it does not return with the original shape and form.
 On the treatment of an Alxatrati which occurs on the lower eyelid; it is a wrinkling or contraction upwards towards the right and left.
Chapter 14.
This Alxatrati which occurs on the lower eyelid is what is truly called an Alxatrati. And it is either natural or accidental.
And the accidental type occurs from a wound, or tear, or burn, or something similar.
And the method of operating on it is to take a needle with double thread and dip it into the flesh; then make it penetrate from left lachrymal bone to right lachrymal bone until the thread comes out at both ends.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with a needle, and cut it with a spatula that is one span wide. So if the shape of the eyelid returns to normal, it is good.
And if not, take a rod and place it in the slit, then turn with it the eyelid: and make two slits on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two slits be from the two corners of the incision until they meet and form an angle; until when they are brought together this shape is made, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount which is its sharp side below from what follows the eyelid. Then bring together the separated parts: or sew it up with wool thread.
Then treat them with what we have said, of medicines that soften, and with lint, until they heal.
And if any aloes fall out from the slit or suture, or are cauterised: then you must make a flat slit underneath the eyelashes of the eyelid, also according to what has preceded. Then separate between the two lips with lint, as we have said.
And the essence of the treatment for aloes, when it is on top or below, is to proceed with the operation according as it has been prepared from the form of the aloes.
For it has many variations in form: and a prudent surgeon prepares his skill with whichever way is possible for him until he returns the shape to its natural form or close to it; and even the patient himself, according as suits him from the operation and instruments in most situations.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or to the cornea.
Sometimes this adhesion occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes adhered to the white of the eye, and prevents it from its natural movements.
You should therefore insert the end of a thin stick under the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a hook; then cut the adhesion with a very fine spatula which is not sharp like a cutting spatula, but rather blunt: so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and remove the spatula, and hurt the eye with its sharpness; and let your incision be such that you scrape off that adhesion with ease, until the eyelid returns to its natural shape, and the adhesion is healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye, wash it with water; or distill into it from a sieve made of this, of zinja dissolved with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a piece of fine linen; and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white; and after three days use sief and solidatui until it is healed.
On the incision of the nail and the prominence of fleshy tissue over the tear ducts.
Chapter 16.
Know that the nail is of two kinds. Or it is nervous, and is like a hard, thin sieve. Or it is not nervous, similar to white frozen moisture; which when it touches cold iron, or you try to grasp it with a hook, it breaks off, and the hook does not become fixed in it.
Both types do not begin unless from the larger lacrimal, as far as it gradually goes, until it covers vision and prevents light and eye movement.
And the method of operating its incision is: that the patient puts their head on your lap. Then open his eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then gather the claw with a small hook and extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse, cow or goat; and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle a little, and fix it in the middle of the claw: and pierce it with the needle, and tie the claw with the thread, extending it upwards: and scrape with the hair the side of the claw that follows the pupil as if you are plucking it with hair right to its extremity.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the lacrimal with a fine spatula or small scissors: and leave the natural lacrimal flesh so that there is no persistent course of tears from its incision.
And sometimes the claw is extended with just a hook: or with thread, as we have said. Then scrape it with a gentle spatula of this shape.
And be careful not to touch the spatula with the hard tunic, lest there is a rupture in it and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, throw into the eye some crushed salt, or something made of zinjar, and leave it until the next day. Then treat it with whatever is necessary until it heals.
If the hoof is not loose and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor does a hook penetrate it, then this type of hoof condition is often treated with medicines and heals as I described in the section on divisions.
If you wish to cut it, then open the patient's eye and take a fine, soft, blunt spatula of this shape. And scrape the hoof from above with the edge, carefully. If you see that it becomes thin and breaks up, and the edge presses into it, then drop into the patient's eye every hour from your freshly-made infusion of zedoary, or red lead, or bruised salt: and bind their eyes until the next day.
Then repeat this procedure over it until all of it is removed. Unless there is also a hot abscess in their eye; then leave it alone and treat the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat this procedure over it with the edge until it heals.
However, if a lump of the tear duct flesh is causing great harm to the eye, hang it with a hook and cut off its end; but do not go too far in your cutting so as to avoid damaging the tear ducts.
Then drop into the tear duct some red lead or an infusion made from zedoary until it heals.
 On cutting the Alguardeen ulcer and flesh growing in the eye.
Chapter Seventeen.
A reddish fleshy growth is sometimes born in the eyes of some humans, either composed on top or overlapping until it covers the pupil, approaches, or constricts above the eyelids and perhaps turns the eyelids outwards; and it resembles a rose bay.
And the operation on this is also such that the patient should put their head in your lap. Then open their eyes and gather all that flesh with suitable hooks; hold it with one pair of forceps or tweezers.
Then cut the flesh first until all of it is finished with a scalpel. And take care to avoid the eye so that you do not injure it during the operation; and let your cut be with a lancet, which we described in cutting fingernails, or with small scissors like those used for trimming eyelashes, as will come according to its form after this chapter.
When your cut is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with ground salt; or distill into it red powder and similar corrosive medicines; and put on the outside of the eye a fresh egg white, so that it may be protected from hot pus.
But if any of the flesh remains and hot blood rules you, and you fear a hot pus; then leave the eye alone and treat it with what soothes the pus.
Then repeat over it with an operation until it is healed.
And do likewise with additional flesh that happens to appear in the eye of this type.
However, it is necessary that you treat all weak eyes by surgery using iron instruments, either via the natural route or via an accidental one; and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you have seen that that limb can tolerate that operation.
On the discharge of pus from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Pus is red veins that form over the eye, preventing its function; and it weakens the eye with each passing day.
You must therefore first consider whether the eye with pus is strong and has no other illness besides the pus; then you can discharge that pus from it.
And you should instruct the patient to place their head in your lap.
Then you should lift those veins with one hook or two according to your discretion; and let the hooks be slender doubled ones of this shape, or two graded into one body of this shape.
Then you should collect those veins with slender pincers carefully and wipe the blood away every hour until you see that they have been removed from the eye and broken up; and be careful not to injure the eye with the ends of the spatulas.
And you should conduct your surgery at midday under the sun's rays and be very strong in your actions; so that you do not cut except for those veins.
And when you have finished, then you should instill into the eye either green or red sieved liquid; so that its sharpness eats away at whatever is left of the pus.
If you cannot collect it all in that hour, then apply eye-plasters to it with what will ease the eye pain; leave it for a few days until its pain subsides and is sealed off from pus by heat, then repeat this procedure on it until it heals.
And here's the form of the scissors.
On setting an arm bone back into place at the nose.
Chapter 19.
Physicians call an Arissati fistula which you treat with the cauterizer or with a burning caustic medicine according to what has preceded its account.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it; unless you cut over the abscess at its birth and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone is revealed.
When therefore the bone is revealed and you see it corrupted or blackened, then scrape it with an instrument whose form is this:
And it is called the rough-head.
Let it be made of hardened iron and let its head be round like an awl which is pitted with a file or the fine pitting of a chisel; and place it over the corrupted part of the bone.
Then roll it between your fingers and press your hand for a while until you know that the corruption is now scraped off; and do this several times.
Then restore the place with drying, styptic medicines.
If therefore the place is consolidated and flesh grows there and the course of pus is cut off; and it remains for forty days without renewal or abscessing or mishap then you will know that it has healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in him unless he can bring the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this form.
And it is to uncover the bone from the second with iron or sharp medicine; and when the bone is uncovered, then take a drill in this form, let its tip be iron, triangular: and its wood should be a pyramid that tapers off at one end as you see.
Then place that over the bone itself, let it be close to the tear duct; and extend your hand away from the eye a little. Then turn your hand with the drill until it penetrates the bone and you feel weakness there; by this air escaping from that place when he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore that place with astringent drying medicines as I taught you.
When flesh forms then hardens in that place, the matter which was discharged outwards returns to the nose; and thus it is lighter on the weak spot.
 On reducing eye prominence.
Chapter 20.
When the eye is prominent with its entire self and no harm or loss of sight occurs, then you must relieve this weakness; thereafter bleed it; afterward place leeches on the neck without any incision but only by their suction.
Then apply over the eye an ointment made from gum arabic (acacia), aloe vera gel, frankincense resin and scotch myrtle resin. Then bind the eye over with a plaster containing many fine feathers.
The method of dressing with compresses is as follows: take soft cloths, many of them, and fold each cloth four times; make many such folds; then place them one on top of the other according to the size required for the eye; finally, bind them firmly in place with a hard cloth.
Repeat the cupping with suction without scarifying.
Then remove the cups, and leave the eye bound day and night.
If however the bandage becomes loose again, it must be tightened considerably; then remove the bandage after a day and night, as we have said.
If therefore you see that the eye has regained its normal colour, it is good; and if not, then repeat the poultice, compresses, binding, and cupping until it is healed.
On incising the white of the eye.
Chapter 21.
When a rupture occurs in the white of the eye and then protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of white matter, disfiguring the face because of it and prompting you to want to cut it, an operation is necessary on it as follows: it must be done by inserting a needle into the root of the white from below upwards.
Then introduce another needle with doubled thread from the tear duct side and let it penetrate; leave the first needle where it is.
Then cut the doubled thread and bind with it the white around the needle; tie it very tight.
Then extract the needle and place over the eye wool soaked in albumen of egg; leave it until the thread comes away with the white.
Then treat the eye with something that strengthens it until the wound heals.
And sometimes, when the eye is pressed from all sides with a circular cloth until it produces a great swelling.
Then it is pierced with a thin needle that reaches the depth of the eye, and the white liquid flows out, and the eye collapses, and you must enter it immediately; then press on it until it heals.
On the cure of alcomnia.
Chapter XXII.
This disease called alcomnia is nothing but pus that accumulates in the eye, like water dripping down, and it is not itself.
And the way to treat it is to have the patient sit on a prepared seat or remain upright.
Then take his head in your hands from both sides, and move it until you see pus reach the lower part of the eye with your own eyes. Then it is bound so that it does not flow down, and the vision is restored; and the patient sees things as he used to see them: and if it does not go below [the eye], know that it is water.
If however the pus does not descend as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands. Then take a thin needle and search with it above the corneal flap near the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea until pus comes out.
When it does come out, then drip into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey; or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
The treatment for water coming down into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
I have already mentioned the different types of water in division, and what is suitable for boring with words that declare and explain it, then take the same according to health.
Therefore, you should make the patient sit opposite your hands on a square facing a light near the sun: and tie their healthy eye, pulling it tightly closed; then with your right hand close the eyelid of their left eye if that is where the water is, or the right eye if it is in the right.
Then take some alum with your right hand if the eye is left, or your left hand if it is right.
Next place the tip of the alum close to the white part of the eye near the edge of the pupil; then push it gently and revolve your hand with it until you feel that the alum has reached the empty space.
The distance that the alum travels must correspond to the depth of the space between the pupil and the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye. You will see it within the pupil because of the brightness of the cornea.
Next, place the alum at the spot where the water is located. Then push it downwards with one finger after another.
If the water comes down immediately, then as soon as the patient opens their eyes they will be able to see it alongside the alum in their eye.
Then rest for a little while. If therefore water descends, then place it down again, except that almagda comes out of it.
When therefore it is mixed, and does not rise up: then extract the almagda with ease; and you turn your hand little by little.
Then dissolve something of clear crystal salt in water; and wash the eye within with it. Then place outside the eye a whole piece of cloth or wool dipped in rose oil and egg white; and bind with it the healthy eye.
We however, and those who are of our time, place on it powdered cumin with egg white.
If almagda does not obey you and enter the eye due to its hardness, since it is of human origin, whose eye is very hard; then you must take a spoon called an *alberid*, which has this form:
Therefore pierce with it only the conjunctiva and do not push your hand into the hole; and there is nothing else for you to do except make a way to the almagda in a subtle place.
Then introduce the almagda as we have said.
And at the end of your work, prepare for the patient a decently-made bedroom in which they can sleep on their back in a dark house; and prevent them from all movement and coughing: and give them food that soothes their nature; and do not let them move their head to the right or left at all.
The bandage should remain in place according to its placement until the third day.
Then you must loosen it in that dark room, and test his sight; make him see things. Then apply the bandage again up to the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do so at the time of treatment or immediately after the operation; rather one must avoid it because water rises quickly through intense heat.
If however a warm abscess occurs then one must loosen the eye dressing before the seventh day and treat it with what will settle the abscess until settled; after that restore his sight completely and place over his face some sort of visual aid to regulate his vision for a few days, while he is in that dark room.
Then let him leave the house gradually and return to his home.
And remember that the student is not to be exempted from the sight of the procedure on several occasions because he will then dare to perform the surgery himself.
And now one of them has come to us from Alayra who said that a water-drawing woman was perforated in Alayra.
I therefore have not seen anyone in your land do such a thing nor read about it in any of the ancient books and so it is possible that this may be something new.
These are the different kinds of covers for the eye as they should be applied by someone who is ignorant of such things.
They should be made from copper and the ends must have this same pointed triangular shape and sharp point.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of flesh growing in the nose.
Occasionally various fleshly growths appear in the nose, one of which resembles a scorpion with many feet; this is carcinomatous flesh, stony to the touch, dark-coloured: and there is also soft flesh that isn't dark-coloured.
So when you have soft, trustworthy flesh that isn't carcinomatous, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun with his nostrils open; then cast a hook into those growths and draw them out; then cut what you've got hold of on one side with a sharp thin spatula until you're sure all the flesh is removed.
But if there's something left which can't be cut off, then scrape it away with one of your fine instruments as painlessly as possible until nothing remains of it. But if there's a lot of bleeding or the patient gets a hot abscess, then give him whatever treatment is necessary; but if it's one of those malignant kinds of abscess then burn it quickly with a red-hot iron until all the blood stops and every bit of flesh is removed.
Then after you've cut it out, pour vinegar or water into the nose, or wine. But if the patient has an open nose with a discharge down to his palate, then you know he's healthy again.
If there's no discharge as you'd expect then you know the flesh has grown inside on the upper bones of the nose to which your instruments don't reach with their cutting.
You should then introduce a thread of linen with some thickness and make many knots in it; place between each knot the length of a finger or less; have the patient insert one end of the thread into their nose together with a stick or similar object that is possible for him, after you've made it similar to an arrow; pull on the other end until it reaches the wound and comes out over his throat.
And indeed many times boys do the same thing like this at school: and it is an easy task for whoever wants to.
Then place two ends of the thread: one end that comes out over the nose, and the other which remained inside the nose. Then with your assistant close the wound with the flesh-hook using the knots which are on the thread. Do this until you're sure that the flesh is now tied with the knots of the thread.
Then remove the thread and place in the nose a linen cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment after cleaning away any blood; do this for three days or more until all of the remaining ointment is worn away by the flesh.
Then finally put into the nose at the end of the treatment a leaden tube for several days until it heals.
If however he requires drying treatment, use the following method:
For the device used for distillation of oils and other medicines into the nose  make this out of silver or brass; it should be like a small lantern with an opening similar to that of a shell, and its nozzle likewise.
And if you wish make it closed like a tube.
And the small shell of the instrument for making a head purging, let it be full and exposed: which has a handle at its end, with which you hold it when you heat oil in it, or whatever liquid or fluid.
Chapter 25.
Often there is born at the end of the nose a lump which becomes larger, and increases with days until the appearance of it becomes ugly.
And because of that it is necessary to cauterize it at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of it. Then put over the place either a cautery or burning medicine which stands in its place.
If therefore the incision of it is delayed until it has grown larger, then consider whether it is stony hard, dark in colour and insensitive; then do not touch it with the iron, for the ulcer is cancerous.
For I have often seen one who incises this ulcer, and there happens great harm to him who has it.
And if the ulcer is soft to the touch, not dark in colour, and you see that incision of it all over is possible, then evacuate the pus, and incise it without fear or dread; and treat the place with what dries and contracts it until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the suture of the nose, lip, and ear.
You know that when a break in continuity occurs in one of these cartilage pieces, surgery is of little benefit to it, except for some people.
One should therefore, when something like that happens to someone, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its blood; and then bring together the lips of the wound with suture; then treat the wound until it heals.
And if the break in continuity has lips already separated, and each part is made healthy; then one should scrape all parts from their skin until it bleeds. Then bring together the two lips with suture and tighten them, and sprinkle over the blood dragon's blood and crushed frankincense; and place on top of the powders a piece of dauphine plaster, and another from the consolidated plasters; and leave it tied for two or three days. Then loosen it, and change the medicine; and leave it until the threads fall off by themselves. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The method of suture is to bring together the break in continuity either with needles as we described for the abdomen; or bring together a break using thread as I have made you aware.
Chapter 27.
On removing lumps of lips.
Many people often have hard growths like herb seeds inside their lips; and some are smaller, others larger.
One should therefore turn the lip over, and cut into every lump of it; then lift it with a hook, and cut it from all sides.
Fill the place after the incision with a mixture of egg yolk and powdered gallnut until the bleeding stops.
Next, it should be washed with vinegar, and the place where there is a styptic effect should be treated with it until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
 On cutting flesh born on the gum.
Many times flesh grows on the gum which the Ancients call Abuluss.
Therefore you should hang it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root allowing the pus to flow out, or blood if that is what there is.
Then apply over the place a mixture ground up, or other styptic, drying powders.
But if that flesh returns after healing as it often does then cut it a second time and cauterise it for it will not return after being cauterised.
Chapter 29.
 On the treatment of teeth with an iron instrument.
Sometimes rough, ugly bark-like matter accumulates on the surface of teeth from within and without as well as between the gums; sometimes they turn black or yellow then green until that corruption spreads to the gum making the teeth unsightly.
You should make the patient sit between your hands with their head in your lap then scrape away with a knife any bark-like matter you see as well as that which looks like sand: do not stop until nothing is left and do likewise for blackness, greenness and yellowness until they are clean.
If therefore that which is in them from the beginning of reason be removed, it is good; and if not, then repeat reasoning upon them on another day, a second and third time, until finally you arrive at what you wish to study.
And you should know that razors of various forms and many shapes are needed; as is prepared for your operation: for the razor with which the tooth is shaved from below is different to the one used between teeth, according to other shapes.
And these forms of razors should be prepared for you as you see them.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of toothache.
You should take care to cure the tooth of its pain with all your skill, and proceed slowly in its extraction. For there is no substitute for it when extracted; since it is a noble substance: until such time as there can be no excuse for not extracting it, then when the patient is compelled to extract it, you should make sure and confirm that the painful tooth is indeed the culprit.
For often the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is a healthy tooth and extract it; yet the pain does not go away until the sick tooth is removed.
We ourselves have seen this from the operations of blood-letters.
When therefore you are sure that the painful tooth itself is to blame, then you should make an incision around it with a small spatula, in which there is something sharp, until the gum is loosened on all sides; then move it with your fingers, or with fine forceps first little by little, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps on those places in a good position, and hold the patient's head between your knees; now you have held them well, so that they do not move; then pull the tooth according to its straightness, so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it underneath from all sides gently, and try to move it as you did initially.
However, if the tooth is perforated or corroded, you must fill that hole with cloth; and tie it tightly with a thin piece of stick so that it does not break when you grasp it with forceps.
And make sure that you carefully scrape around the gum from all sides.
You must also be careful with your strength so that you do not break the tooth and a piece of it remains inside causing worse pain for the patient than before.
Beware of doing what ignorant bloodletters do with their haste and boldness when extracting teeth, other than the methods we have described above.
For often they bring about great harm to people when they break teeth and leave some or all of the roots behind; or extract them along with parts of the jawbone, as we have seen many times.
After extraction, it should be rinsed with wine or with vinegar and salt.
If bleeding occurs from the site of extraction (which often happens), then take some powdered frankincense and fill that place with it; if not, cauterize it with a hot iron if you do not have any frankincense.
The shapes of fine forceps with which the tooth is first moved should be long at their tips and short at the handle, thick so that they do not double up when pressed against a tooth: you will see them made of thicker handles, yet when you squeeze them together, they will not pinch themselves nor bend; the tips are to be short and made out of iron or good steel with straight tips. There should be teeth on these, some of which fit into each other and close firmly with a strong grip.
And sometimes the tips should be made in the shape of the beak of a bird called a stork, which has a strong grip.
Chapter 31.
Regarding tooth removal, as well as extraction of fractured jaw bones...
When a bit of tooth remains and needs to be removed, you should place over the site a poultice with butter for one or two days until the area softens; then introduce into it an algest or forceps: these have tips that are shaped like the beak of a bird called a stork. The shape of these forceps is as follows...
Their tips should be made like a file on the inside; or like an awl.
If it does not obey you and come out with these forceps, then you should cut over the root and remove all the flesh, and introduce a small instrument called a palanca, of this shape...
Its tip should be short, thick but not too much so that it does not break.
If the root comes out through it then that is good; if not, you should help with these other instruments of which the shapes are as follows...
The shape of the first triangular end, which has some thickness.
The shape of the thin triangular end.
And together with other instruments and tools that have preceded it in regard to teeth extraction.
It is also helpful to use this instrument which resembles a large hook, of the following shape - twisted triangular end with some thickness so that it does not break; and ensure it is not soaked.
And know that there are many dental instruments; similarly other tools cannot be counted and a skilful practitioner, skilled in their craft, will invent for themselves the tool which is signified to them by the task and specific illness.
Since from the many [teeth] there are some for which an instrument has not been described by previous authors owing to their diversity of type.
If however a jawbone or other bone of the mouth is broken or has decayed then examine it in its place with that which suits him from amongst the instruments and forceps I have described for extracting roots; and assist using a lever of this shape.
There should be some thickness to it gradually so that the bone is grasped or held and does not slip away nor slide until the bone comes out; and restore the place with suitable medications for it.
But if there is slight decay in the bone then scrape it from its decay and treat it until it becomes healthy.
Chapter 32.
On locking prominent teeth above others.
When teeth emerge not according to their natural course, it becomes an ugly deformity; especially when this happens with women and girls, namely those of noble birth.
It is necessary that you give consideration to it. For if a tooth is born after another and does not find its place, or its socket is impossible as well as the filing of it; then pull out this tooth: and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it together with that other using this instrument which has this form.
It is like a small beak, and it is made of very sharp steel.
And let your incision be made over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other may be moved from among the teeth.
But if it is an exposed prominent tooth that needs filing; then file it with a steel file whose form is this.
It is all made of steel, and its handle has very small points like the file with which needles are made: with this the tooth is gradually filed over many days easily so that it does not move nor fall out; then soothe it afterwards and finally shave it smooth using some scrapers.
If there is a tooth from which a part has broken and it injures the tongue; then you must also file that one until its roughness caused by breakage be removed and levelled; and smoothen it so that it does not injure the tongue nor corrupt speech.
Chapter 33.
Regarding setting teeth with gold wires.
When the front teeth suffer concussion and commotion due to blows or accidents: and the patient is unable to chew without food falling out; and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but the treatment was not successful; then it is appropriate to bind them with gold wire: since silver turns green and decays after some days, while gold never changes.
And let the wire be of moderate thickness and fineness according to the amount that fits between the teeth.
The form of the binding is as follows: take a length of wire and insert twice its thickness between two healthy teeth; then weave it with both ends of the wire around the loose tooth or teeth until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving process back to where you started; and tighten your hand with care and wisdom until it cannot be moved at all: and make sure that your binding is tight around the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose.
Cut off the excess ends of the wire with scissors; then gather both together and bend them so they are concealed between a healthy tooth and a loose one, taking care not to damage the tongue; finally, leave the binding in place until healing is complete.
If it comes loose or breaks, bind them with another wire, and it will remain in place for the whole period of healing.
This is the arrangement of teeth and form of binding for two healthy teeth and two loose ones, as you can see.
Sometimes it happens that one or two teeth return to their place after falling out and are retained as we have described; but this is only done by a skilled and experienced practitioner.
And sometimes a replacement is made from calf bones; it takes the form of a tooth and is placed where the missing tooth was secured and fastened, as we have said; it remains there and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, resulting from a wound that has already healed.
And the operation for this is to open the mouth of the patient as wide as you can with your hand, then lift their tongue; next, cut that sinewy ligament horizontally until the tongue is freed from its restraint.
If there is any hardening and knotting in it due to the healing of a wound, then place a hook on this area and pass the hook across horizontally until you cut through the ligament and release the knot.
And take care not to make an incision too deep into the flesh so as not to cut through the artery there and cause a flow of blood.
Then let the trace of the incision be rubbed with rosewater or vinegar or cold water.
Next place some flaxen lint under the tongue which the patient should hold there every night; this will prevent a second healing.
Should any flow of blood occur, then place on the area some pounded egg white. But if the bleeding defeats you, then cauterize the area with a fig-shaped cauterizer appropriate to this; next treat it with the remaining cure until it heals.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes there occurs under the tongue a pustule resembling a small frog, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and perhaps it grows so large that it fills the mouth.
And for treating this condition, you should open up the patient's mouth facing towards the sun: then inspect the pustule.
If you see that it is of a dark or black colour, hard, and the patient feels no pain upon touching it; then do not touch it for it is cancerous.
And if it slopes towards whiteness where there is moisture, then thrust into it a hook, and cut it out with a thin scalpel, freeing the whole of it. If blood defeats you during the procedure, then place on it bruised figwort until the bleeding ceases; afterwards return to your surgery, until you have removed it and all of its contents.
Afterwards it should be treated with vinegar and salt: then tend to the wound using appropriate dressings until it is healed.
The treatment of an abscess in both tonsils.
Chapter 36.
Sometimes there occur between the throat and the jaw, two glands resembling cotton balls that sit externally; these are called tonsils: when you treat them with what we have described elsewhere and they do not heal, then consider the following.
If it is an abscess that is hard, dark in colour, with little sensation upon touching; then do not touch it with the iron [scalpel].
If it is red in color and its root is thick, then do not touch it even with an iron [instrument], fearing a gush of blood; rather leave it until it matures. Then either you will pierce it, or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is white in colour, round, and its root is slender; then you must cut into it.
And the procedure is as follows: consider before performing it whether its abscess has cooled to complete quiet or diminished somewhat; then make the patient sit facing the sun with his head in your lap and open his mouth so that a servant takes hold of [the tongue] between his hands, pressing it down with an instrument of this shape.
It shall be made of silver or copper, thin as a knife.
When you press it against his tongue with this and the abscess is revealed to you, catching your eye: then take a hook and fasten it into the tonsil and draw it outwards as far as you can without tearing anything from its coverings.
Then cut into it with an instrument of the following shape: It resembles scissors; however, its tips are curved so that the opening of each is directed to the point of the other, and care should be taken that it be made of iron-inlaid silver or bronze dipped in alum.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula of this shape: Let one side be sharp, the other blunt.
And after you cut one tonsil, cut the other in the same manner.
Then after the incision, let the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
But if there is bleeding, let him gargle with water in which boiled pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves and similar astringents have been steeped until the bleeding stops; then treat it until it heals.
And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils. Cut them accordingly, as I have said about the incisions of the two tonsils.
Indeed, I once treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat and was causing it to swell, with very little movement; the swelling almost completely blocked her throat, so she could only breathe through a narrow opening. She could no longer eat or drink water, and she would have died within a day or two if left untreated.
The abscess had grown so much that it sent out two branches until they came out through the nostrils.
I therefore hurriedly seized one of them with forceps. Then I pulled it out, drawing forth a large portion of the abscess.
I then cut through it where I could reach from within the nostril.
Then I did the same for what had come out of the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue; afterwards, I seized the forceps at that abscess, cut a portion of it away without much bleeding, so her throat was cleared out. The woman could immediately drink water again and then she started eating.
I did not cease to cut out that abscess many times over a long period; and an abscess followed in the place of each one I cut out until it became too extensive along with the one around it.
I devised a plan and cauterized the abscess between the throat.
I stood back from adding anything; then I walked away from that side, and did not know what God did with it after me.
 On the cutting out of an abscessed uvula.
Chapter 37.
When a discharge flows down to the uvula and an abscess forms there, and it is long; then it itself is called "perpendicular"; and if it is on the lower part thick and round, then it itself is called "uva".
When it is treated with what we have said in the division, and the cure does not come about; and you see that the abscess has cooled off from that, and it is thin; then you must cut it out.
And that which is on it round and bunched together, and has no length, and is bloody or of a dark colour or black, and has no feeling; then you must deepen the cut into it. For in that there is fear over the sick person.
You must therefore when you see it according to the manner I have described from its whiteness and length, make the sick person sit facing the sun; and press his tongue down with an instrument, which has been previously described; then fix a hook into the uvula, and draw it downwards; and cut it off with one of two instruments that I mentioned for cutting out two tonsils.
You must not cut away any part from it unless it is what naturally protrudes without causing an extension.
If you remove more of it, you will harm the voice and speech.
After the incision, use what we have described for incising two tonsils: and treat it until it is healed.
However, if the patient is afraid of the incision: then you must use skill without fear or trepidation when cauterizing him.
The manner of the cautery is not proper unless with boiling water: and it is best to put the patient's head on your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument that we mentioned. Next, take some of the water that I told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with unslaked lime, making it neither thick nor thin; fill the hollow part of this instrument, which is shaped like so.
Let the end of it that holds the medicine be hollow like the bowl of a spoon.
Place the instrument with the medicine on the uvula itself: and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva may flow out of his mouth from within the medicine, so that nothing runs down into his throat and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine over it. You must hold it over the uvula for a space of time equal to half an hour's length until you see that its color has already turned black and the pungency of the medicine has subsided.
If you wish to apply the plaster and wrap it around the end of the radius bone, pour the plaster mixed with medicine into a tube, and insert the radius with the cast inside the tube until the plaster adheres to the wound.
Do this many times until you achieve the desired result with regard to cauterizing the wound. Then leave it; for it dries up and falls off by itself after three or four days.
If you need to apply more medicine, do so; and after the cauterization, clean around the wound with a plaster soaked in butter, and cleanse it with whatever medicinal ointment is available; then wash it with cold water.
And treat the wound externally with embrocations (ointments) and internally with gargles (mouthwashes), until it is healed.
This type of treatment, then, is more beneficial than cutting open the wound and less frightening.
Sometimes the wound is even healed with a method gentler than cauterization and incision; it is healed by fumigation (smoke inhalation), as follows. Take chamomile, hyssop, marjoram, rue, savine, wormwood, southernwood and similar herbs; put all or some of them into a glazed pot, cover with vinegar and boil; the pot should have a hole in its middle, over which place an instrument shaped like a ladle.
It should be made of silver or brass; and insert the end with the pomegranate grains into the patient's mouth until the vapours rise to the wound through the tube, so that the wound is greatly darkened.
Repeat this process over it many times until it dries out.
And be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses. It often adds to the abscess: and you must not do this unless it is at the decline of its hot stage.
But if you don't have this instrument available to you, then take a reed and attach sheep's skin to its end so the patient's bone is not burnt because the sheep's skin prevents the vapour from burning the bone; and this is good treatment with successful results.
On extracting thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Often there is a bone or fish spine or other object stuck in the throat.
You must therefore extract any object that is visible to the naked eye after you press against their tongue with an instrument under a bright light and then tell them what it is stuck in their throat.
And if you cannot see it and it is hidden in the throat, then you must make the patient vomit before their food has been fully digested by the stomach. Perhaps it will come out with whatever is brought up through vomiting.
Or have the patient swallow a piece of turnip, or lettuce root, or a dry rusk; or take a piece of dried soft sea sponge and tie it with thread then have them swallow it. When it reaches the place where there are spines or bones and is extracted, then they come out.
If therefore it does not exit with what we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form.
It should be thicker than a radius and at its end there is a curve that can easily be inserted into his throat; he himself should have his head elevated upwards.
And take care that it does not touch its epiglottis, so that coughing does not happen to him, and push with a bone or spine, or the doctor should insert his hand himself.
Whatever the patient inserts is better: because of his knowledge about what is attached there; and push down or pull up with his hand holding an instrument, all that is prepared for him until it comes out.
On the removal of leeches.
Chapter 39.
When a leech is treated with what I said earlier when dividing the cure by medicines and it does not take hold, then look at the patient's throat facing the sun or near the sun after you have pressed its tongue with an instrument as described to you.
If your sight falls upon the leech, remove it with a small hook or with slender forceps as shown to you.
If it is not possible to do so with those: then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat near the leech; next, place inside the cavity of the tube a red hot iron over fire. Do this many times; let the patient abstain from water for that whole day.
Then give him a cup full of cold water and let him open his mouth into it; have him rinse his mouth with it and do not allow him to swallow anything, he should move the water around in his mouth for an hour with his hand. For as soon as the leech feels water, it drops immediately.
But if it does not leave with what we have described, then fumigate the patient with ground beetles or with asafoetida using the instrument that I described for fumigating the ear.
Do this several times because it will fall out by itself.
And the method of treatment by fumigation is to take a pot containing live plums with fire inside; and the pot should be covered with a lid which has a hole in its centre, and the end of the instrument is fitted into this hole.
Then apply the fumigation and let the patient put his mouth on the end of the tube and close his mouth so that no fumes escape until you know that they have reached the leech. For the leech will fall out immediately.
But if it does not come out, then repeat the fumigation several times.
And let the patient endure thirst, eat spicy food, garlic, onions, but not drink water.
It is therefore necessary that it comes out with this treatment regimen.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which a leech is extracted from the throat when it falls on it with its eyes open.
It is like forceps as you see; only it has this curve which is inserted into the throat. And its end is like the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there are rasping points; when it grasps anything, it never lets go entirely.
On the opening of abscesses, their incision, and treatment in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many types of abscesses, with numerous ways they can develop; this will be recalled when considering one particular type in this book. They vary in how they pierce and how they are incised depending on two methods.
One method is for an abscess that forms within itself and contains humours.
The second method depends on the location of the abscess, which develops from an injury to the body.
Since an abscess occurring in the head is different from an abscess appearing in the anus, and since one that appears in soft tissue differs from another appearing at a joint; each has its own considerations regarding treatment.
Some abscesses should not be pierced unless they have matured and drained completely; others must be pierced when raw and unripe.
Such as those near joints.
When an abscess occurs near a joint and extends its length until what is within it rots, the surrounding ligaments or nerves of that joint may be corrupted; this is why there's greater cause for that limb to contract.
Or it is an abscess on a principal limb; for if you delay piercing it until it has matured, it will harm that limb or the person.
Or it is near the anus; pierce it while still immature. An unripe abscess should not be pierced unless it's near the anus so that rot doesn't spread deep into and lengthen towards the interior of the anus, creating a fistula or becoming untreatable at its terminal end.
You must know the hour of the abscess's perforation when it has matured according to its fullness; and this is at the settling of pain, retreat of fever, reduction of redness, throbbing, and sharpness of the head of the abscess; and other signs.
And you must make the same perforation in the lower area of the abscess, and the most prominent part; and let this be a piercing that goes lengthwise through the body, if there are abscesses on parts of hands or feet, and in places like arms, wrists, tendons, nerves, arteries, and lastly in all equal locations where there is no curvature.
In those which curve outward, go with the perforation according to that limb.
When the abscess is in fleshy areas, it is better that you postpone its perforation until its digestion has been confirmed, as we have said according to its fullness.
Because if you pierce it before that time, the course of its discharge is prolonged and results in much filth and foulness; possibly its lips are hardened and so is its depth.
Some abscesses are pierced breadthwise through the body when necessary, or according to that limb's needs.
And you should use a small piercing on small abscesses and large ones on big abscesses; or make multiple cuttings depending on the size of the abscess.
There are some abscesses where the skin must be scooped out; and it is to be cut when already made like a piece of cloth and has reached its limit, which means that it is already dead tissue; as happens with many types such as carbuncles and buboes.
And among these are those that are cut with a three-cornered incision. And among them is one which is cut like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like an abscess in the groin.
And among these are those in which a round incision is made, and a lunar one; and similar to them among incisions.
But that which has no head, like soft superficial abscesses, must be pierced with a shallow piercing, or only flat.
And when an abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, and you pierce it, do not rush and remove all the pus at that moment; instead, extract some of it. Then dress the abscess up to the next day. Then extract some more of the pus.
Do this many times in stages, until it comes out; especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old decrepit person: for often the animal spirit of one animal is dissolved with the exit of pus: and perhaps the patient will die, but you won't perceive it.
Therefore, take great caution in this chapter.
And after your piercing, with which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary to wipe the wound; and consider... If therefore the wound of an abscess is small, or it is a flat incision, then apply lint made from linen, or old cotton. And if it is a large abscess and there are many perforations and fissures, then you must insert a licinia into each fissure until they meet.
And if you have cut away part of the skin from the abscess or scooped it out around its circumference, then you should fill it with old cotton, or as when one dresses a wound with cloth, or scrape it with line lint without moisture; and bind it tight for three days.
Then wash it and dress it with the ointment required until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood during your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after the cloth has soaked them up; and place it on the bleeding spot many times.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you must apply the regimen and treatment and powders which I have described in many places throughout this book.
But if it is wintertime and the location of the abscess involves many nerves, then you must fill poultices with warm wine and oil; and place them on the affected areas.
And if it is summertime and the areas are fleshy, then you must apply poultices soaked in water and oil, or with wine and oil, and keep them all cool. Until the third day, as I have said, you must then open the abscess, clean it, and treat it with what is suitable until it heals.
This is, therefore, what is necessary to know about the universal treatment of abscesses.
According to the path of distinction, I have already spoken about every abscess and how it is a step-by-step way towards its cure individually.
Chapter 41.
On the incision of abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
There occur on the skin of the head small abscesses, and they are of the types of nodules which are contained by membranes like sacks; it is as if they were chicken scabs themselves.
And there are many types of them.
Among them are fatty ones; and among them are those which contain moisture like mud; and among them are those containing moisture like gruel and porridge; and similar to these; and among them are hard stony ones.
And in the incision of all of them and their extraction there is no fear as long as an artery does not oppose during their incision.
And the operation for their incision is that you try it with an instrument whose shape follows below and which is called "Intromission" until you know what it contains.
For if it is one that contains moisture then dry it by incising it lengthwise with a superficial incision; according to this shape.
And start with the incision from line b to line g. So when the moisture is evacuated then scrape out the sac that contains this moisture and do not leave anything in it at all.
For many times it returns if something remains from it.
Then immerse the gauze in Egyptian ointment if it is available; and if not, in water and salt; and fill with it the wound and leave it until another day. Indeed, it corrodes what remains of the cyst.
Then repeat on it with the second Egyptian poultice, and the third, and if you need it, do so until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If the abscess contains a fatty lump, then cut it open in this form, with the incision taking the shape of a cross; and place hooks between the lips of the incision, and scrape it from all sides: and try your best to remove the membrane that contains it.
However, if an artery gives you trouble, then do what I shall tell you next.
And do likewise with an abscess, if it is stony, from the incision and treatment as we have said.
And the incision above the stony abscess is easier, because it has little blood or moisture. And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are on the heads of certain men, with which there is absolutely no moisture.
That is because I cut open an abscess on the head of an elderly woman, and found an abscess like a solid, hard, rough stone which could not be broken; and if anyone struck it with something sharp they would injure themselves.
However, in other abscesses on the head, apart from these abscesses which occur on children's heads and at the roots of ears, their incision should be a superficial one.
Or make your incisions in them always from the lower part of them so as to ease the course of pus downwards.
Then treat it with whatever is appropriate for them from among treatments.
Regarding the removal of goiters in the neck.
Chapter 42.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin area: and sometimes they occur elsewhere on the body.
And with regard to those that occur in the neck, they may be singular or multiple: and they form from one another: and each goiter among them is within its own membrane, just as is the case with nodules and head abscesses, as we have described.
And there are many types of these goiters. And indeed some of these goiters are stony; and among them are those that contain fluids; and among them are malignant ones which do not respond to treatment.
In the case of those that you see to be of a good disposition upon feeling them, whose color is close to that of the skin tone, and which move with every part, and are not attached to the neck nerves, nor to the guide-veins, nor to the arteries, and are not deep: it is necessary that you cut these away using a superficial incision from upper body part to lower body part along the line, b. to line, g.; and scrape them clean on all sides; and stretch out two skin flaps with a hook or many hooks if need be, as we said regarding head abscesses; then extract it little by little.
And take caution not to cut into the vein or nerve.
And let the knife not be too sharp; so that it does not cut into your hand during the incision, or disturb the patient, and cause you to cut what is unnecessary.
If you cut a vein or an artery and it prevents you from operating, then apply to the wound ground zege or certain powders that stop the blood flow, compress the wound, and leave it until the swelling subsides and the wound softens: or until it starts and is inclined towards putrefaction.
If the bleeding has been stopped, return to your operation until it is complete.
Then probe with your index finger to see if there is any remaining strophe or small stones; therefore cut them out and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the root of the strophe, then you must not cut that strophe from its root; instead, you should tie it with strong doubled thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If the strophe is cut through entirely, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and have them bind themselves immediately once you see that there remains no excess at all.
If you see that there is excess left over due to the size of the strophe, then you must consider cutting and removing its root; and apply the suture we mentioned before.
And those strophes that contain moisture, pierce them with a shallow puncture so that you can see the place of their maturity; and make the puncture below what follows from the body, as we have said before.
Then apply, after the puncture, licinia with ointment and similar things to consume what remains of corruption until you see that the wound has now been cleansed; then treat it with generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
On the removal of the epiglottis due to an abscess occurring in the throat.
The ancients called this procedure a 'section' of the epiglottis, and I have never seen anyone in our land perform it; here is their account.
In those with severe sore throat, it is best to avoid the procedure of epiglottis removal; for there will be no relief from it because all the veins and lungs are affected.
In those with a hot abscess in the mouth or throat, or on both tonsils, where there is no disease in the windpipe, it is necessary to perform an epiglottis removal procedure as otherwise they may die from suffocation.
Therefore when we wish to perform it, we must cut the epiglottis below its three or four circles with a small knife across its width in that part which lies between two of these circles; this is the appropriate place for cutting and not at any cartilage: because this place has no flesh attached to it, nor are there veins bearing blood near by.
If the surgeon is timid, it is best to first stretch out the skin of the throat with a hook. He then makes an incision in the skin until he reaches the windpipe; he should avoid any vein which may be seen.
Next he cuts the epiglottis as we have described; and the procedure is signalled by an abundance of pus issuing from it with a breaking apart sound and loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When the hour passes and pre-gangrene is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound with skin, but without cartilage.
Then apply medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasis says so. The full explanation of this procedure we have described is only apparent when they see that one of these abscesses has already closed the patient's throat; and the patient is elevated towards death, and wishes to be cut in order to relieve their breathing: they go to cut the epiglottis so the patient can breathe over the site of the wound with a certain type of respiration, and thereby save them from death. And for this reason, they used to advise leaving the wound open until the illness is exhausted; and that takes three days or nearly so. Then, therefore, they advised suturing the wound and treating it until it was healed.
And what I myself have seen is that one maidservant took a knife and inserted it into her throat, and cut a portion of the pulmonary canal with it.
And I was called to treat her, and found that she was moaning like the moan of a dead person.
So I lifted her from the wound, and found that only a small amount of blood had emerged from it. So I was afraid that she herself had not severed the vein nor the artery; and air was escaping from the wound.
I therefore proceeded with the suturing and treated it until it was healthy; and nothing happened to the maidservant apart from a slight hoarseness in her voice: and she returned after some days, having improved.
Hence I say: there is no fear in the incision of the epiglottis.
Regarding the incision for a throat hernia.
Chapter 44.
This abscess, which is called a throat hernia, is a large one, of the same colour as the body; and it occurs frequently in women.
And it is of two kinds: either it is natural, or it is accidental.
Certainly, the natural kind is not innate.
The accidental type, however, is of two kinds; one of which resembles fatty tumours. And the other kind is similar to the abscess that forms from an arterial blockage. There is a risk with this procedure, and it should not be attempted presumptuously with the iron except when it is small; you must try it, and investigate it with your finger. If you find it resembling a fatty tumour and not suspended by any vein, then cut it out as tumours are cut; and extract it with what is contained of the cyst if there is one; but if there is none, then investigate it entirely. Then treat the site with what is required of its healing, until it is cured.
Chapter 45.
Regarding incisions over the kinds of tumours.
There are many kinds of tumours, and I have already spoken about all their kinds in the classification; now it is necessary that I explain here the difference between a Tumour and an Ulceration, since this causes doubt.
I therefore say that when there is exiting heat and fever, as well as violent pains, until the superfluous boiling subsides and putrefaction is complete, then indeed do fever and heat quiet down.
When there is no heat nor fever and the pains contain them within a sifachin bag, which is their own sack, and it matches the colour of the body; and they begin like chickpeas, becoming like a batecha, growing larger or smaller.
And there are two types: either fatty; or they contain moisture. The colors of the humidity are many, as I said before in my classification.
You must therefore, when you come to treating a Knot, examine it and inquire about it first with the instrument called an Intromission, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows.
And the way to inquire about abscesses and all Knots is to take this instrument and insert it into the moistest place you find in the abscess: then rotate your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has now penetrated the skin. Then stretch out your hand according to the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw the Intromission, and consider that which has come out on its track.
If therefore moisture comes out running, whatever its colour: then dry it with a superficial incision, as I said before about other abscesses.
And if moisture does not come out on the Intromission's track, then know that it is fatty: therefore make an incision above it in the form of a cross like this, as I taught you; and suspend it with hooks, scraping the skin all around gently; and keep watch over the bag if you can until the Knot comes out whole.
If the cyst is ruptured during the operation and it is not possible to extract it whole, which often happens, then remove it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
If any part of the cyst, small or large, is left behind, the lump will return for the most part.
If it overpowers you and a small part remains: then fill the wound at the end of your procedure with some sharp corrosive powders; bind up the wound and apply to it a hot poultice, and treat it with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
If therefore it is a large lump, then its two lips, and treat it with that which promotes flesh growth.
If on the other hand you have a pulsating or non-pulsating vein: then be quick and fill the place with pounded fig; leave it tight for two or three days until the wound decays and the boiling of blood subsides, then return to cutting that which remains of the lump.
Chapter 46.
A note on the instruments required for cutting and piercing.
Of these there are three kinds of Introducers.
For one is large, another is medium, and the third small.
They should be made of iron rods with square ends so that they go swiftly into the abscesses.
These are the forms of the Probes, that is to say, piercers; one of them is called *beris*, that is, piercer and there are three kinds of it.
Among them are large, medium and small ones.
They agree to investigate the ulcers, abscesses, fistulas, and tumors caused by what is between them among the bones.
And for others they are made round, smooth and soft like large needles with which they probe; these are of gold, or of bronze, or iron, or silver.
And the best among them are those which are made out of gold.
And there are also made of black lead, which they call "Experientia", and these are suitable for probing into the cavities of fistulas so that when reflected with its softness it reflects those same reflections gently.
And they too are again three kinds. For among them there are long ones, medium-sized ones, and short ones according to the size of the fistula's cavity and its constriction.
The shapes of probes, and they too are of many kinds.
For among them there are simple ones, that is to say those with one curve; and they too are three kinds as you see, namely large, medium and small.
And among them there are blind probes; and they too are three kinds.
And among them there are hooks with two curves and they too are three kinds; and among them there are hooks with three curves and these also are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their proper place.
And these are the shapes of scalpels with which they cut and scrape away nodes and ulcers; and they too are three kinds since among them there is a large one, a medium-sized one, and a small one.
The ends of the instruments that are used for cutting are sharp, and their other ends are not sharp; they are designed this way so as to aid in the removal of nodules without causing damage to veins or nerves, and also so that the patient may be cured by cauterization rather than excoriation, finding some relief from the burning sensation instead of that experienced with abscesses.
They are made of brass, and resemble the rod with which alcohol is produced; at its wide end is a hidden spatulum, and it moves inside and out as you wish, as you see.
The shapes of the spatulas that are hidden between the fingers when piercing abscesses; these are not perceived by patients; and there are three types, large, medium, and small.
The shapes of the tourniquets with which blood flow is cut off; there are three types, large, medium, and small.
They should be made of brass or citron wood, round and slightly long, as you see; they must be thin.
And it is necessary that you have these two types of tourniquet with you, large and small; so that you can quickly stop the flow of blood in an emergency, or when medicine is not available.
However, do not use them to stop blood in any part of the body; only on fleshy parts like the calf and thigh, upper arms, breasts, belly, groin, or other similar areas, such as moist fleshy limbs.
And sometimes small instruments are made that resemble almonds in shape; they stop the flow of blood at a bleeding point or an incision into a vein or artery; and they are also sometimes round like this.
Chapter 47.
The treatment of male breasts that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen during sleep completion (that is, when they begin to wet the bed), until they resemble those of women; and they remain unsightly with disfiguring swelling.
Therefore, if anyone detests this (i.e., the swollen breasts), they should cut over the nipples with a lunar incision like this one: b to g. Then scrape off all the fat. Afterwards, fill the wound with flesh-coloured medicine (i.e., ointment). Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
If the breast hangs down and softens because of its size (as happens with women), then it should be cut on both upper sides with two similar incisions shaped like a crescent moon; each containing the other at their ends, so that there is one larger line enclosing the smaller according to this diagram: b to g. Afterwards, scrape off the skin between the two lips and remove any fat; apply what we have said about sutures and healing powders until it is healed.
If you cannot complete the incision that needs to be made due to the patient's restlessness or because of a flow of blood; then it is necessary for you to fill the wound with cautery sticks dipped in corrosive ointment, and leave them there until they corrode what remains of the fat. Then treat it until healed.
On the perforation of an abscess, which happens under the armpit.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses which happen under the armpit are of the hard type of staphylomas that contain cysts, and among them are those that contain fluids.
Those that contain fluids should be cut open with a crescent-shaped knife, like this: from line b to g. When all the pus has been drained from the abscess, fill it with an old piece of cloth and let it remain until the next day.
Then remove the cloth and dress it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
If the abscess is of the type of nodular staphylomas, then cut it open over the top as we have said above for staphylomas generally.
If the wound extends such that it discharges pus, then apply a caustic to it as we have said above.
Chapter 49.
On cutting open an abscess that happens next to an artery or vein.
When an artery is torn and the skin above it heals over, then often an abscess forms there; similarly, a vein can also form an abscess or swelling.
The signs by which you can recognise that an abscess and swelling are next to an artery or vein are as follows: when the abscess is next to an artery it will be long, collected deep within the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers you feel a sort of hissing sound.
And what lies over the vein is rounded and apparent on the body.
And the incision over this abscess is a mistake, especially when it is under the armpits, groin, neck, and many other places on the body; and it is very dangerous. Therefore, it is advisable to avoid treating it with iron, and one should also avoid what comes out from the ends of it or from the head.
With regard to what comes out from the swelling of the artery opening, make an incision on the skin lengthwise. Then open the incision with hooks, afterwards the artery; and free it from its coverings until it is uncovered.
Then introduce a needle under it, and make it penetrate to the other side; then tie the artery with double thread in two places, as I have taught you for the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then prick the place which is between the two ligaments with a spoon until all the blood comes out of it, and the abscess will be healed.
Then apply a treatment that generates pus until the ligaments fall off; afterwards treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
If the abscess is due to the incision of a vein, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess together with the skin as possible. Then introduce a needle under the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be double thread in it until you extract it from the other side. Then bind it to the same abscess with a good ligament: as I told you about binding *uva*, from two parts with two ends of the thread.
However, if you are worried that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with another thread under the abscess throughout the entire length of the needles insertion: push and tighten your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in its middle until what is inside comes out: then cut off the excess skin and leave tied that which was bound to it.
Then place on it a poultice that you soaked in wine and oil. Then administer treatment which is done with compresses and ointments until it heals.
Chapter 50.
On an abscess that happens due to nerve torsion.
Just as an abscess happens to the artery and the vein, likewise an abscess happens to nerves: which occurs either through bruising or from excessive exertion and similar causes; and it mostly arises in them at the sites of attachments or at the heel, and in every place where joints move: and it is a serious abscess.
Its colour is similar to the rest of the body, and it presents with many different appearances without pain: and when it is pressed vigorously, the patient feels a faintness like swooning.
And it is not an abscess that collects deep inside the body, rather it lies under the skin and shifts to every side; it does not move forwards towards the front or backwards towards the rear.
Therefore whatever is among them that occurs at joints should not be invaded with the iron [i.e., scalpel]. Perhaps contraction may occur.
Remove the skin from it with a spatula if it is on its head or forehead. Therefore, if it is a small abscess, hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then lift it with a hook and scrape it; then remove it and dress the wound with stitches: and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On cutting open an abscess which occurs on the belly.
Some people often get swellings on their bellies and other parts of their bodies which are called fungi because they resemble mushrooms.
Whose root is thin and whose head is thick and the lips are turned outward. And there are some which are small, and others that become very large.
And I myself have seen a man with two such swellings on his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else: there was no difference between them, both being white and having small roots, and their lips turned outward and they broke open and moisture kept running from them.
So I cut them open and found one weighing about 10 ounces and the other 6. And in operating on them you must consider then whether the patient is moist-humoured, and the colour of the swelling white, and its moisture thin and slender: then cut it open with a broad spatula and have your cauteries ready over a fire.
For often a great deal of blood is expelled during its dissection: therefore act quickly if the blood beats you to it, then cauterize it.
If you see the patient afraid and timid about being cut with a knife, then take a decently made lead wire, and tighten it with an atheroma in the way we have described, leaving it there for two days.
Then add to the lead constriction... So you must not stop tightening the lead until it presses into the testicle so that it falls off by itself without any effort.
However, if the testicle is of a large root, then its dissection must be done with some fear and caution; especially those found in the belly.
Yet it is possible to cut half of it out. Then cauterize it so that it does not grow back.
Then look after the wound until it is healed.
And beware of cutting into a testicle that is dark in colour, with little sensation and an ugly appearance; for it is indeed a cancerous abscess; and I shall be back to speak more on Cancer.
Chapter LII.
 On the treatment of the navel hernia.
A navel hernia arises from many causes. Or from a tear of the sac above the belly; through which escapes either omentum or intestine, depending on what happens with other ruptures. The blood that flows from the vein or artery, according to what has been stated above. Or from an obstruction caused by windiness within it.
But if it is due to a crack in the bone and an exit for pus: then its colour resembles that of the body's complexion; and it is soft, without pain; and a different site appears. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then its site differs even more from what we have described. When you therefore press it with your fingers, it becomes hidden; then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it; and it increases greatly upon entering the bath and during heavy labour.
But if it is due to moisture, it is soft; then when you press it with your hand, it does not become hidden nor constricted, but it increases.
If however it is due to blood, then with these signs an abscess appears towards a blackish shade of the skin's complexion.
But if it is due to flesh born within the body, then it is an abscess that is serious, thick, hard and confined according to one quantity.
If however it is due to windiness, then its touch is gentle.
And the operation regarding it is as you should then consider that if the prominence of the navel is due to arterial or venous blood, or windiness; then you ought to be prohibited from its cure. For in it is fear and dread, as I have taught you in the chapter where I said abscesses due to arteries and veins.
If the bulge around the navel is due to the intestine or the womb, you should instruct the patient to hold their breath and stand while stretching out their body. Then mark with an encaustic around the entire navel. After that, instruct him to lie on his back between your hands. Then encircle with a broad spatula around the navel over the area you marked with an encaustic. After that, extend the middle of the abscess upwards with a large hook. Then bind him tightly around the circumference with a strong thread or with a cord of firm silk binding: and let the knot of the binding be on the right side.
Then open up the middle of the extended abscess above the binding. If you find it already caught by the binding, then extract with the right hand and insert your index finger into it, pushing the intestine towards the interior of the belly: and if you find the womb, take hold of it with the hook and cut off its superfluous parts.
But if an artery or vein opposes you, then encircle it firmly. Then return to your operation. Take two needles and insert into them two strong threads: then introduce the two needles you have inserted around the abscess in a cross-like manner until they penetrate it.
Then tighten the abscess in four places over the needles and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the stretched flesh putrefies and drops off by itself; or cut it when it ulcerates and putrefies.
Then treat it with whatever ointment is required until it heals.
If the navel has a flesh-colored knot or an indentation filled with moisture, then one should treat it as if it were a concave abscess, as we've mentioned. And draw out the blood or moisture that you find within it.
Then treat it with whatever hardens the wound.
Chapter 53.
On treating cancer.
We have already mentioned the types of cancer and how to treat them with medicine; we've also warned against treating it with iron lest it be ulcerated; furthermore, we spoke about cancers formed in the womb and precautions regarding their treatment.
The ancients have said that sometimes cancer is located where it can be entirely removed; for example, cancers of the breast or thigh and those in similar external locations can all be wholly extracted, especially when they are small at the outset.
But once it has spread and grown large, one must not approach it.
For I could not heal anyone of it, nor have I seen any before me who had succeeded in curing it.
And the treatment for it when located as we've described is to precede and cleanse the sick person of black bile several times. Then you must bleed them if they present with an apparent fullness.
Next prepare the sick person for treatment by placing them within it.
Then throw into it hooks suitable for this cancer. After that, hollow out the entire ulcer from every side with a probe, thoroughly examining it until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood run freely without cutting away the ulcer quickly; instead, squeeze out the places [of infection], and wipe off all thick blood with your hand or whatever is possible there among the instruments.
However, if a flow of thick blood from an arterial or venous incision opposes you, then cauterize the vein until it cuts off the blood supply. Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
On the Treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter 54. We have already discussed the different types of dropsy and how water accumulates; we also gave the signs for each type as well as its treatment with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron, it is only the type of ascites; and it cannot be treated with iron for tympanitis or hyposarcia because these are deadly.
When you have already treated this type of dropsy called tympanitis with medicines but it did not yield any results, then consider the following... For if the patient has become weak or is suffering from another illness in addition to dropsy, such as a cough or stomach pain and similar ailments, then beware of treating them with iron since it could be dangerous.
If however you see that the patient has an abundance of strength and is not suffering from any other illness except dropsy, and they are neither a child nor an elderly person, then this is how to proceed: lift the patient up between your hands while a helper pushes on their stomach with their hand forcing water downward with comb-like motions.
Take a sharp awl, shaped like this. Let there be a straight line divided into two parts with the longer one ending in an acute angle just like your awl. However, let there be some degree of shortening so that it does not pierce too far when you are operating and damage the intestines.
Consider this. For if the swelling of dropsy originates from the intestines then you must extend your incision three fingers' breadth downward from the navel, straight down to the pubic bone.
But if the dropsy is due to illness of the liver, then let your incision be on the left side three fingers' breadth from the navel.
And if the dropsy is due to illness of the spleen then let your incision be on the right side; and it should not be made on whichever side he wishes to lie either so that the superfluities do not flow there, weakening him further.
Then pierce through the entire skin with your instrument. Then introduce your hand into the incision and lift it with your awl between the skin and flesh as if you are scraping it; let that which is scraped off be of a quantity equal to a fingernail or thereabouts.
Then pierce in this way until the awl reaches an empty space; here is where water will be found. Then withdraw the awl and introduce this instrument into the hole: And it is like a tube; it is made of silver or copper or bronze, flexible and clean: at its lower part there is a small hole and along its sides are three holes, two on one side and one on the other: and its end is cut with a slit like that of a reed, as you see here: at its upper end there is an encircling ring.
For when the instrument reaches water, it immediately sinks onto the instrument; therefore, remove it from the water within an hour's time.
If you remove it too soon, within an hour the patient might die from a loss of vital spirits or they may suffer a swoon that is near to death.
But remove it according to its strength, and according to what the patient's condition indicates to you regarding the strength of their pulse and their well-being.
Then withdraw the instrument, and keep the water.
This is because it adheres immediately to the skin that retains the hole that is above the navel; of which I told you how to pierce it in that manner.
On the next day, reinsert the instrument if you see that the patient can tolerate it; then remove a small amount from the water as well.
Do this for several days without fear, taking care to avoid error, until there remains only a little of the water.
But if you fear for the patient and let out a large amount of water, then treat it with burial in hot sand, and profuse sweating in the bath and the sun, and watch for thirst; and also treat it with drying medicines until it is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, flanks, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I described earlier.
On treating children who are born with their urine passageways unpierced.
Chapter 55.
When any child emerges from its mother's womb with the head of its penis unpierced, or with a narrow hole, or in an incorrect location.
We must therefore provide immediate assistance with its perforation as it occurs using a very thin spatula, in this manner.
Then place a thin lead peg into the hole and tie it there; and keep it in place for three or four days.
When he therefore wishes to pass urine, it should be removed, and he may urinate. Then return him there.
And if you do not place the lead there, it is possible that the urine which passes over the wound will not allow it to close up.
However, the man whose wound is narrow should be treated with lead as we have said, for many days until it widens.
Those in whom the wound is not in its proper place will be injured. This is because in those who are born with such a wound it is located at the end of the penis; hence they cannot pass urine until they lift the penis upwards with their hand. Nor is it conducive to generation for him because the semen cannot reach the uterus directly; and this is a very foul sickness.
And the manner of its operation is that the patient must lie face down on his back. Then take hold of the end of his penis with your left hand and stretch it forcibly; thereafter cut off the head of its glans from the place where it joins onto the shaft, using a knife or an extremely sharp spatula: the incision should be like that made in a reed, or as if you were cutting roots, so that its middle becomes like the glans: and ensure that the wound falls exactly in the middle as required.
And take care during your operation to avoid blood flow. For it often happens thus. Therefore oppose him with that which cuts off the blood supply, and tend to the wound until it is healed.
On the various occurrences of inflammation and putrefaction, blackening, and sticking together which happen to the prepuce and glans penis.
Chapter 56.
These inflammations often occur on the penis and there is an ugly fleshy swelling.
And one of these is malignant while another is not malignant.
Therefore the non-malignant one should be treated by suspending it with a fine hook and cutting it off until you have cleaned it all. Then place over it lint soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of the whole thing afterwards with dyaphinicon ointment until it is healed.
If the inflammation is malignant and of an ugly colour then it should be treated with a cautery after its incision and scraping.
However if the inflammation is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised person and part of it lies within the foreskin while another outside then it should be treated by removing first that which is inside until it becomes firm, then treat externally; because when you treat both at once the foreskin won't heal without a perforation.
And these occurrences of blackening and putrefaction also happen to the testicles. You should therefore hollow out all that is already blackened and what wants to be corrupted, or has already been corrupted.
Then sprinkle over it after that with honey what has already been crushed with flour of pomegranate rinds and powdered herbs.
Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
However if there should be bleeding, then administer the lunar caustic with a cautery, in this form.
The caustic is indeed beneficial for two conditions at once, namely bleeding and wounds when corrupted.
But if the head of the rod corrodes and is destroyed entirely within an hour: then you must insert into the penis a leaden tube so that the patient urinates over it.
In cases of the foreskin sticking to the head of the rod; and this sticking does not happen except in someone whose foreskin is healthy, and has not been cut over it: and sometimes sticking happens because of injury or swelling: you must therefore scrape it with a blunt spatulum until the bond dissolves, and the head of the rod becomes free from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, you must therefore scrape something from the head of the rod and from the foreskin. This is because when the foreskin is thin it might be pierced quickly on account of its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and head of the rod with a fine linen cloth, which has already been moistened in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
The wound should then be treated with astringent wine until it heals.
Chapter 57.
Regarding the cleansing of infants and the treatment for mistakes occurring during this process...
Circumcision is not just a solution to restoring continuity like other wounds; however, as it is our doing and at our will  especially for its use being proper in boys  we must mark this operation with an improvement and provide a smoother path leading to their health.
I say then that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books since they do not use it in their laws and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
That is because I have found that most craftsmen and phlebotomists perform cleansing by cutting with a razor and scissors; they use cauterization and ligatures with thread, and incisions with a nail.
Indeed I have tested all these methods and found no better way of cleansing than with scissors and a thread-ligature.
For when one uses the razor for cleansing, skin often escapes (and is missed). Because the foreskin's skin has two layers; therefore perhaps the upper layer is incised and the lower one torn - forcing another incision and causing pain. And with the cleansing done by cauterization - that is, with a moxa cigar which cobblers use  the genital member's tip incision is not sealed since it may enter its hole.
But with the cleansing by nail, perhaps the iron pierces (the member) and ruins your operation; boys' skin is short by nature and they are often born in such a way that they do not need this cleansing  I have seen it myself.
The method of wound excision using scissors and ligating with thread has proved a good technique for me: because the scissors are proportionate to the size of the incision; therefore, that which is sharp above is like that which is sharp below. When you thus hold your hand, the two sharp edges are brought together and make an incision with one motion in a single movement of time; and it makes a compression with a similar shape containing the skin of the rod from every side without any slip or mistake at all.
The way of performing this operation is to make the patient believe, especially if it is a child and one who can understand somewhat, that you are not doing anything but tying a thread around their rod; and then let them go until another day.
Then make him enjoy himself and be happy in every way you can for that day from the fact that his understanding has received this knowledge. Then make him stand between your hands which are positioned to support his weight and not have him seated; and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that the child does not see them at all nor any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand onto his rod and blow into the skin; and pull it upwards until the head of the rod emerges. Then clean it from what dirt has gathered on it.
Then ligate the marked place with doubled thread. After that, tie slightly lower down another similar ligation below it. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the lower ligation place with a good grasp; and make an incision between the two ligations. Then lift the skin upwards quickly and extract the head of the ligament. Then let the blood run gradually (for it is better) and place powder on top; then put a cloth over the powder which has been spread with the yolk of an egg boiled in rose water, beaten together with fresh good rose oil; and leave him on this until another day; and treat it with the rest of the cure until it heals.
This is the shape of the scissors for cleansing.
There should be two sharp ends and they must converge; the nail of which shouldn't protrude from them; and let both edges have a length equal to that of their handles.
But an error occurring during cleansing is when the entire inner skin or part of it escapes at the incision site.
Therefore it is necessary that you stretch it with your finger for some time before the incision and cut it evenly.
If you cannot hold it with your finger then extract it with a hook and cut it.
If however three days have passed and what is under the swollen ligament remains as an abscess then leave it until the abscess becomes warm and scrape it with a lancet, and cut it according to your preparation; and beware of the head of the ligament. For it won't harm him.
Treat it with what heals wounds from the powders we described in the treatise on powders; and if it is cut from skin above a measure and protrudes upwards then that won't harm him either.
Take care of it with what we have said, until he is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the extraction of retained urine from the bladder.
Retention of urine occurs when the bladder becomes obstructed by a stone, or from congealed blood, pus, flesh, and other such things that we have mentioned among ways to treat these conditions as outlined above.
And if the urine is not resolved and you see that his retention is due to a stone which already exists in the neck of the bladder, then it must be that the patient should be placed bent over his knees. Then his feet should be placed upon his back and the patient must extend his belly from the upper part of his spine, and he should draw in his breath as much as possible. Thus he is forced with the neck of his bladder towards an expulsive action for the stone, which will then result in a discharge of urine.
But if this does not resolve as we have said and the matter is severe for the patient then you must proceed to its extraction with an instrument that is called a syringe, which should look like this: It should be made of silver, and fine, soft, concave like the quill of a bird in the fineness of a pencil lead, long as the length of one palm; it should have a small nozzle at its tip.
The manner of urine extraction with it is as follows: Take a doubled thread and tie some wool or cotton to its end, but securely; and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe, and cut off any excess from the wool with scissors, then push the end through the nozzle like a ramrod.
Then lubricate the syringe with oil, or butter, and an egg white; and make the patient sit on a seat, and insert the catheter, and moisten his penis with oils, olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the penis with ease until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double it above on the upper side from the navel.
Then push the syringe inside until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that he has now reached an empty space; and this does not happen according to this order unless because of the meatus, where it goes in, is twisted.
Then pull out the thread with wool gradually. The catheter will follow the wool.
Then pull it out and make the urine flow through its path; and repeat with the syringe, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
On the quality of bladder irrigation with a syringe.
Chapter 59.
When there is an ulcer in the bladder, or blood has solidified in it, or it becomes blocked with pus and you want to inject water and medicines into it; then use a syringe, which is what this instrument is called, and this is its form:
It is a syringe, that is, closed. And it has three holes on two sides of one part and one hole on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place where that which is being pushed resides should be sized to fit what it is meant to enclose without addition until such time as something is pulled with it and moisture is attracted by its pull; and when it is pushed, expel with it far away: just like how a cistern works by pumping naphtha, or Greek fire, during the battles of Mars.
So when you want to send moisture into the bladder, put the end of the syringe into the liquid and pull with it what is pushing upwards; for moisture will be drawn up by the suction power of the syringe.
Next insert its end into the tube as we described for the syringe. Then push the moisture with what pushes; for that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it.
The subtle enema is shaped to administer an enema to the bladder.
It shall be made of silver or brass; its head will be higher up like a small funnel with a pouch underneath into which the ligature falls.
Then take a goat's bladder and put into it some moisture with which you want to administer an enema to the bladder. Then tie it between two pouches with a strong ligature of double thread; heat that moisture slightly over the fire.
Next put the end of the enema into the tube; then hold your hand over the bladder with a suitable ligature until the patient feels that moisture has already reached their bladder.
If the bladder is not available to you, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; perforate it with holes over its entire circumference. Then introduce a thread firmly into those holes as they revolve. Then assemble the circle as you would a distaff: once you have placed in it whatever you wish of moistures, and oils, and waters.
Then bind it to the instrument; and do with it as you did with the bladder from expression by hand until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On extraction of the stone.
I have already spoken about the types of stones and their treatment with medicine, and I described the differences between a kidney stone and bladder stone, along with its signs; I mentioned a stone which requires manual intervention or surgical incision; I also spoke about a true bladder stone, and one fixed to a stick. I am now explaining this with clear exposition and brevity.
I say therefore that a true bladder stone most commonly occurs in children.
And from its signs are that the urine comes out of the bladder like water in its thinness; and there appears in it white grit, and the sick person rubs his penis and labours with it, and hangs down frequently. Then he stands up, and the anus comes out with it in many of them.
And healing is easy for children until they reach the age of fourteen. And it is difficult in old people. However, for young people it is moderate; that is, for him who lies between the two extremes; for the one whose stone is larger, healing is easier; but if small, his cure is the opposite.
When we reach the point of treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema that extracts all feces from their intestines; for this can sometimes hinder the discovery of the stone during examination.
Then the patient should be taken with their feet first and shaken and moved towards the lower parts of their body so that the stone descends into the bottom of the bladder or leaps from its high position several times.
Then have him sit between your hands while prepared, and his hands should be under his hips so that the bladder is completely sloped towards the lower parts.
Then examine him, and touch him externally.
If you therefore feel the stone in its place, then hurry immediately with an incision upon it.
But if it does not fall under your touch at all, you must clean your left-hand index finger with oil for a child or the middle finger of an adult and insert it into their anus to search for the stone until it lies beneath your finger; then turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and force it to the exterior opposite the location where you wish to make the incision; instruct one assistant to press on the bladder with their hand while another stretches the scrotum with his right hand upwards, and the other removes the skin beneath the scrotum away from the place of the section.
Then insert the scalpel, which has this shape: [a picture of an ancient surgical instrument]. Find the place between anus and testicles but not in the middle on the left side of the buttocks: make the incision above the stone itself with your finger inside the anus so that the cut is made transversely to be wider externally than internally according to the size of the possibility for the stone to exit from it, no greater.
Perhaps the finger compresses a stone that is near the incision and it exits without difficulty.
And you should know that since the stone has angles and edges, its exit is difficult because of them.
And if it is smooth, like a gland, and rounded, its exit will be easy.
Therefore, to those with angles and edges, add it to the wound.
If it does not come out in that way, then you should use a hook on it: or compress above it with an off-center lever, the end of which is like a crescent moon, to press on the stone and not emerge from it; or insert below it a slender instrument with a curved end.
But if you cannot above it, then enlarge the hole somewhat. If something resists you with blood, cut away that part with scissors.
But if there is more than one stone, then push the larger towards the bladder's mouth first. Then make an incision above it. Next, push the smaller one after that; and do likewise if there are more than two stones.
If it is very large, however, you must not cut above it with a wide incision. For it happens to the patient that either he dies or has frequent dribbling of urine: on account of this, since the wound does not heal completely.
But administer his evacuation until it comes out; or insert hooks into its fracture with scissors until you extract it piecemeal.
Once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood; compress it, and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: to settle the hot abscess.
Then turn the patient onto their front over their neck, and do not release the ligature until the third day. When you have released it, bathe the place with water and lots of oil.
Then treat it with duafalan ointment and basilian ointment until it is healed.
If an abscess forms in the wound with added heat and corrosion, or similar; like if blood freezes in the bladder and prevents urine from passing: it is known by the passage of blood with urine. Insert your finger into the wound and draw out that blood. For if it remains, it will provoke the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; apply every kind of suitable treatment to it until it is healed.
During the entire course of treatment, it is necessary that you bind together both thighs and draw them close, because of the medications being placed on the site.
But if it is a small stone and lodged at the opening of the penis, and stuck within so as to prevent urine from passing; then treat it with what I described before you resort to cutting. For many times one may be spared the knife through this treatment, for I have already proven it.
And it is necessary to take a perforator made from steel iron, its shape being as follows: triangular tip, sharp point, fixed in wood.
Then take a string, and tie it with that to the stick under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the piercing iron into the stick with ease until you reach the stone itself; and turn the piercer by hand on that same stone little by little: and try its puncture until it emerges from the other side.
For urine is immediately released.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer side of the stick. For it will break, and exit with urine, and the patient will be healed.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you due to something that prevents it; then tie the string under the stone and another string over the stone. Then cut above the stone on that same stick between the two bindings. Then extract it. Afterwards untie the binding and clean frozen blood that forms on the wound.
And it is not necessary to bind the string under the stone unless you wish to prevent its return into the bladder: and another binding above [the stone] unless when you untie the string after exiting the stone, skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and for that reason it is necessary for you when you tie the upper string to raise the skin upwards so that it returns at your completion of the procedure and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
The removal of stones from women's bodies.
Stones rarely form in women.
However, if one of them has stones, then the cure is difficult and is prevented because of many modes.
One of these is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who reveals herself to a doctor when she is chaste or among those with husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art well, especially surgery with the hands.
And the fourth is remoteness from the stone's place; hence it requires deep incision, which involves fear.
If necessity drives you to it, then you should take a female doctor who knows well; and she is rarely found.
If you lack that, then seek a chaste and subtle doctor; and present to him an obstetric woman well taught on women's matters or one who knows part of this art: so make her present, and chiefly instruct her to do everything which you order concerning investigation above the stone.
First is to look if the woman is a virgin; then you should put your finger into her anus and seek for the stone.
If you find it, hold it under your finger; then instruct the obstetric woman to put her finger into the patient's vulva and look for the stone after placing her left hand on the hip and squeezing it well.
If you find a stone, then you should move it gradually from the urethral opening towards the lower parts with all your strength until you reach the hip joint with it.
Next, cut over it at the midpoint of the groin near the hip joint on whichever side it is prepared for him and feel the stone on that side; and his finger should not be removed from the stone, grasping under it; and let the incision be small at first. Next, insert your finger into that incision.
Next, insert your finger into that incision. If you feel the stone, then make the incision larger according to how much the stone protrudes from it.
And be aware that there are many types of stones. Of these, some are small, some large; some smooth, others rough; some long, and others round with branches.
Know then its type so that it may be shown to you by this over what you want.
If blood overpowers you, then add some powdered frankincense to the place and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out; and do as I said when extracting stones from men's bodies, and prepare those instruments with you to assist in your operation.
If a flow of blood overpowers you and you know that it is coming from the artery which has been cut; then place some powder on the spot and bind it with suitable compresses: do not change it: leave the stone alone and don't extract it. Perhaps the sick woman will die. Then treat the wounds.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood is abated after some days, and the place becomes corrupt, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
On cutting open a watery hernia.
A watery ram is not anything other than a collection of moisture in the spermatic cord, which lies beneath the skin containing the egg; and it is called a spermatic cord.
And sometimes it is in its own sac which nature has prepared for it on the side of the scrotum where the egg lies; and this is another skin of the testicle between the spermatic cord that we spoke about, and this happens only rarely.
And indeed the generation of these rams is from a weakness that befalls the testicles; therefore this material is poured out upon them. And sometimes it happens after a blow on the testicles.
And this moisture is of many colours. Or else its colour is greenish-blue, or it is red like blood, or swarthy, black, or white and watery, and this last is the most common.
And the signs by which it may be known where the collection of water lies, are these. For if it is in the spermatic cord that we spoke of, then there will be a round abscess like an egg for length; and the testicle does not appear because moisture surrounds it on every side.
If there is moisture in the cloth itself, then the abscess is round with an ear-like part, and due to this, it is considered another type of egg.
And if moisture is between the skin of the testes and the white scrotum, then it falls under a different category.
When you wish to understand the colour of moisture, then test the colour of the moist abscess with a square-shaped probe which precedes its shape. According to that which emerges on the probe, judge about what is inside it.
When we come to treatment with the iron, you should then instruct the patient that they must be bled if possible and see their body as being full.
Then the patient should lie on their back over something slightly elevated and place many cloths beneath them.
Then sit on the patient's left side and instruct your assistant to sit at their right who will stretch out their penis towards one of two sides of the scrotal skin and towards the navel area.
Then take a very wide spatula and cut the scrotal skin from its middle lengthwise towards the comb; let this incision be made according to an even-distanced line that divides the scrotal skin until you reach as far as the white scrotum: then scrape it and observe it or watch out for this, so that you can cut it away: and make your scraping from the part which is suspended with the egg more; and carefully probe using this scraping according to what is possible for you.
Then pierce the water-filled scrotum with an ample hole and extract all of its water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and stretch the scrotum upwards, and do not touch the skin covering the testes: and cut the scrotum however it is possible for you to cut it, either as a whole or in pieces, especially its thin side. But if you do not carefully examine it, there will be no safety in its incision, that water returns.
If however the egg moves outwards from its skin during your operation: then when you have finished the scrotum incision, bring it back. Then join the two lips of the testes' skin with a suture.
Then care for it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
If you find the egg corrupted by other blackness, then you must tie its vessels, which are its suspension, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testes with its suspension, and extract the egg: afterwards care for it with what we have said.
If however water has gathered in the two parts, then know that there are two branches: therefore cut off another part equally as you did with the other one.
And if it falls to you that there is one operation, then do this: afterwards wipe the blood away. And introduce into the incisions wool soaked in oil, or in rose-coloured oil: and place outside the wool that you have steeped in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testes, and navels of the abdomen: and place doubled cloths on top, which are compresses: and tie them from above with a bandage having six folds like this.
Two cloths should be taken and soaked, then filled with red lead powder according to this likeness: the ends which are pressed together will have a piece of cloth or wet wool; they will be bound with bandages on the arms from shoulder to armpit: one end is placed over the anus up to the back, and the second covers the side up to the breast area: two ends cover the thighs below, and the other two ends cover the groins. The whole binding should then be done tightly around the arms in the shoulder girdle region.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with the cautery instead of cutting it with an iron tool; take a thin cauterizing knife and cut the skin of the testicles with it, and heat it as we described earlier until some white substance containing water appears; then take the cautery in this shape.
The letter resembles Greek characters.
Then make a hole in the white substance with it (the cautery), which is hot until all moisture comes out.
Then stretch the white substance with hooks, scrape it with a thin hot cautery, and cut into it as much as you can until you have removed all of it.
And be careful not to touch the egg with fire (the cautery).
Also remember that this operation is safer, less likely to cause blood loss, and better than the one involving cutting (i.e., incision).
If a hot swelling or bleeding or some other complication occurs during the operation (i.e., incision) or cauterization, then it should be treated with appropriate therapy as mentioned above.
If however the patient is fearful and does not expect to survive this operation because of its horror: then perform the perforation as I have described it: and so it shall be.
When you have confirmed for yourself by what we said about the meanings that the branch is watery: then you must make the patient sit on a raised seat.
Then perforate the abscess on its lower part with a spatulate object that is wide: and make the perforation according to the length of the body, leaving an ample opening until all water runs out.
Then place on the spot a poultice, binding it in place, and let it remain until all residual water has run out: then treat the wound until it is healed.
If however there is any hindrance to the egress of water at the time you perforate it: and if this is only because a white membrane causes obstruction at the mouth of the wound, preventing the exit of water: then you must introduce into the wound either a feather or that instrument by means of which hydropic fluid is extracted, its tip having been first sharpened: or add this to your procedure upon the wound.
And you should be aware that water returns and collects after six months or thereabouts. When therefore it has collected, then repeat the operation in exactly the same way, and the patient will pass his days.
Chapter 63.
On the treatment of fleshy branches.
Be aware that in the treatment of this branch, fear often leads to ruin in many situations. Therefore, it seems to me that his dismissal is a salvation from it.
And I am reminded of the operation on it, and the appearance of cellulitis.
I say, therefore, that many abscesses occur in the bodies from which the testes are composed; and this happens for many reasons, namely...
Or from acute or sharp superfluity that is poured out towards the testes. Or from impact/strike.
And the colour of the cellulitis is according to the colour of the body, and no pain is found with it; and this abscess is deep/serious.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, whose colour is brown, and there is no sensation with it.
And sometimes it happens from the blockage of arteries, and their inflammation; as has already been recalled earlier: or from the inflammation of veins.
That which is among them due to the inflammation of arteries is recognised by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers. And one must not touch it directly at all.
That which happens from the inflammation of veins does not discharge anything upon being compressed with the fingers.
And now it is possible that an incision be made over this appearance, and over the remaining flesh; and it must cut the skin of the testes. Then extend the scrotum upwards, and extract it with a white cloth; and free the spermatic cord from the testicle, and tie the testicle; and cut the spermatic cord after you free it from every side of its parts.
If the egg is consolidated with those newly formed flesh, then you must draw out the egg and cut it.
And if there is adherence between something from the siphon or in that which is between the vessels; then you must free up all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If however there is a growth of flesh at the place of adherence which is at the back; then you must cut all of it and extract the egg as we have said.
When therefore your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; afterwards treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids which is done with leeches.
A grape-like abscess wrapped up with bandages, resembling a swelling of the testicles; it becomes difficult for the patient in terms of movement and exercise, as well as walking.
And in the treatment of this illness there is fear due to that which preceded its recollection.
However it is necessary for us to say the operation on it according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore that you must make the patient sit on an elevated seat. Afterwards push the supporter of the testicles downwards. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with the vessels that are close to the rod; and let another assistant hold it and stretch it with a forceful stretching motion.
Then make an incision with a sharp spatula that is two finger-widths wide across the straight course of the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape it from all sides, as I told you when dealing with the extraction of arteries that are located in bony protrusions.
After that, fix on them a needle which has two threads, and tie it at the first of those places where there are veins; and tie it again at their last place. Then cut them in the middle of their straight course along the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from putrid, foul-smelling humors.
Then treat the wound with a cure for other wounds which aims to generate pus so that the vessels nourishing one of the testes may fall away. Indeed, it is not an evil because of this.
But if all the veins happen to be severed then they must remove for this reason both testes together with their veins; so that neither of them will suffer a lack of nourishment and shrivel or dry up because of the incision, becoming unbeneficial in this state.
Chapter 65.
On the cure for branches of the intestine.
The cause of these branches is from an incision that occurs over the navel on the abdomen in the groin area because of a rupture of the belly.
Why do the intestines herniate from that rupture down to one of the testes? And this rupture is either because of a hernia or its extension.
These two conditions occur due to many causes: either from blows, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting heavy objects, and similar things.
And the sign is, when it is due to excessive straining. It is a condition that happens gradually over a long period of time, and it does not happen suddenly; and it is an equal abscess pointing inwards (towards the intestines): because straining compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a tearing of straining, because it causes an intense pain at first suddenly; and it is an outward-pointing abscess, appearing close to the skin: and this happens due to the exit of the intestine, and its course towards the exterior of the strain.
And sometimes it exits with the intestine as well: and this is called an intestinal rupture or a hernia; and sometimes it occurs with wind (gas).
And sometimes faeces runs into the intestine and is retained there; and it is harmful to the sick person: because it causes severe pain, especially when pressure is applied.
And there is fear (of harming the patient) when treating these types of ailments with iron instruments; therefore, one must take precautions to avoid such accidents.
And the method of operating is to instruct the patient to push the intestine back into their abdominal cavity with their own hand if they are able and willing to comply. Then have them lie back on their neck between your hands: and lift up their legs.
Then pull the skin that follows onto its upper part, and make an incision along the entire length of the scrotum's skin. Then attach hooks to the two lips of the incision, according to what you need to open the incision with them; and let the incision be made as large as possible so that an egg can pass through it.
Next, scrape the scrotal sac and what is under the skin of the testicles until the white albuginea is revealed, which should be hard on all sides; then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, between the white albuginea, which is under the skin of the penis, and the secondary albuginea, and separate the adhesions that are at the back of the penis.
Then move the right hand towards the inner skin of the testicles; and with this action stretch the white albuginea upwards with your left hand; raise the egg with the scrotal sac towards the side of the incision; instruct the assistant to stretch the egg upwards; and you loosen the adhesion that is behind, once stretching is complete.
And feel with your fingers that there isn't anything inside the intestine wrapped around the hard white albuginea. If however you find anything there; then push it towards the lower belly.
Then take a needle which has a thick thread attached to it, made of ten threads of silk; and insert the same into the last scrotal sac, that is, the tunica under the skin of the testicles which follows the incision; then cut off the ends of the protruding thread until four threads remain. Then arrange some of these over one another in the form of a cross; and tie them with that scrotal sac we spoke about, which is under the skin of the testicles along a tough ligament until no vessel, which nourishes it, can send anything to it: so that there is no risk of a hot abscess. And place another ligature outside the first one, about two fingers away from it. And after these two ligatures, leave out a piece of the sifach, which is under the scrotal skin, about the size of a finger; and cut away all that remains around [the testicles], and remove one [testicle].
Then cut in the lower part of the scrotal skin where blood and pus are flowing, as we explained earlier.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and apply the ligature we described. And sometimes the white part of the scrotum that we mentioned is cauterized after its incision to prevent bleeding. For this happens often. And leave the ligature in place until it falls off on its own.
But if its falling off is delayed, then it should be bathed with warm water; and place on top of it what we described earlier until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the remaining treatment for wounds until it heals.
Chapter 66.
 Of hydrocele (watery tumor).
In this hydrocele, I have not seen anyone who has dared to operate on it with an iron (instrument).
And first of all they say that it happens as we described earlier in the case of hydrocele with fistula. That is, bind the cords loosely after their incision over them; then cut it open at its middle part and treat it finally with what opens it until the cords fall off; and treat the wound as we said before until it heals.
Chapter 67.
On ruptures that occur in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins as we said and there is an obvious lump that does not descend into the scrotum or if it has descended then this is slight but returns at all times: when it becomes prolonged over time with the patient, a fissure opens up in sifach (groin) so that the intestines fall down into sifach.
And this happens because of the extension of sifach which is in the groins as we said. That is to say that because the tissue of sifach has become stretched it becomes soft so that the spot hardens (and develops a lump) and protrudes.
And its treatment is with cauterization as was mentioned in the previous chapter.
And it is sometimes treated with the use of an iron tool in this way: have the patient lie on their back and place your hands either side of them. Then cut the ruptures spot which has hardened and is protruding in one slice according to a width of three fingers.
Then pull the alsifak (a bandage) tight to hold together what is beneath the skin until you feel the white tissue that lies underneath and follows it.
Take a cylindrical object and place this on top of the protruding area of the tissue and press it deep into the abdomen.
Sew together the two protruding areas over the end of the cylindrical object with a suture connecting one to the other and then remove the cylinder's end.
And do not cut the bandage at all nor apply egg whites or anything else as I have already made you aware of when treating with intestinal branches.
Then treat it with treatment for wounds. When you therefore cut the threads, cleanse it, and restore the wound until it heals.
For a hernia is contracted, not an added protuberance of rupture.
And the cautery is better in this place, for it is closer to recovery.
Chapter 68.
On softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
The scrotal skin of some men is softened many times over due to which the flesh between them also softens and its appearance is marred.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is seeking its treatment to make the sick person lie down on his back and then cut away all the skin that has softened above the normal skin.
Then join the two lips with a suture; and if you wish, sew first the superfluity of the softened scrotal skin with three or four sutures and secure them.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat with wound treatment the remainder of its wounds until it heals and the threads fall out.
Chapter 69.
On emasculation.
Know that emasculation is prohibited by our law; and for this reason I could have omitted to mention it in my book; and its mention here is not necessary save on account of two points.
One of these is that it should be within the doctor's knowledge when he is asked about it; and that he may know how to treat him for whom it has occurred.
Another way is that we often require the castration of certain animals for our livestock, such as rams, goats, and cats, and similar among animals.
I say, therefore, that castration is done in two ways. Or by abrasion. Or by incision and cutting.
In that which is done by abrasion, the way of operating is this: we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften, relax, and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and are no longer felt.
In castration by incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then bind the suspensory ligament and cut above each testicle with one stroke until two testicles come forth; then incise these after you have scraped both and do not let anything of the spermatic fascia remain except the thin part that is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that done by abrasion because abrasion may leave some of the testicles, so the animal desires intercourse.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphrodites in two ways.
A hermaphrodite is from men in two ways. One of them is that it appears in the space that follows, or on the skin of the testicles, what is between the two testicles, shaped like a woman's vulva, with hair; and sometimes urine runs from what is on the skin of the testicles.
Among women there is one type and it has a woman's vulva above the comb just like small male testicles completely protruding to the outside; of which there is one like a man's penis and two like two testicles.
And the cure for all three types, two from men and one from women, is because you must cut away the flesh additions until their imprint disappears. Then cure them with treatment for other wounds.
On the second type of men from which urine comes out, that is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation nor any cure for it at all.
Section 71.
On the excision of warts and protruding flesh on women's vulvae.
A wart may be added to a natural thing until it is disfigured and its appearance becomes ugly; and sometimes it grows on some women so much that it expands like a man's and reaches the point of intercourse.
You should therefore hold the superfluity of the wart with your hand or a hook and cut it; do not hesitate to cut deeply into its root so that there is no bleeding.
Then treat the treatment itself for wounds until it is healed.
Meat however arising is meat which is born in the opening of the womb until it fills itself, and perhaps comes out to the exterior like a tail; and because of this some ancients name the disease tailed. It is necessary therefore that we cut it like we cut warts, and treat it until it is healed.
On the treatment of alratitis which is an unpenetrated wound of a woman.
Chapter 72.
Alratitis is that there should be an unpenetrated wound of a woman or it should be a small hole. And it is either by nature or by chance/accident.
That which is by chance/accident happens due to an illness that has preceded it; and it itself occurs either from the meat born added or extremely fine or thick; and it occurs either in the depths of the womb or on its sides or at the top or bottom of it, and prevents coitus and impregnation and birth, and perhaps menstruation.
And its diagnosis is made by the gaze of an obstetrician if the obstruction is apparent nearby.
But if it is not apparent then seek it with your fingers or with a rod.
But if the obstruction is by extremely fine meat, and it is near the two lips then hasten and tear it apart.
And it must be that you place on the two lips some poultices.
Then place your two hands' index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread. Then stretch the two lips with strength until it is torn open slightly, and uncover the incision.
Then take some wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the wound; have the woman sit every day so that the wound does not close up with scar tissue.
If the wound is thick and dense, you must cut it with a scalpel that is six inches wide, similar to a myrtle leaf.
If the incision is formed from flesh, then lift it up with hooks and cut it; and have you on hand some medicines to stem blood flow without clotting, such as acacia gum, dragon's blood, and oil mixed with egg white.
Then insert a lead pipe of appropriate width so that the wound does not close quickly; keep it in for several days; and then administer linen thread made from dry flax, after which cure the rest with other medicines until it is healed.
And when other fleshly growths occur in the womb, they should be cut out in this way: while there is no cancerous abscess, for an iron implement must not come into contact with a cancerous sore.
Chapter 73.
For the cure of hemorrhoids, and red pimples on female genitalia.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the opening of veins, from which a great deal of blood flows out steadily.
When hemorrhoids are inflamed, they become purple; and I have already mentioned their types in the division of species, and their signs: and here I will say which of them can be cured, and which cannot.
I therefore say that hemorrhoids which are located at the opening of the uterus, and are not apparent to the senses: then they cannot be cured with iron.
Those hemorrhoids which are located at the opening of the uterus and are apparent to the senses, are those that can be cured.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to introduce the woman into a cold house. Then stretch out the purple areas with forceps or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then sprinkle over them during the flow of blood a powder made from the excised hemorrhoids without any modification: such as acacia gum, dragon's blood, frankincense, and similar substances.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. After that, place her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rinds, galls, and similar substances.
Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster from it for her back.
If the blood stops with this treatment, it is good; and if not, apply cupping glasses to her back and breasts without scarring.
Then take wool and soak it in the juice of tarathon, or the juice of sea-thorny head, or the juice of alant branches (that is, elecampane), with Pontic wine, and apply it as a poultice.
When the abscess subsides, then treat the place with ointments until it is healed.
The albarth, however, resembles the redhead of another bird, and it is of rough appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cut off what appears from it, as I have said elsewhere evenly; and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of the exit wound that occurs in the womb.
There occur in the womb many types of abscesses, such as cancer, and stony abscess, and ulcers, and adubelati, and alekilati, that is herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulae, and haemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thethel, and hot abscess.
And I have indeed already spoken of all these ailments and their types, and their signs, and their treatments in detail; it is necessary that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess that occurs in the womb when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and you want to know how its opening with an iron is done.
Therefore, it is necessary that you pay attention. Then if the pain of the abscess in its onset is sharp with its throbbing, and burning, and fever; and you see it redden; if sensation falls on it, then do not rush into perforating it; and treat it with that which promotes maturation until such time as the sharpness of the symptoms subsides.
Then you should have the woman sit on a chair that has two slippery seats, and lean back, or be supported over her back, and draw up her feet to the lower part of her belly; and let her hips be spread out, and place her arms under her knees, and bind both with a suitable bandage for it.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and use the tool to open the maternal opening.
And when you wish to use this tool, make sure to push with the rod into the depth of the woman's womb: so that what enters from the tool does not go beyond the depth of the womb and harm the patient.
But if the tool is longer than the depth, you must place some pads on top of the covering of the womb's depth: to prevent the whole tool from entering into the depth of the womb: and it is necessary that the helper places the handle, which runs through the tool, from the upper side: and hold the tool, and make the assistant turn the handle until the depth of the womb opens.
When therefore the emerging part appears, and is touched by hand, and is soft and gentle: then it is necessary to cut it near its head with a spatula an inch wide.
When the blood is drained, it is necessary to place on the wound lint soaked in rose oil: or green oil, in which there is some astringency: and put the lint, and extract the piece from the depth of the womb.
And place outside over the womb, and over the pubic hair clean wool soaked in water in which have boiled some apples.
Then it should be treated for two days with an ointment appropriate to the situation until it is healed.
And sometimes the womb and wound are washed so that they are flushed with water and honey: then with water in which is boiled lily root or long aristolochia: then return to the ointment.
If a wound is hidden internally within the uterus, then one ought to refrain from treating it with iron instruments; indeed, treat it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 70.
Doctrines of midwifery: how live infants who emerge with a distorted shape are treated.
It is necessary for the midwife to recognise first of all what constitutes normal delivery.
Therefore, the signs of it are that when you see a woman straining at the lower parts and wishing to sniff the air, and whatever is above her feels lighter and she hastens the baby's exit: then you know that this delivery follows the natural form, and its presentation is head first and the second stage with it: either suspended or hanging by the umbilical cord.
So when you see these signs, it is necessary to compress her abdomen so that the baby may descend swiftly.
For when it has descended head first, the second stage descends with it, and is cleansed of any superfluities by a good cleansing.
Anything other than this delivery is unnatural and to be deplored.
For sometimes the fetus emerges on its feet and its body comes out before its head and its feet and hands come together or one of its feet; or it comes out with its head and hands; or it comes out breech; and perhaps it turns onto its neck, along with similar unapproved forms.
Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters and beware of error and deception; and I am showing every form from them, along with how each condition presents itself, what it signifies, and how one should stand over it.
When the fetus exits head-first during its natural emergence and it becomes intense for the woman and childbirth becomes difficult for her, and you see her strength already weakened; then have her sit on a chair or have other women hold her: and apply vapor of wool with fenugreek decoction, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert between her fingers a small spatula and tear with it the amniotic sac, and cut it open with her nail until all its moisture is gone; then press on the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then the woman should be enema'd with fenugreek glue and sesame oil.
Then instruct her to push after the enema; then make her sneeze with ground cumin, and hold her mouth and nose shut for an hour. The fetus will exit immediately.
If two hands of the fetus exit first, you should pull them back gently and slowly. If it does not comply upon entry, then have the woman sit on a chair with her feet elevated; shake the chair vigorously on the ground and make sure she is held so that she doesn't fall during shaking.
If the hands still do not exit and the fetus dies, then cut open her belly and extract the rest of it; tie one hand with cloth so that it's stretched out and pull the fetus from its hand with equal force on both sides, for it shall come out.
The exit of an embryo head-first. When the fetus exits feet-first, you should press its feet upwards; then turn it slowly and balance it afterwards.
Then take one foot of his/her leg and gradually stretch it out.
When the pain reaches the thighs, then tell him/her to press it and make him/her sneeze with peppercorns; if God wills it, he will come out.
And if it does not come out as we described, then gradually withdraw the fetus until you place him/her in their natural position. For it will come out easily itself at that point.
But if it does not come out as we have described: then take from the mucilage of the nightegale, and sesame oil, and dissolved gum; pound all together in a mortar with a good pounding: then anoint with it a woman's woolen pad and place it on her abdomen. Then make her sit in warm water until she reaches the hypochondrium.
When you see that her lower body has been warmed up then apply a poultice of myrrh to her and place it on. When she has held the poultice for one hour then make her sit upon a seat. Then make her sneeze: press her mouth and nose; and gently press the lower part of her abdomen with compression. For at that point, the fetus will come out immediately.
Exit of the fetus onto knees and hands. When it comes out in this form then deliver by gradually inserting your hands. Then the woman will lie on her back with her feet hanging down towards her lower body and she will be lying on the bed with her hands folded. Then press gradually on his abdomen. Then extract what is beneath their feet from the mattresses until it is ready in the lower part. If the fetus does not exit, then take their feet, and move them with a violent motion. Then press gradually on what is above the hypochondrium until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then insert your hands and equalise the fetus gradually; and instruct the woman to push until the fetus exits.
Exit of the fetus hanging horizontally from your hands. There will be damage to their hand as you reduce it. If they cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed; and shake her legs with a violent shaking motion.
Then administer the lotion you prepared from mucilages.
If she takes up childbirth, then make her sit on a chair. Then strive to reduce the hand and equalise the fetus according to its natural shape; and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to push until it exits.
Exit of the fetus onto its neck, with hands spread out; and its face is towards its mother's back. It is necessary for the midwife to hold the hand of the fetus; then she should turn it gradually and equalise it gently.
When it is equalized, then place upon his wound what we have described from oil and mucilages.
Then instruct him to move gradually. Once you have done that, then make her sit on a chair, and instruct him to lean towards his right side. Then tell them to sneeze after you have made him sniff some snuff.
The prepared fetus comes out on its side. When it descends to the mouth of the womb in this manner with the caul, then cut the caul with your nail until all moisture is cleared away.
If it hangs over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from its navel so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you place it where it ought to be; and tell the woman to press herself several times for he will indeed come out by a gentle birth.
The birth of twins or of many children. You should know that twins often come to birth; sometimes three or four at a time. However this is an extraordinary thing, and rarely happens.
Five is beyond nature and they do not live at all; though the caul may contain them even when they increase, it still separates each one by its navelstring.
And sometimes they are born like one fetus is born naturally and easily; or they come by the ignoble birth as we have described.
If some of them are difficult during childbirth and reach that which we have described as unnatural presentations, then treat them as we have narrated: let there be a skilled midwife, and she should act with skill and slowness, and manage according to every presentation with what is prepared for her leading to health.
A reminder of that which is formed in the womb from embryos, and they abort.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more even ten: and it has been verified by me, that a woman aborting emitted seven, and another fifteen, all fully formed.
Which was done by measurement of the glorious sage.
All this, therefore, ought to be within the knowledge of the obstetrician. Perhaps she will come across one similar to it; therefore, oppose her with that which is required.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus as I have said in the section on medicinal treatment, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to use manual manipulation, then you ought to consider carefully.
If therefore the woman is of sound constitution, and she has no accident from which one fears loss of life; then the woman ought to lie on her back on a bed, with her head bent downwards, and her legs raised: and an assistant should hold her at both sides, or she may be tied to the bed so that her body is not dragged during extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the womb bone with moist oils, along with mucilage of althea, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages; then she should insert it into the womb easily. Then she should seek with it the place where to hook the fetus' hooks, and convenient places for that.
Therefore consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend head first: then hook the hooks on its eyes, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or below its chin, or on its fork (clavicles), or nearby places of its ribs, and below its flanks (hypocondria).
If however the descent is feet first, then on its pubic bone (symphysis), and on its mid-ribs (costae mediae).
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand; and place its curve between the fingers of her left hand: then insert with the hand easily, and hook the fetus in one of those places we have mentioned, until she reaches an empty space.
Then hook another hook on its opposite side, or a third if needed; so that there is an equal contraction, and it does not lean to one side.
Then it should be extended with an equal extension, and not just pulled straight; rather moved to every side so that its exit is eased; as happens when a tooth is removed.
And in what is between it (the fetus) there should be softening during the extension. If a part of it is retained, then the midwife must grease certain fingers with oil and insert them from that side so as to turn with them what is being held back.
If therefore the baby's part exits, then change the hooks to another place that is higher: do this until the whole baby comes out.
If therefore one hand comes out before the other and it is not possible to pull it back because of its constriction, then a cloth must be wrapped around it. Then pull it out until it comes out completely, cut it either at the ankle joint or at the elbow; and you should do so with the other hand and with both feet.
But if the baby's head is large or it suffers a constriction upon exit, or water has gathered in its head, then one must insert between the fingers a sharp-pointed spatula and split its head with this, extracting the water; or break its head open with an instrument called *Almisdac*, whose form comes together with those of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Similarly do so if the baby is of large-headed nature; then it is necessary to cut its neck with a scissors; or extract it with an *Almisdac*, as we have said. Then pull out the bones with forceps.
If the head exits and becomes constricted at the collarbone, then it must be split open until the moisture that is in its chest spills out.
But if it does not get constricted nor yield to being pulled out, then cut the head in pieces as much as you can.
If there is an abscess in the lower abdomen or it has become edematous then you must pierce it until moisture runs from it.
If the fetus is in a head-down position then pulling it out is easy and guiding it towards the maternal pelvis is straightforward.
If however it is trapped around the abdomen or chest then you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand and tear open its abdomen or chest until their contents run out.
If the other parts are removed but the head returns then the midwife should insert their left hand. If therefore the maternal pelvis is open then you should insert your hand deeply into it and search for its head with that same hand before grasping it firmly between your fingers until it reaches the maternal pelvis; after this introduce a hook or two hooks inside of it and pull it out with these tools.
If the maternal pelvis is cramped by hot inflammation then you should not strain yourself over it but rather administer evacuation of moist and fatty matter and apply poultices as well as sitting in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side then it may be turned; after this you should administer what we have said for live fetuses.
If this is not possible then it should be cut piecemeal and extracted.
And you must ensure that none of the membranes remain inside at all.
Once you have completed your procedure then you should administer what we have said for hot inflammation of the maternal pelvis.
If there is an occurrence of blood flow, then he should descend into styptic waters, and administer the remaining cure.
And I myself have seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was; then she became pregnant on top of it with another child, afterwards the other fetus also died. So it happened to him after a long time that there was an abscess in his navel, and it became swollen until it opened up: and he began to discharge pus.
I was called upon to treat him, and I administered medicine to him for a long time: and the wound did not heal.
So I placed on him some of the plasters with a strong drawing power: and a bone came out from its place. Afterwards, some days passed, and another bone came out. I was therefore amazed that there is no bone inside the belly.
So I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I therefore examined the wound, and extracted many bones while the woman was in her improved state of health: and now she has lived this way for a long time, and discharges very little pus from that place.
And I have not asserted this matter here as anything extraordinary, unless because there is knowledge in it, and assistance for that which the skilled physician administers with his hand from the treatment.
Chapter 77.
On the forms of instruments necessary in extracting a fetus.
The form of the vertigo instrument by which the womb is opened.
Here below is the form of the forceps, by which the handles are equalled out to which there are two pivots at both ends of two pieces of wood. However, this instrument for treating vertigo ought to be more slender and delicate; and so that it can be made either of ebony or boxwood.
And the width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers; and the edge of either one is about one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions made from the same type of wood, which are already fixed to both, the length of which is half a palm plus a little more: and the width of each is about two fingers or slightly more.
And these two additions are inserted into the vagina so that it opens with them when you rotate both vertigo instruments.
Another form similar to this one, more slender and lighter.
It should be made of ebony or boxwood, shaped like a pair of forceps. However, at its end there are two additions as you can see above; and the length of each addition is about a palm; and the width of each one is about two fingers.
When you want to open the womb with this instrument, then have the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging down and what is between her legs exposed. Then insert these two connected additions into the womb; as you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, evenly to the degree that you want from the opening of the mouth of the womb, until the midwife does what she wishes.
The other form of vertigo that the ancients described is the Form of Propelling by which the fetus is propelled.
The form of forceps, by which the large head is crushed, resembles a pair of tongs with teeth at the end, as you can see.
And sometimes it becomes elongated, like the forceps in this shape, as you can see, with teeth like a saw's, by which it is cut and crushed.
The shape of the hook with one barb.
The shape of the hook with two barbs.
The shape of the spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two spatulas, also broad.
All these instruments are put into practice; and the more their types are multiplied, and the greater number that is prepared by the craftsman, the quicker he becomes in his operation, and the higher in repute among men on account of this quantity.
Therefore do not despise any one of these instruments which is prepared for you. The need for them is indeed inexcusable.
Chapter 78.
Concerning the extraction of secundines (the afterbirth).
When the secundines are retained after childbirth, you should instruct the woman to hold her breath. Then make them sneeze with a feather: and squeeze your hand over their mouth and nostrils. If therefore it comes out through this, that is good.
If not: then take a pot and pierce a hole in its lid: put into it herbs that open the womb's mouth such as calament, rue, dill, chamomile, sea holly, woody-smelling cinnamon, and centaury: take all these herbs or some of them, and submerge them with water, then place them over fire.
Then place a reed funnel over the pot's lid hole and the other end into the womb's mouth: hold it until the steam reaches inside the womb.
Then make them sneeze as we have said. Indeed it will come out easily.
If however it stays after this treatment and does not come out: then instruct the midwife to dip her hand in oil of turpentine or marshmallow mucilage. Then she should insert it into the womb and search for the Secondary there. When she finds it, then let her grab it and draw it out gradually.
If however it is attached deep inside the womb, then she should insert her hand as we described until when she finds the Secondary and pulls it out slowly along its length so that the womb does not collapse under strong traction; rather, it must be turned with ease to the right and left sides: afterwards the amount of traction may be increased. The blade itself then obeys and is preserved by being free from adherence.
If the womb is constricted as we have already mentioned, treat it with sneezing and an ointment of herbs from a pot.
But if it does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then be careful not to tire yourself by attempting the extraction repeatedly.
What comes out of it from the womb must be tied to the woman's hip. Then give her an enema with tetrapharmacum ointment. For it will cause her to decay within days and be dissolved, and it shall come out.
But when it rots, an evil smell is raised from it to her belly and head, which harms the sick woman. Therefore suitable fumigations should be administered to that part of her body.
Some ancient practitioners have experienced the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Make an instrument by which to fumigate the woman suffering from Secondary Retention and menses.
Make it from a glass similar to an alcama or from zere: and place the broad end over fire: and let the fumigation be positioned over coals: hold it there until that fumigation is consumed: and repeat with another.
Chapter 79.
On the cure of anus which is not perforated.
Many children are born with their anuses not perforated, which thin cauterisation has already closed up. It is necessary, therefore, for the midwife to pierce it with her finger; and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp spatulam, being careful of the arm so that it does not touch it.
Then place over it wool soaked in wine and oil. Next treat it with ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear it will become blocked, then place in the opening a lead pipe for many days and remove it when the child is able to walk.
And blockage of the anus also occurs from the healing of wounds or abscesses. It is necessary therefore that the healing be cut open, then it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Chapter 80.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part (of the body).
Fistulas that occur in the lower body are nodules and swellings that happen outside the anus or in one place; they can be a single fistula or multiple ones.
When the nodule becomes old, it opens up and there runs out of it a watery white liquid or thin pus.
And sometimes there are penetrating fistulas among them. Penetrating fistulas are recognised by what comes out in the stool and by flatulence when the sick person uses the bathroom; perhaps worms come out of them too.
And there are fistulas among them when they penetrate into the bladder and all the way to the tip of the penis. And some penetrate as far as the hip joint and even to the tailbone.
From where the penetrating fistula is recognized as far as the anus, even for one that does not penetrate, you should insert your index finger into the anus and also introduce a fine probe of copper or iron into the fistula; when there is no curvature.
But if there is a curvature, then introduce into it a fine lead probe or an horsehair pin until you feel the probe or the pin on your finger.
But if you do not feel it completely and no something comes out of the orifice through evacuation nor wind nor worms as I said; then know that it is non-penetrating: so hasten to its cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating as far as the bladder or the urinary passage then its sign is the egress of urine from it and the hindrance of this so that the place may be consolidated with medicines.
If however it is penetrating as far as the hip joint or the bone of the hip then its sign is that a probe reaches there if there is no curvature up to the bone and the discovery of pain around the part and that pus always flows out from it; and also that treatment in it fails and it cannot be consolidated with ointment.
And for all these penetrating fistulae there is no cure at all and their treatment is labour wasted on them by stupid doctors who deal with it.
In those which are not penetrating and also fresh recovery is hoped for with the knife as I tell you and I have already proved it; and it is so that the patient should lie between your hands on his back and you raise his legs above his hips and let his hips incline towards his belly. Then they should insert a lead or brass probe if there is any twisting within the fistula until you know where it ends by using the probe to test.
If however he feels weak around the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel that the probe has already penetrated what was detected beyond which you would feel between your finger and the fistula or flesh, then indeed you know for sure it is penetrating; thus do not labour over it as there is no cure for it as we said.
They say however that flesh can be cured and by medication which is hoped to help, it should be done with a subtle fire cautery according to the size of the fistula as mentioned before, and insert it while ignited into the fistula until you reach the anus. Then repeat that twice or three times until you know all those added filtered flesh like bird feathers are burnt.
Then dress it with butter-soaked lint until those burnt flesh come out; then treat it with flesh-generating and consolidating ointments.
If therefore it is cured, that's good.
And if not, then it will never be cured with any other treatment.
And if the probe comes out and has not reached your finger which is inside the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or fistulous tissue between it and the probe; and you see that the fistula follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from where the fistula starts, and keep cutting with the probe which is in the fistula until your scalpel reaches the end of the probe, when the probe will be released and fall out.
Clean then those filtered flesh that resemble bird feather pipes so that nothing remains in them.
But if blood defeats you and resolves between yourself and the surgery so that you must cut those flesh out then it is better for what has happened and faster healing to cauterise with fire or sharp medicine.
For a fire-cauterion brings together good dispositions of burning those added flesh and cutting off blood and drying out moisture.
Then care for that by wrapping it in buttered linen bandages or crushed cabbage leaves until the wound gives out pus and those burnt flesh come away into the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments which generate hard flesh; and there are medicines that have both stypticity and drying qualities.
For once they become restored then it is already healed; and do not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has already reached deep into the anus and stretches out from excess body then put your finger into the anus and probe with it.
If therefore you feel a membrane or flesh between your finger and it being close to perforation then there is no surgery upon that unless by the way of faith and hope.
Which is because it administers upon that one of three ways: either to cauterise it as we said or cut it away until you reach its floor so that it's possible for you to insert dressings and care from nearby. And do not proceed far with cutting so as to not slice the anus-holding muscle and it happens there is weakness of bowel movement without will. Then treat it with what we have said.
It will perhaps heal; either remove the scab itself or cleanse it with what we have said, after you cut yourself close to the vein, as mentioned, either with tweezers or another sharp instrument. Then cleanse those exposed flesh parts that are in the wound as far as you can with scrutiny.
Then attempt the restoration of the whole wound with the incision and the upper hole where it has healed; there remains an open fistula on the inside part of the anus which is lighter over the perineum.
And sometimes a fistula follows like this: and that is when you insert the probe into the fistula; it lies on the side of the anus close to the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the anus; then take a pointed-probe, which is like a leathern awl, i.e., skewer, according to this shape: And insert into it a thread wound of five threads, and around that. Then introduce the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its bend.
If it then pierces inside the margin of the anus near to there, then extract the thread out of that hole; so that you insert your finger into the anus and draw out the end of the thread, and bring together both ends: and tie them such that you leave this for one or two days. The more the thread cuts into the flesh, bind it well until those parts which are between the two ends of the thread fall off; then treat the wound until it heals.
But if the mouth of the fistula does not pierce then make it so that it does by any means prepared for you unless this lies very deep. You indeed lack the ability to do this due to your arm, which prevents you from cutting it.
Then treat it as we've said until it heals.
Create a sharp-pointed spatula in the shape of a spine that splits the fistula, whose curvature is very acute, and one part is not as sharp so you do not cut what is unnecessary, as you see.
Chapter 81.
Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids from which blood flows due to their incision: and treat fissures.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways. Or they are inside the anus, like bags of charcoal or plums; or else they themselves are like grapes. And from them there are small ones, large ones; blood always flows from them, sometimes it is one hemorrhoid that bleeds, and at other times multiple do. And they occur outside the anus and on its edge.
But those hemorrhoids that are outside the anus have little moisture, from which flows a small amount of yellow fluid or thin blood; and they match the colour of the body.
And the treatment for internal hemorrhoids is to instruct your patient to go on all fours; and press until it comes out of their anus so you can see its appearance. That's why also use hooks to lift them; or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their base.
If they do not have hooks to hold them because of their moisture and softness, then take them with a rough cloth or with a cotton swab made from double-layered wool, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them open, and sprinkle on them after cutting some hot powders to act as a local cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what was described earlier about the procedure of cauterization. Then treat them with the remaining treatment until they heal.
But if the anus does not obey by releasing it, then give the patient an enema with a small amount of the biting enema, so that it washes what is inside the anus, and quickly obeys the release when the patient expresses himself.
However, if the thorns are external to the anus, then the matter is simple and easy; you should take them with your nail or hook them with a hook and cut them. Then treat them with what we said until they heal.
And for those who cannot bear the incision with an iron [blade], then you must administer their suture in this manner. Take a rolled-up thread and insert it into the needle. Then extract the thorns upwards and make the thread penetrate with a needle into its root from the other side; and roll up the two ends of the thread on the lower part of the needle such that they are at right angles to it; then tighten the thorn strongly with this binding. Then knot the thread and extract the needle.
Do that with all those who are helping you and let one of them go; don't allow yourself to be too hasty so as not to make the blood flow excessively.
Then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote, and put it on the anus; instruct the patient to rest. Then let him go until he falls.
When the helpers fall down, take care of them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
On the treatment of fissures. Indeed, they happen frequently due to dehydration of faeces and natural contraction.
When they do not respond and medicine does not help, it is necessary to scrape them with the point of a spatula or your nail until they become moist and remove from them the upper layer that prevents their healing. Then treat them until they heal as is appropriate.
But if they do not heal then repeat the treatment with more force than before until they bleed a lot and then make them suppurate; afterwards treat them until they are healed.
On the treatment of inverted piles, non-inverted piles, dry helpers, and ants.
Head (section) 82.
Know that Almirmar is nothing but a round knot of the colour of the body resembling the head of a nail; it occurs throughout the whole body especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes and causes pain when walking.
It is necessary, therefore, to cut what is around the nail, and it should be held with forceps or a hook, and then removed from its root.
Then treat it, and if you wish to cauterize it according to what has been described in its chapter.
On the other hand, there is one small, rough, flattened, circular protuberance on the dry athlis, above the surface of the body. And these often occur on the hands of children.
The treatment is to extend the athlis and cut it; or tie it with a silk thread; or with a hair until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine as has been mentioned earlier; and now the athlis are removed, both inverted and not inverted, using an instrument that I will describe later.
A formica is also a small, flattened protuberance on the surface of the body that penetrates deeply; and when it encounters cold, it feels like an ant bite, and appears all over the body, especially on the hands.
The treatment is to take a tube made from a goose quill or a strong vulture feather; and place the tube over the formica until it encloses it on all sides. Then turn your hand with the tube until you cut what is around the formica; and place it deep into the flesh to remove the formica from its root.
And if you wish, do it with an air or iron tube in this shape.
Place the upper part of the cannula towards the earlobe, drawing it around and upwards so that its grasp is loosened from your finger and its rolling-up.
And if you wish to cauterise an ant, do it as has been mentioned earlier regarding the cauterisation of Athelil in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter 83.
On the shapes of instruments that are used for enemas in diseases affecting the rectum, as well as evacuating the belly and treating colic.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, or gold-copper alloy (i.e., brass), or cast bronze, or sheet copper.
And sometimes it is made of these instruments small or large depending on those to whom they are administered.
Thus that which is administered for the cure of small children should be small; and so also their enemas if those children have weak or painful rectums.
Large enema.
Its tube, that is the upper part to which the bag (i.e., the bladder used as reservoir) is tied, should be wide like this: and have a mark so that the bag is tied on like you see, and its lower extremity that is inserted into the rectum should be deaf, i.e., not open, very soft, drawn out to a point; and let there be two holes in one side of it, and on the other side one hole.
And let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of rays (i.e., thin branches) and a little thicker; and let it have a bag in which medicines are put made from an animal's bladder, or from sheep paper that is like the shape of a small asofra whose root is one palm.
And it is pierced with multiple holes as it revolves, and there should be a space between each hole the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread made of raw silk, which should be ten strands or thereabouts, and attach to it the bladder as with a sausage casing. When therefore the bladder is put on it, tie it at the end of the enema tubes between the two distinguishing marks with a strong ligature. Then enema with it.
And this is the form of the circular bladder depicted here, as well as its holes.
The quality of enema with it is such that you fill the bladder or wineskin with medicine which should be heated according to the extent the sick person can bear; and take care that it is not very hot nor very cold.
Then the sick person is laid on their back and their legs are raised upwards; and put under them an inthaan, that is to say, a skin on which people lie down, or a cloth.
Then anoint the end of the enema tube with oil or with egg white or with fenugreek mucus, or the like. Then insert it into the anus easily. Then the attendant takes the bladder with both hands at once and squeezes it vigorously until everything inside the enema tube is evacuated into the intestine.
Then withdraw the enema tube and raise the sick person's legs to the wall.
But if the medicine makes him want to defecate then he should hold on for as long as he is able. If he sleeps with her for a whole night, it is all the more beneficial.
If however you give him an enema during the illness of abdominal pain and his discharge hastens; then repeat the enema until he is cured.
If there are haemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then use a very gentle enema, soft, of the type that is used for children's enemas.
And this is the form of a gentle enema, which applies to cases where the skin is tight.
Chapter 84.
I have already said in the section on wound treatment that a book was appropriate, and I will say here the treatment of them with the hand, and with medicines as a supplement.
I say, therefore, that wounds are differentiated according to the instrument by which they are caused and the place where the wound occurs.
The things by which wounds are caused, such as a stone thrown or an incision with a sword or knife, or being struck with a spear, wooden stick, arrow; and many similar objects.
Wounds that occur according to the place on the body are, for example, a wound which falls on the head, or neck, chest, stomach, flanks; and similar parts of these members.
And I will describe the treatments of some wounds, so that I may establish this reasoning and rule for other types of wounds.
I shall begin with simple head wounds, since the description of compound injuries will be given at the start of chapter three.
I say therefore. When there is a simple head wound and no bone fracture occurs: consider this; if it was caused by the impact of a stone or something similar, and has already broken only the skin. If it is a large wound and you fear an adverse outcome with hot abscesses then proceed quickly to perform a cephalic phlebotomy without delay and extract from his blood according to the strength of the patient: unless there is some impediment to performing the phlebotomy, especially if the blood issuing from the wound is scant. And let the phlebotomy be performed on the side opposite to that of the injury.
And let the phlebotomy be performed on the side opposite to that of the injury. And caution the patient against overeating, drinking wine, or eating fatty foods.
If, however, something prevents the patient from taking liquid foods then reduce their solid food intake and avoid meats or wines altogether.
And if a hot abscess forms on the wound then apply to it lard that has been melted in rose oil alone or mixed with wine having an astringent effect.
But if you are assured that there will be no hot abscess then apply to the wound, while it is still fresh with its own blood and before it has been exposed to air, the powder which I shall describe shortly: but if the injury has already been exposed to the air then use certain ointments instead until healing occurs.
But if the wound is large or caused by a sword-cut or something similar and its lips do not come together naturally then use stitches to bring them together as I shall describe for wounds of the belly.
If however the wound has already separated from the bone, and it is hanging, and there is no way to retain it except with a small sling; then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh to it instead of skin; instruct the patient to be fed with foods that are coarse, such as cabbage heads and boiled wheat, until it is like porridge, along with similar fare.
If you find a case of skin-deep gangrene that does not adhere to bone; then cut out the entire gangrenous area and throw it away; afterward treat what remains.
If however an artery or a vein from which blood is flowing should be found among these wounds; and it cannot be severed by medicine alone, then make a ligature above the vessel. If therefore you find that it has not been severed; then sever it with a scalpel or ligate it. If need requires it when what we have said does not suffice; then cauterize until the blood stops flowing.
If however these wounds are small and simple; then their treatment is easy, light: so that you sprinkle this powder on them: for it solidifies them before the air changes them.
Recipe puluerem ex lapide talco, et sanguine uenarioso commisto parum cum salicacae, et commisce eam in mortario. Take one part frankincense and two parts dragon's blood with three parts quicklime; grind all thoroughly together in a mortar, then sieve it: fill the wound with this powder and dress it well so that it adheres firmly to the powder and clots with the blood.
Then secure it from above with small sticks and leave it, do not release it as long as it remains so that it does not come off. Make sure the medicine is not removed from it until it heals.
And sometimes lime alone does this, when you do not have frankincense at hand, and the blood of a dragon also performs the same operation in many large wounds, when it is appropriate to place it on them and secure them, and they are fresh wounds with their own blood which has not been altered by air.
But if air has already altered them in some way, especially when it is summertime, then this powder is not appropriate for the purpose: so treat it with what we have said, such that you place on it certain digestive ointments: or place poultices of barley flour made with water and honey until they discharge pus. Then treat them with the remaining treatment until they heal.
If however there is a fracture with the wound in the bone and it is small, then extract it with Gesht: and I will now describe the treatment of head fractures later.
On wounds of the neck.
But if a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference between it and a simple head wound with regard to treatment.
But if the nerve of the neck has already been cut, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in treating it except to abandon its cure with what causes severe contraction such as Zinnia and Zea and similar things. For they harm nerves and contract them.
And do not place anything cold on the wound at all: for the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is loftier than the members; and let it be cured by medicines that are soft, such as lime washed with water often poured in with oil, or with rose oil, and tutia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and the rest of the mineral stones, in this way, and moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then apply a suture; or draw together its lips with stitches. Then treat it until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep, or if there is an abscess in its lower part, where now pus has already gathered, then pierce it in a deeper place on it.
If an artery has already been cut in the wound and its flow of blood has followed, then separate it or tie it off, and bind it; or cauterize it if necessity calls for that.
But if the larynx has already been cut into, or all of it, and the alhaudegi are saved: then gather together the lips of the skin with a suture over the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat, rather equalize it, and bring it back to its natural shape. Then bind it with a suitable restraint, and leave it for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have styptic and drying properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has already made an impression in bone, then probe it; then if there are fragments of bone in it, take out all that you can of them; and what is not prepared, leave it until the wound festers, and its discharge separates and lessens.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle over it the powder I described. If there appears to be bone in the wound and a fistula forms, then treat it with that which I mentioned in its own chapter.
On wounds on spathels.
If it is the strike of a lance or knife, and you see its depth, then consider this. If breath escapes from the wound when the patient gasps, then you know that the wound is fatal.
But if it is not deep and is fresh with its blood, then do not put on it at first any powder nor bind it up tightly so that the blood may not be retained in its depth and return to the heart and kill the patient; but apply to it an attracting ointment twice a day.
If you have no ointment at hand, then put on the orifice of the wound a warm poultice to draw from it what comes out of its moisture; and make the patient sleep upon the wound so that what collects in it may run out.
If three or more days have passed since the wound and no spasm nor heart tremors, tightness when breathing, or other signs of illness occur in the patient, then you know that the wound is healed. Treat it therefore with linen cloths and other treatments until it is cured.
If its healing is neglected and it always reopens, then you know that a fistula has formed. Take care of it yourself from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from an incised sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with what was described earlier regarding sutures if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression in the bone and has cut off pieces from it, then investigate the wound, and hurry to remove those pieces if they are separated. If however they are not separated, then leave them until the wound decays as their removal will be eased.
The judgement of the remaining accidental wounds in other members regarding treatment is the same as we have said.
On abdominal wounds, and on protruding intestines, and their protrusion:
The rupture that occurs in the abdomen is large, medium, or small.
From a large one, sometimes an intestine or several intestines protrude.
Why does their protrusion happen and their suture is more painful and difficult.
And the small rupture also occurs in another way. Therefore it follows that their reduction is more difficult if you do not hurry to push them back into place immediately because they become inflated, open up and thicken which makes getting them in again challenging.
For this reason the medium rupture is better than that of complete ruptures because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult as it is in these two types.
You should know that there are four methods for sewing veins.
Two common stitches are used for the abdomen and other bodily injuries; two other types of stitches are specific to other wounds. However, they are more specific when it comes to abdominal stitches; I will describe each one for you with an explanation and clarification.
I say then that when a wound is small and something comes out of the intestine, making it difficult to close, it must be done in one of two ways. Either because of the small size of the wound, as we said; or because there is an inflammation inside due to cold air.
When this is the case, you should warm it up by dipping a sponge or damp cloth into lukewarm water only. Or you could boil water with squills, rushes, spikes, and embrocation, using it to soak the intestine until the inflammation subsides.
Sometimes alcohol with astringent properties will do this, and it's better than water alone at reducing inflammation.
Once you see the inflammation has subsided, moisten the intestine with water that has been boiled with marshmallow root or apples. For it soothes the entrance with something soft.
But if its exit is obstructed after this treatment, then you must look for a small opening in the wound with an instrument that cuts haemorrhoids.
The first treatment is better when it's prepared beforehand compared to cutting; there's no force necessary for the cutting once the tool is needed and fails.
One part of it is the curved, pointed end and the other part is not sharp; its fine point should not be as delicate as a spatula, rather let it be somewhat blunter; and that which resembles chalk you see there.
Thus when a wound is enlarged and penetrates the intestine, then it should be reduced back into its natural form in its proper place according to its own nature if possible; for this is better.
When there is a wide rupture in the lower part of the belly: then you should make the patient lie on their back and place their legs higher than their head. And if it is on the upper part of the belly then place their head and chest higher than their lower parts.
Similarly if there is a rupture on one of the two sides of the belly then direct your mind and always consider that the side where it has occurred be elevated higher than the other.
And so you should administer this treatment for both large wounds and medium-sized ones.
For small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then ensure that there is present a diligent attendant who holds the entire rupture with his hand and brings its lips together. Then expose it to the one who follows with something after something else for a single suture.
And it is such that you take a needle or the number of needles according to the size of the wound. Then measure from the edge of the rupture a quantity equal to your ring finger (that is, the physician's) and fix one needle beyond that, then thread it through both ends of the skin with two ends of suture beneath the skin until you have made them penetrate on the other side; and now you have brought together two ends of the skin and two ends of the suture: there are thus four strands.
Then bind with double thread around the needle several times from both sides simultaneously until the two lips of the wound are brought together in a proper union.
Then discard the bulk of the finger as well, and fix another needle into them; afterwards, draw it taut with thread, just as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not cease doing this with as many needles as you need until you complete the suturing of the entire wound.
And let the needles be of medium thickness between coarse and fine; for thin needles pierce the flesh very swiftly, while thick ones are difficult to insert through the skin; hence it is necessary that they should be of medium thinness and thickness.
And one must not fix the needles too close to both edges of the skin so that flesh is not quickly cut through and the wound opens up before it has healed or stretched out with the suture so as not to prevent healing of the wound.
Then blunt the tips of the needles so as not to hurt the patient while they sleep; and place on either side of them small pads made from cloth which hold the ends of the needles; and leave these in place until you know that the wound is now healed.
And this particular type of suture with needles, thus described, is more suitable for small wounds. Since one needle or two or about that number is sufficient for the suture of these wounds.
The second type of suture is common to bring together the four edges - two skin edges and two edges of subcutaneous tissue with a needle which has thread wound around it uniformly in terms of thinness and thickness.
Then, when you have penetrated with the needle these four extremities, bring the needle back from the side where you started it so that the threaded filament falls down from the upper part of the wound: let there be a suture like the stitch used to string clothes together, and place between each suture the thickness of half a finger.
People refer to this as 'sewing'.
And with this stitch I sewed together the wounds of a man who had been stabbed in the belly with a knife and whose wound was gaping open wider than a palm; about two palms' worth of his intestines had come out through the middle, and there was a rupture right across the abdomen.
I brought those intestines back inside after they had been hanging outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
So the wound healed after about fifteen days; I treated it and he recovered, living many years afterward and going back to his old ways.
And the doctors had judged that it would not heal.
It was truly miraculous because I did not treat him with any ointment. Because I was in a place where there were no ointments to be found nor any medicines. So I put an old linen cloth on the wound twice a day and kept washing it with honey water until it was healed.
I will now describe to you two types of stitches that I have used successfully in my practice.
And this is how you start with an acute suture: the needle should go in from the outside to the inside.
When the needle therefore has penetrated into the skin and having entered the muscle according to the length and width of the whole body: release the end on that side where you have inserted the needle, and make it penetrate from the inside to outside at the other end at Mirach.
Once you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this into the same Mirach end from outside to inside: and release the Sifac end which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end from inside to outside: and make your penetration as you do when penetrating into the Sifac Mirach end, which is in its part, until it penetrates the whole thing.
Then begin again from this same side, and guide it with the end which is from Sifac on the other side, and extract the needle from the skin through which it has penetrated.
Then return it to that skin and guide the Sifac end which is on the other side with this Mirach end: and extract it from the skin of its part, and make one after another, and one after the other: and do so until you have extracted all of it externally according to that example.
The essence of this suture is that the sutures of hides are like those of skins: so that you guide Sifac one after another from one side with an end of the skin: and release it one after another from the other side, until you have completed it.
The second type of suture proper, which Galen calls.
His discourse about this is that you guide it according to the similarity of how some physicians use it, so that they bring together all parts to their appropriate counterpart by nature: and apply the Sifac end to its other end, and the Mirach end to its other end. And it happens just as I tell you.
You must fix the needle at the tip of Mirach close to you from the outside part and make it penetrate inward only; and release the two ends of Sifac. Then rotate the needle, and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside into the two ends of Sifac, that is, on both sides.
Then rotate both of them as well, and make both of them penetrate from the inside to the outside into the other two tips of Mirach which are on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common and easy stitch, and it is a kind of stitching that has been mentioned before.
This, therefore, is also Galen's saying.
And some have said, The abdominal wound is stitched with two needles. Which is to insert into both of them one thread; and start with the insertion of the needle from what is near you, and make it penetrate up to the other side according to the stitching of those who are equal in skin.
And you should know that when there is a tear in the middle of the abdomen; then its stitching is more difficult than other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound's healing is the judgment of other wounds.
Which is because when you acquire a fresh wound with its blood, before it changes itself by air; and you bring back the intestine, follow it, and make it fit; then place it over red powder.
If the air has already altered the wound: then place over it certain ointments, which are available to you, until they produce pus; and let the filaments fall out, and let the sinews become consolidated, and the bone. Then treat it like the healing of other wounds until it is healed.
But if these medicines are not available to you, then place over it immediately, from the moment that it begins to discharge pus, an old linen cloth; and change it twice a day as I have taught you until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine for many treatments when the wounds are simple ones.
But if you fear that the wound may communicate with any of the principal members during their dislocation, then it is necessary to immerse soft wool in oil of a moderate warmth or in rose oil; and place them around those places which are between the groins and under the armpits.
If he feels pain or gripes, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then administer an enema to him with astringent wine, black, tepid; especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and is about to break out penetrating right up to his hollow belly.
And know that the part from the large intestine is easier to heal; and that which comes out of the finer intestines is more difficult to heal.
The intestine which is called the jejunum does not admit of healing from a wound which occurs in it at all; and this is due to its great multitude of veins, and the size of them, and because of the fineness of its body, and the proximity of its nature to that of nerves.
If, however, what proceeds from the wound is zirbum, and you follow it while fresh: return it according to your own method of reducing intestines evenly.
But if some time has passed, and it has already become green or black: then you must tie it with a thread above the place that has darkened from it, so that there is no bleeding. For in zirbum there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so as to relieve yourself of drawing out its attraction, and extracting it in case of a zirbum, and emitting pus of the wound.
Remembrance of the wound that happens in the intestine.
When disruption happens in the intestine and is small, then it may be possible for it to be restored in some people; because I have seen one who was wounded in their belly with a lance blow, and there was a wound from the right of the stomach, and the wound had become old; and it became a fistula, and there came out from it discharge, and flatulence.
So I treated him until I was not confident of his healing; nor did I cease to treat him until he had healed and the place had consolidated.
After I saw the place now consolidated, I feared for the patient that there would be an unfortunate accident in their belly; and no misfortune happened to them from it. And he remained in better condition, eating and drinking, and having sex, and entered the bathhouse, and exercised at his meals.
And now some experimentalists have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be sutured in this manner. It happens that you take ants of large heads. Then gather the two lips of the wound, and place one ant with an open mouth on top of the two lips of the wound. When it therefore bites down on them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not let go.
Then place another ant near the first one, and keep doing so with an ant after each ant according to the size of the wound.
Then draw it together, and sew up the wound. For those heads remain attached inside the intestine until the intestine has healed and there is no longer any harm to the patient.
And now it is possible that the intestine be sutured even with fine thread: which has been removed from the gut of an animal and attached to it after being passed through a needle.
It is necessary that you take the end of this thread from the gut, and it be thoroughly cleaned of flesh. Then bind to its end a thin linen thread wrapped around it. Then pass that thread through a needle, and sew with it the intestine. Then draw it together at the wound.
And this method of suturing with ants and gut is only by way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large and wide, especially if it is on one of the thinner intestines, then there is no cure but subtle treatment, nor is its healing at all.
On the cure of boils and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when it becomes old and ages, and turns into an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and discharges pus constantly, and is not cut off: then it is universally called a fistula on whatever part of the body it may be, and we call it a boil.
A fistula is indeed correctly a hard, white nodule with filtering, without pain, which has the concavity of a bird's feather; and on account of this some call it Risati, that is, feather.
And at certain times it becomes moist, discharging pus. And perhaps the moisture is split up at some times. And sometimes this moisture is plentiful or scarce; it is thick and thin.
And I have already mentioned in the division, then when I said wounds, that any ulcer which does not heal and flesh is not born in it, it is not except for one of nine causes.
Of which one is either because of the scarcity of blood in the body or due to its ill-nature; or because between it and above its lips there is hard flesh, preventing the birth of flesh; or because it has an abundance of filth and dirtiness; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter sent to it is of poor quality: or because the medicine used for its cure is unsuitable; or because the corruption falling on that region is a type of pestilence, or due to some property in that region, as happens at Caesaraugusta: where recovery from illnesses takes place with difficulty, and healing of boils by nature is delayed there; or because there is one bone, or number of bones, in it.
And now I have shown you all these causes and signs of the conditions, and their treatments along with the medicines in the section: and here it is necessary for me to make you aware of the treatment of fistula and zukn, which are carried out by means of manual operations.
Therefore, you should know that fistula occurs in all body parts. For among them are fistulas that reach major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine; or [those that reach] the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs; or one of the vertebrae of the backbone, or one of the compound joints such as those of hand and foot; and among them are some which go towards the proximity of a main limb, and similar areas.
The fistula from among them that is like this is one of the difficult illnesses to heal, and it does not accept treatment, and dealing with it is labour-intensive and requires expertise.
But if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places that I have mentioned: and you are hopeful, and confident in its treatment, and want to attain knowledge of it, then take a probe made from brass or iron, if the fistula runs straight, and use it to trace [the path of] the fistula.
But if there is curvature in the fistula, then investigate it with a fine lead probe. Because the softness of the lead enables it to be bent and conform to the curvature.
But if the fistula has many openings, you cannot trace it with a probe. Therefore, you must inject liquid into one of its openings from among the openings.
For the moisture which the enema brings, enters via one orifice and runs out through others.
Then carefully inquire as to how you can tell whether it is bone or nerve, and if the cavity of the fistula is deep or shallow; or whether there is one fistula with multiple openings that covers all of this, using your utmost strength: through questioning the patient and finding pain upon compression with your hand on the site, and similar signs and causes and symptoms.
When you have thus stood at your true station, then go to the cure with confidence; and consider then whether the fistula is a shallow one that appears close by, or in a safe place far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places I mentioned: then cut open the fistula as previously described, remove whatever may be draining from it and corrupted flesh which forms at its opening out of flesh or membrane and similar things; treat this until it is healed.
But if the fistula is deep and straight, then you must cut it open as deeply as possible. Then clean it of all its corrupted flesh.
Then apply linen wraps soaked in sharp medicines; insert these into the fistula cavity which you have opened with your knife: do this several times until the sharp medicine has eaten away all that remains of corruption within the fistula's cavity.
Then treat it with salves which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it does not heal by this means, then cauterise it as we have described.
If the cause of the fistula is bone, and you ascertain this, then expose it and cut into it as I have described to you; if nothing prevents you from among veins, nerves or main members, as we said.
If you find bone and there is some decay or blackness within it, then scrape it until all the decay is removed. Then treat it with something that promotes flesh growth until it heals.
But if it does not heal and still discharges pus as before, then you should know that you have not succeeded in removing all the decay.
Therefore expose it again, and make a thorough investigation of its condition and cleaning with all your strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then know that the decay lies deep within the body, beyond your reach. It is not within your skill to cure it, other than to leave it to nature.
But if the decayed bone is small and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps that suit it.
If, however, there are many bones, then make a thorough extraction of them all, and do not leave any behind with your strength.
If any of the moist tissues offer resistance and there is no fear or mistake in cutting them open: then cut into those moist tissues and flesh if they are present there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the means to remove bones immediately, then place on the wound something that will cause it to rot; and leave it until what is around those bones rots away from flesh and moisture.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal. And constrict the incision you made during your procedure. In my opinion, place on it, if you fear it, a poultice of sulphur pounded with oil and moistened; or a poultice steeped in Egyptian ointment, or any one of the green ointments.
For when those moist parts decay, and the bones are separated from them, the removal of the former and the drawing together of the latter will be facilitated.
But if it is one large bone, such as a leg or hip bone, and what is corrupted of it is a large part; then scrape it with the ultimate razor until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted of it is a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow, then it must be sawn through and cut away entirely down to the place where the corruption has reached; then take care of it until it heals.
And I will tell you, Zuken, what happened to a man in his leg; so that you may take it as an example and help for your procedure.
There was a young man around thirty years of age, who experienced pain in his leg from a cause that originated inside the body; until the pus reached the leg and formed an abscess - and there was no external reason for it.
Thus was extended over time with him the error of the physicians until the abscess opened and many substances had mixed with it. And his cure was postponed until the leg became fistulated and many holes were made in it: all of which discharged pus and body fluids.
Thus he was treated by a multitude of physicians for about two years and there wasn't among them one skilled in the art of surgery until I was called upon and saw his leg and the substances that were flowing from those holes at great speed: also all the man's body had already wasted away and his colour was yellow.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the holes, and the probe reached the bone.
Then I examined all the holes, and found that they interconnected with each other from every part of the leg.
Therefore I sawed and cut away the tissue over one of those holes until I uncovered a part of the bone; and found it to be corrupted: for it was already corroded and blackened and putrefied and perforated right through to the marrow.
I therefore sawed away what had been uncovered by me and prepared it from the corrupted bone.
And I judged that there was nothing in the bone but that corruption which I had cut away and sawn off. And by this point, I had already eradicated it.
Then I applied a long-term healing remedy to the wound as a means of restoration. And it has not healed (consolidated).
I then tried and placed a splint on the second bone above the first one; and I found that it was also contaminated with decay, so I removed what appeared to me from this contamination as well.
I then tried to restore it. And it was not restored.
I placed a splint on it again and did not stop cutting the bone piecemeal in an effort to restore it; but it was not restored until I cut out about one palm's width of bone with its marrow.
I then treated it with medicines and it healed quickly; this repetition of the operation and incision would not have been necessary had it not been for the condition of weakness and frailty of the patient, and his lack of endurance as well as my own fear over him of death: since he was fainting every hour from an excess of evacuation.
He has thus been completely cured; hard flesh was formed instead of the bone and a good condition established in his body, so that he regained strength and returned to his normal state, conversing with people again: there is no sign whatsoever of injury or difficulty while walking.
But if a protruding bone has already been broken at the body of it; then you must saw it off like this: take a ligament and tighten it to the end of the prominent bone, while someone else stretches it upward, and place another thicker woollen bandage on top of the first one. Then bind it to the flesh above the bone; and stretch its end so as to pull the flesh downward while you cover the area of the flesh that you wish to saw with a splint so as not to hurt it.
Place a wooden stick or board under the lower bone: for when you do this, it is not prohibited that it cuts through the corrupted flesh.
The lock must be placed over the infected area for a short time to prevent infection from entering into the hollow of the bone; this will not appear as an obvious wound and forces the use of another lock instead.
If the bone is infected and not protruding, but it continues into a connected portion; the infection being within its center or one of its sides, then you must remove all flesh from every side (of the injury). Then place a wooden stick below it.
After that, lock it from the first side where there is infection until the lock continues to the other side; and let the lock be slightly longer than the area of infection as we have said.
If the infection is at the joint, cut away that infected part of it; then lock down the bone from where it continues on its other side.
However, if the infection is between two joints there is no remedy other than to scrape it out.
If the infection is at the comb of the hand or foot, then the situation becomes very difficult to treat. But it is necessary that you inquire how exactly the infection presents itself to you. And you should scrape it out and clean it according to any arrangement that is possible for you; with whatever remedy appears right to you as long as this does not go against the vein or nerve.
You should be aware that there are many different types of scalpels and locks for cutting these bones; according to the location, preparation, thickness, fineness, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity of each bone. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that particular operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the type of instrument needed, which you require when you have a lengthy study. And knowledge of the techniques of this art is a guide to the nature of illnesses; for then you will discover for yourself which instruments are suitable for every illness.
And I am providing you with a list of instruments at the end of this chapter, which serve as examples on which you practice, and as tests by which you may experiment with others.
Shape of another saw.
Shape of the scissors with joined blades. Let the head of these scissors be made according to the shape of a star-shaped nail; and let its points be like those of the eyelash-curling iron.
And it is not suitable unless the blades are rubbed with them when they become blunt or a large and thick bone is to be cut.
Shape of the larger scissors.
The form of a wide rope ligature.
Form of a curved clamp.
The form of another thin rope ligature.
Form of the other curved clamp with a hooked end.
Form of a small pair of thin forceps.
This resembles a lever; its end is like a saw: it appears in many places because of bones.
Form of the clamp which suits its purpose for perforated bones.
Its end is triangular; it has sharp ends.
It is made of Indian steel. And similarly it is necessary that all of the instruments we have mentioned be made of Indian steel, whether they are clamps, knives or saws.
On amputating limbs, and sawing bones.
Limbs become putrid either from an external or internal cause.
Therefore when you have treated that putridity by medicinal cure and it does not bring about healing; and you see the putridity spreading into the limb which is unaffected: then it is necessary to amputate that limb as far as the extent of the putridity, so that the patient may escape death or a serious ailment.
The sign that this has occurred is when the limb turns black and remains so until it is thought to have been burned by fire or to have gone bad after turning black; until that rot is cut away right up to what follows that limb and spreads throughout the entire body.
Therefore make the first cut appropriately, and likewise if the cause of the rot is from the sting of certain venomous creatures such as the sea scorpion, viper, adder, and similar things.
If therefore the rot or sting is on the tip of a finger then cut off the finger and do not give space to the rot so that it may spread to the rest of the hand.
And likewise if it happens to the hand then cut it off from its root at the wrist and do not give space to the rot so that it takes hold of the forearm.
And if it invades further then cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
But if the rot spreads beyond that point then there is no hope for the patient's life. And administering anything further in treatment at this stage is pointless.
And likewise for the foot; when rot invades a toe then cut it off at its first joint and if it takes hold of the whole of the foot then amputate the entire foot. If however it ascends to the knee then cut off the leg at its joint with the knee.
If however the rot has already reached above the knee then it is not a matter of skill but rather resignation and leaving the patient to death.
And the method for cutting a limb or binding it is to tie the tendon below where you wish to cut and then tighten another tendon above that place. And the attendant should stretch one tendon downwards, and the other upwards. And you separate the flesh that is between two tendons with a broad chisel until all the meat is exposed. Then it should be cut or bound.
It is necessary that you place a linen cloth on all sides and not touch the healthy area with the saw; for if an unhealthy part is struck, there will be added injury and hot abscess.
But if internal bleeding occurs while you are operating, then quickly cauterize the place or put some styptics on it. Then return to your dressing until it is completed.
Next bind the wounded limb with appropriate bandages and treat it until it is healed.
And I tell you that this same accident happened to a man in his foot.
Which is because a blackening occurred in his foot, like a burn resembling fire combustion; and that corruption first began in his toe until it started to affect the whole foot.
So the man decided to take action for himself after he saw that the corruption was spreading into his limb with increasing severity; which he found from its pain and burning sensation, and it had occurred at the joint, but now he is healed.
After a lengthy period had passed, he experienced the same decay in his index finger of his hand.
He came to me, and I attempted to treat the excess flesh with medicine that I applied to his hand after cleansing his body; however, the superfluity was not rectified, and it began to spread to another finger until decay set into his hand.
He called on me to cut off his hand, but I refused, hoping for a recovery from the excess flesh and fearing death during the amputation of his hand itself. Since the man's strength was above adversity.
After losing hope in me, he returned to his land and hastened back to me, having cut off his entire hand; thus, he was healed.
I have related this account not only as an aid for treating those who suffer from this illness but also to signify and describe what may be done in such cases.
On the treatment of fistulas and the nature of enemas with medicines.
When a swelling occurs in some fleshy parts and the condition persists until it forms an accumulation of pus; then it breaks or is pierced, discharging its contents and leaving an empty space like a vessel with only thin skin covering it: and this does not extend to complete decay nor affects bone, nerve or ligament. It should be called a Sinus rather than a Fistula; however, if the condition persists until decay reaches one of these structures then it is named a Fistula or zuken.
And its treatment is to cut that skin entirely as it peels off; especially when it has been thinned out and made like cloth; and be confident that it will not stick with the site because of its decomposition.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and it does not follow from that last corruption; and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then treat it with an enema; and it is necessary to pay attention to the cavity.
Then if it is large and the pus that comes out of it has a foul smell; then treat it with an enema using Egyptian medicine made up of equal parts vinegar, oil, and ziniar, combined in a vase: boil them over a fire until the remedy reddens and becomes as thick as honey.
Then take as much of it as you need; dissolve it with water and honey, and administer an enema to the cavity using that mixture; squeeze its opening, and leave the medicine inside for about two hours.
Then extract it by pressing; do this for as many days as necessary until the cavity is cleansed and the stench removed.
And sometimes it is treated with an enema of ash water when this remedy is not available to you; and be sure to use the ashes of grape vines or the ashes of holm-oak wood, throwing them into the water. Then mix it well and administer an enema with that water until you are confident that the cavity is now cleansed.
But if the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then treat them with an enema of just water and honey to which some ground ziniar has been added. The enema itself with honey and wine mixed in it because of the property of honey is cleansing and washing out; and wine makes it adhere to the sinus, especially when there is excess astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you have done this a few times, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has now been removed, then use an enema with what makes flesh grow there.
And it is necessary that you take some dyaphinitis plaster: and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine: or use an enema with those medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatise on ointments.
But if the sinus orifice is narrow and does not admit the enema's cannula: then stretch it a little with an iron instrument: or place over it a linen cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or in balsam-ointment, until it is stretched.
And similarly if it is also a wide orifice, then draw together its lips with a suture: and leave of it the amount into which the enema will go without any extra length.
And similarly if its orifice from which the pus issues is elevated above the rest: then cut it at a lower spot on it so that the pus runs out downwards; for when pus is confined deep within the sinus, it prevents flesh from forming there.
If you cannot cut the sinus as low down on it as you wish: then try to prepare the member with a preparation that will make the pus run out of it easily as is prepared for you. Try to ensure that no vestige of pus remains within it at all: and take healing medicines which are put on the wound, suitable for what you wish. And extend them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it accommodates the entire cavity. Then make an incision with scissors along the center of the cavity's hole, somewhat beyond the cavity's opening. Then apply a fresh poultice of soft ointment to another cloth, according to the size of the hole; and place it on top at a distance from the cavity's opening so as to ease the flow of pus from it: and do not remove the large cloth unless after some days have passed.
The one that is on the cavity's opening, you will remove every hour to allow what has accumulated in it of pus to drain out; and so that you may know whether what flows from it is more or less, cooked or raw.
And with this again consider the place of the cavity itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or not; and whether there is abscess in it or not.
When therefore your treatment is extended like this and you see the material that comes out over the cavity's opening, then you know that the cavity has already healed or is close to healing; so then dissolve it in the morning or on the third day: and when you heal the wound, then change the other cloth and renew the ointment.
But if a refined material comes out of the cavity after a long time has passed, then do not despair over its healing for it is near; since there are men who delay the growth of flesh in their wounds and some act contrary to that.
But if raw pus comes out of the cavity after many days have passed, then you know that the cavity is not healing.
If the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its condition prolongs, then add in desiccation medicated substances, but physicians should ensure that these medications are moist by substance yet dry by virtue; such as dyafinicon unguent when added to it an excess of zegi.
And for the more advanced treatment, take dyafinicon unguent and dissolve it with rose oil, then moisten an equal amount of old wine by substance over it.
Then prepare it with that and use it.
And it performs a similar action to this when you do not have dyafinicon unguent at hand: honey, when cooked until thickened, can be used instead. Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense; grind everything together and powder it over honey while it is over a flame. Then spread over it a cloth and bind it to the sinus; coat with the honey you cooked until thickened and powder spices over it; place over the cloth and bind again.
And sometimes it is administered with long aristolochia, heaven lily roots, and true lily; the herb's flour and centaurea are also used. Use these simple substances or combine them; grind them together and sieve; powder over the honey I described earlier and use it.
If the condition of the sinus prolongs and does not heal with this treatment, then know that there is deep corruption; or it has already impacted the bones, hard tissues, or ligaments; in such cases treat as for fistulas, as previously mentioned.
On the treatment of panaritium and abraded nails, as well as incising and cutting a finger.
A panaritium is an abscess that forms under the nail of the thumb or toe, but may also occur on other fingers.
If it is left untreated and the abscess becomes hot to the touch or filled with pus until the root of the nail is destroyedor even the entire nail itselfand perhaps reaching the bone until its smell is foul; then the finger's tip will swell, and its color darken.
So then when you treat it, along with what we mentioned earlier regarding the types of panaritium, and your treatment does not help; then you must cut away all remaining superfluous material left from the nail using an iron tool. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. For cautery is indeed very beneficial.
But if the bone is healthy and both nail and flesh are also so, yet its supporting nails now press against this interior flesh, pricking it and causing pain; then place a slender probe under the offending nail's edge that pierces the flesh, pushing it upwards: then cut away that flesh with ease, and apply what remains of any cauterizing and corrosive medicinal substances until all is removed. Afterwards treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if the rot has already set into bone then it is necessary to cut away and remove that bone; for it will never heal so long as the corrupted bone remains.
If you see decay and deterioration progressing into the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints, according to what has been mentioned above. Then treat it until it heals.
But if the nail suffers abrasion or a blow, and severe pain occurs within it, then you must first use phlebotomies on the patient. Then cut the nail with an acute spatula, making a transverse incision from top to bottom.
And be careful not to let the incision reach the flesh underneath the nail, for you will cause severe pain in the patient and it may result in an addition of flesh by nature at that place.
Then treat this place with what soothes the pain.
However, the extra finger that is born in some people's hands may be fleshy throughout; and perhaps there are bones in some of them, or even a nail; and some of these fingers are born at the root of the joint, while their nature is native to some joints of the finger. Therefore the one that is born on some joints of the finger does not move; and the one which is born at the joint of the finger may well be movable.
The sectioning process for the fleshy one among these is easy. This means that you should cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
However, the treatment of that one whose nature is native to some joints of the finger is difficult. Therefore abstain from cutting it.
However, if the tumor is born on a finger at the end of the joints, you must first cut his flesh with a round incision down to the bone. Then saw through the bone with one of those saws suitable for this task. After that, treat it until it is healed.
However, the stiffening of the fingers against each other often happens either from birth, that is, they are born with it, or as the result of wound-healing, or by firebrand, and similar things.
Therefore you must cut away that stiffening until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place between them strips of flesh, or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not stiffen quickly, and separate them; or put between them a thin sheet of lead until the site is healed as it should be.
And similarly if stiffening happens to some fingers with the palm of the hand, then cut away that stiffening as is prepared and appropriate for the shape of the limb.
On the topic of incision for a hernia.
There are twisted veins, thick and full of melancholy superfluities that happen in many parts of the body; and their outcome is often in the legs, especially the legs of those who walk long distances and labour and carry heavy loads.
Therefore you must administer the expulsion of black bile from the body by strong pounding several times.
Then apply leeches to the patient's basilic vein.
The treatment of these conditions with an iron instrument is according to two methods. One of them is that they are incised, and black blood is extracted. And the other method is that the vein is raised, and the whole thing is removed.
Its incision is according to this method. Soak the patient's leg first with hot water until the thick feculent blood is loosened. Then bind the patient's leg from the upper part of their hip to the lower part of their knee with a bandage. Then make an incision on one spot, or two, or three places with a wide cut.
Then raise it, that is, extract the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and you must have leeches on the patient first. Then make an incision to the nail down below until you see enough blood coming out and as much as the patient can tolerate.
Afterwards bind it and instruct the patient to avoid foods that produce black bile; and repeat the evacuation and leeching when the veins are full and harmful to the patient.
Its elevation is according to this method. Shave the patient's leg if there is much hair on it. Then immerse it in a bath or apply hot water to their leg until they turn red and the veins swell; or have them exercise vigorously if there is no bath present, until their limb becomes warm.
Then cut the skin along the vein's length, either at its end near the knee or in its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks and scrape the vein from all sides until it becomes visible; you will know when it appears because it looks reddish-black. So when it has been removed from the skin you see that it is white like a cord.
Then insert the rod beneath it until, when lifted up, it emerges from the skin; hang it with a blunt hook gently.
Then make another cut close to that cut, about three fingers away. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then lift it up with rods as you did before, and hang it with another hook just like at the beginning.
Then make another cut or several cuts if you need to. Lift it up again and make the final incision near the heel.
Then extract it to the cut that is above it.
And do this until you have extracted it from the top cut or highest of all cuts; when it is fully out then make an incision in it.
But if it does not obey you by coming out and lifting up, then insert a needle with strong thread doubled over and tie it, and pull it out; or insert beneath it a rod: turn your hand in all directions until it comes out. And beware, lest it be cut. For if it is cut, it becomes difficult for you to raise it greatly, and it enters the patient from that harm.
So when you have extracted it all: then place over the wound a piece of wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil; and take care of the patient until they are healed.
But if the artery is contracted, having a twist with an inward bend to its parts, and it is not as we have said straight: then you must cut over it on every side of its twists, and at the places of that bend.
Then lift it with hooks until you have raised it completely: and beware at your incision over it lest you cut the vein or wound it; for it will be difficult for you to raise or extract it. Therefore, preserve your prudence.
The manner of the cutting whereby an artery is healed.
The manner of blind stitching.
It does not have a curved edge like other stitches, nor is it sharp-pointed so as to wound the vein; and it has a thick, undulating shape that is gentle; for if it were thin, its thinness would cut through the vein: rather, let there be superfluous thickness to it, as we have said.
On the extraction of the femoral vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, such as Alexandria and Arabia; and in dry, hot lands of little moisture, that is, where neither grass nor trees are born.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Its generation indeed comes from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just as happens inside the bodies of snakes and roundworms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this varicose vein is a severe inflammation that occurs in the leg. Then the place should be cauterized. Then the vein begins to emerge from that place of cauterization, like the root of a plant or an animal.
When its tip appears, you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing from one to two drachms, and tie that in place; then leave the lead suspended from the leg.
Whenever anything comes out of it to the outside, wrap that in the lead and tie it up. But if it extends too far, cut off a piece of it, and wrap up the rest. And do not cut it off at the root until it has come out completely. For if you cut it off, it contracts and reenters the flesh; this causes an abscess to occur at that place, and rot, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it should be handled gently and extracted little by little until its very end comes out, so that nothing of it remains inside the body; indeed this vein extends outside some people's bodies to a length of five or ten palms. He has now arrived because a man left with twenty palms.
However, if it happens to you during the hour of your medication: then insert a rod into its hole and perforate it with a long hole, with the body, until all that is in it of matter is evacuated; and apply putrefaction of the place with medicine for several days. Then cure it with the treatment for boils.
And this vein indeed sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle joint, or on the foot itself: and there are multiple openings to it, and a branch comes out of every opening.
Therefore treat it as we have said in the division, and with what has been mentioned before.
On cutting over worms generated under the skin, which is called Bovine Disease.
This disease is called Bovine Disease in a certain region among us: because it often happens to cows, and there is one small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it enters the whole body, ascending and descending: and is felt during its walk from limb to limb, until it bursts wherever it bursts on the skin, and exits.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain juices. As happens with worms and snakes, that is, earthworms, and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for its harmfulness. Because when it enters the body and is raised towards the head, and reaches that place, then perhaps it opens there, comes out, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
So if you want to cure him and extract it, then this can only be done when he walks around, and its presence is revealed to the senses.
It's necessary, therefore, to tie up what is above him and what is below with a strong binding ligature. Then cut over it and extract it.
But if it is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cauterizing iron on the spot until it dies.
And greater than that which is feared is its corruption, by which it corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If however you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind beneath it the eyebrow with a good ligature. Then cut over it and extract it.
And the patient must use cleansing of his body with medicines that dissolve bad putrid humours.
And he should beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
On the operation for the illness of Nakir.
This illness is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs; then it changes from limb to limb.
I have indeed seen it myself, just as I am telling you. I was called to attend to an ailing woman in certain villages. And I found her arm with a small swelling on the vein of the bicep.
And after I remained for an hour, I saw one swelling move with a whip, like a worm, ascending to her shoulder faster than could be believed; so that it was as if live silver were running from place to place.
So the pain retreated from that spot and fixed itself on her shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and it rushed into the rest of her body until it reached her other arm.
Then she told me that the pain was revolving throughout her entire body, just as I had observed.
I was amazed at the speed of its transformation from limb to limb. I had never seen this illness with my eyes in such a manner before. However I have seen many who experience pain that shifts from limb to limb; and I have not witnessed it with my eyes as I did with this woman.
And I do not think it is anything other than the fact that she was among those from dry villages where the veins were often found to be exposed; and thus this sensation of windiness appeared when it shifted.
And it is necessary that such sensations not appear according to this reasoning among those who are luxurious and whose bodies are moist with concealed veins.
When you wish to treat it and the patient feels that pain, then if it is visible to your eye as we said, then squeeze above it, and beneath it quickly; and cut over it until that trapped wind comes out; and cauterize the place.
If however you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with body shaking and with that which expels wind, and makes it fart with foul-smelling pills, and pills made from serpent's flesh, and similar things.
On the removal of arrows.
Arrows vary according to their kinds, and according to the places in which they fall out of the body.
Their variation is because among them are those which have large and small heads, concave and convex. And among them are those which have three edges. And among them are those which have barbs. And among them are those which have stars.
But those that fall into the limbs do so in two ways. For either the limbs are from the main concave members such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lungs, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and things similar to them. When therefore it falls into one of these members and the signs of death which I tell you about later appear to you, then you ought to avoid extracting that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many cases. And when these bad signs are not evident to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it and treat the wound.
For when an arrow strikes the brain and pierces the bone, exiting towards the membrane that covers the brain, the following signs will occur: severe headache, scotomas, vertigo, redness in the eyes, swelling, reddening of the tongue, spasms, mental confusion, and vomiting bile. And perhaps blood will exit through the nose or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And from the place of the wound, a white moisture like pus will exit. And it exits with a moistness similar to that of flesh.
If these signs appear to you, then refrain from treating it, and extract the arrow if it has not exited.
The signs of an arrow having struck the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and with it comes a feeling as if it were fixed upon something hard, not empty. And perhaps the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound. Afterwards, it is followed by coldness of the limbs, cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore, you should know that death has surely descended upon them.
And the sign of an arrow having struck the lung is the exit of foamy blood from the wound, and the veins that follow down the neck will swell, and the patient's complexion will change. He breathes a great, deep sigh and seeks to draw in cold air.
If the arrow falls upon the diaphragm which is in the chest, then it is near the small ribs; and there will be a great panting with severe pain, together with a sigh; and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if an arrow falls upon the stomach, then perhaps something undigested may come out of the wound.
And if an arrow falls into the belly and pierces it, then something of faeces will come out of the wound or the zirb (a looped gut) or a ruptured intestine. There is therefore no hope of cure nor of extracting the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out, and something goes from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger below (in the lower parts of the body), then you know that it is a mortal wound.
The remaining parts such as the face, neck, throat, jaw, aid (hyoid bone), spinal vertebrae, wishbone, hip, leg and similar limbs shall be treated according to many different methods; when an arrow has not struck an artery or nerve: and is not a poisoned arrow.
And I tell you that I have seen these arrows so that you may judge by it concerning your treatment.
Which is to say that an arrow fell into the tear duct of a man's eye at the root of his nose. I therefore extracted it from him on the other side beneath the fat of his ear; and he was cured without any harm to his eye.
I extracted another arrow from the eye fat of a Jew under his lower eyelid; and the arrow was already hidden, and I only found its small end with which it was attached to its wooden shaft: and this was a large arrow from Turkish bows, without ears on its iron tip.
The Jew therefore healed up, and there was no ill accident befall his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And this was an Arabian arrow, which has ears on its iron tip. So I secured it above the wound with two sutures, although by then the arrow was already submerged in his throat. I therefore operated on him with great care until I extracted it; and the Christian healed up.
And I extracted another arrow from the man's belly; we thought that he would die of it.
So after thirty days had passed without any change in his condition, I made a suture over the arrow and then devised a plan to extract it; and the man healed up completely with no ill accident befalling him thereafter.
And I saw a man with an arrow that had pierced his back; the wound over it was healed up. So seven years later, the arrow came out at the root of his hip bone.
I saw a woman with an arrow that had pierced her belly; the wound over it was healed up and remained so, nor did she suffer any ill effect from its presence: no change came to her condition, and during all her natural functions the woman found no harm in it.
I saw another man who had an arrow lodged in his face; the wound had healed but remained, causing him little pain; and there were many similar cases like this.
And I extracted an arrow from the nose of a man who was one of the king's nobles; it had struck him right between his eyes and then veered off slightly to the right, becoming entirely hidden within.
I was called upon to treat him three days after the arrow struck. The wound from the arrow had become very constricted.
I therefore tested it with a fine probe but could not feel the arrow; however, he himself did find the puncture and pain beneath his right ear. I hoped that this was simply due to the tip of the arrow having pierced him there.
I therefore plastered the area with an ointment possessing both drawing and digestive qualities, trusting that it would form a pustule, revealing to me some sign of the arrow so I could cut above it; however, this did not happen at all.
I thus tended to him with the plaster for many days; yet still no incident occurred that indicated the arrow had followed some course beneath his skin and meanwhile the wound healed over completely: he remained weakened by the extraction, until one day he felt something inside his nose  it was the arrow. And so he narrated this to me.
And so he narrated this to me. I therefore applied a sharp corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up; and when I probed with my probe again, I felt the fine tip of the arrow adhering to wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly to us; and it passed by me with him for about four months.
Then after the wound was enlarged and it became possible for me to introduce forceps into it, and move them without their obeying at the outlet: then I did not cease from sharpening and devising ways over it with devices until one day I began on it a certain device made of forceps according to what will come in form at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restorable. Therefore I restored it, the wound became consolidated, and the patient was healed with a complete recovery; nor did anything at all harm him.
And I tell you the nature of the extraction of some arrows: so that you may put it as a rule and a sign over what I have not said.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not covered along with the narration: nor does a book comprehend it, and a prudent craftsman compares little over much: and what is present over what is absent: and he discovers new procedures, and new instruments in dealing with foreign matters that happen to this art.
I say therefore that arrows do not come out of the members in which they are fixed except according to two methods. Either by attracting them from the place through which they entered. Or by opposing from the other side.
And that which exits where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding through a fleshy area; and it is drawn out, and exits.
If it does not obey and exit from the hour in which it falls, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it becomes rotten; and its attraction and its exit will ease.
And similarly if it is stuck in bone and does not obey you to exit, then leave it for a few days; and repeat with attraction and movement every day until it exits.
If it does not obey you to exit after those days, then you must bore around the arrow in the bone itself from every side with a fine trepan, until the arrows are enlarged. Then attract it, and extract it.
If, however, the arrow is already concealed within the body and hidden from sight, then you must search for it with a probe. If you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments suitable for its extraction.
But if you cannot [draw it out], because of the tightness of the wound and because of the length of the arrow inside deep down; and there is no bone or nerve or vein in that place: then make an incision over it until the wound is enlarged, making it possible to extract the arrow.
If there are ears by which it is held fast, then free the flesh that has become attached to them from all sides with every means at your disposal; and if it cannot be extracted due to the tearing of the flesh in splitting those ears or twisting them: continue until it comes out.
And when you are extracting the arrow from whatever location it is in, use hand movements and twisting with the scissors on all sides until you cause it to come out: using ultimate skillfulness so that the arrow does not break during this process making its extraction more difficult for you.
If you cannot extract it from the first moment onwards, then leave it there for several days until those things around it decay. Then try again; it will be easier due to the loosening from [the decayed flesh]. But if you encounter trouble because of a profuse flow of blood, then do what has been described in its own chapter regarding treatment: and guard your strength against cutting into any veins or nerves or tendons.
Use every means at your disposal for the extraction of the arrow: and let that be done with ease or tranquility; slowness and strength, as I have described to you.
You must ensure that when you are removing an arrow [sagittam], the patient is positioned according to the angle at which the arrow entered their body. As it is more beneficial. If this is not possible for you, then use whichever of the positions that is feasible.
An arrow which exits from the opposite side of the body; or if part of it has already come through to the outside; or if one end of the arrow is causing a lump under the skin on the upper side, and you can see this protruding: cut over this area with a knife, and make an incision large enough for you to grasp in forceps.
Then pull it; it will be easy now to remove.
If the arrow is stuck to bone, then rotate your hand following the curve of the bone until the arrowhead cuts into it and enlarges its hole; then pull on it.
And if not, leave the arrow for several days; then try again until it comes out.
If there is any wood from the arrow shaft still present inside the wound, then push it out with this.
If the shaft has broken and you wish to push it out with an implement, then insert a concave tool inside the wound so that its cavity fits over the tail of the arrow; then use this to push on it.
If the arrow is concave, however, then use an instrument which inserts inside it to push on this. The arrow will be pushed out by the implement.
If the arrow is poisoned, then you must scoop out all of the concave flesh where the venom is; if this is possible for you to do. Then treat it with what is appropriate for that.
If the arrow has fallen into the chest, or abdomen, or bladder, or side; and is close enough to be reached with a hook, and it's possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and avoid cutting any veins or nerves, and extract it.
Then sew the wound, if you see fit, and treat it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps with which arrows are extracted.
The ends should be like the beak of a bird, which are made sharp like iron; when they grasp the arrow, they do not release it.
And many kinds are made from them, large and small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow, its slenderness, and the width and narrowness of the wound.
Form of the concave driver.
And the form of the deaf driver.
This is the form of the deaf end like a wedge, to ease its entry into the concave arrow, and drive it with that.
On the cutting of veins.
There are thirty veins that are regularly opened for bloodletting.
Among these, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsatile veins located behind the ears called 'Herbae', and two arteries visible at the temples; also, there are two veins found in the lacrimal ducts of each eye known as 'Aspicientes'; additionally, there is a vein situated on the midline forehead, and one placed at the tip of the nose. And two 'Guidegis', which are found in the neck. Also, there are two veins that are present on the upper lip of the mouth. And another pair of veins located below on the lower lip. These, then, are the vessels known as 'Algecherichs'. And there exist two veins situated beneath the tongue.
The veins typically used for bloodletting in the arms consist of five vessels on each arm.
One is the Cephalic vein, positioned on the outside of the forearm; it's commonly referred to as the 'head' or 'capital' vein by laypeople. And then there is the Fusca, or the dark/brownish one. The next is the Median vein, composed of branches from both the Basilica and Cephalic veins; it's commonly known as the 'body' or 'trunk' vein by laypeople. Following is the Basilica, found on the inside of the arm; it's also known as the 'Titillicar'. Laypeople call this the 'belly' or 'abdominal' vein. And the tendon of the arm, which is located above the wrist: it is the one that is bled and appears over the thumb with a clear manifestation.
And the Salvatella: it is the vein that lies between the ring finger and little finger, and has two branches.
In the leg and foot there are three veins. One of them is the one that lies beneath the thumb's curve on the side of the forearm. And the second is the Saphenous vein, which lies at the heel on the inner side. And the Nesse Vein, which is located at the heel on the lateral side.
In the other leg there are three veins similar to these.
Regarding venesection of two veins behind the ears.
The venesection of two veins behind the ears is helpful for old catarrh, headaches, facial swelling and long-standing head ulcers.
The method of venesection should be as I describe it. The patient's head should be shaved, and their occipital region rubbed at the site of the two veins with a rough cloth using vigorous friction. Then the patient should tightly bind their neck with a cord until the two veins become visible. Their locations are behind the ears, in the two hollows of the head. Feel for them with your finger, and where you detect their pulse beneath your fingertip, there make a mark with an ink-soaked swab.
Then take the lancet, which is called the 'Incidens.' Then introduce it beneath the vein into the skin until you reach the tip of the lancet. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein along with the skin using the Incidens. And let the length of the incision be equal to that of two joined fingers, or around this amount: and make as much blood come out as you wish.
Then compress it with small bandages, and leave it until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of this book was described the incision of such things, as well as their cauterization.
Indeed the puncturing of two arteries in the temples is beneficial for an old headache; an evil sore, and frequent eye-ache; as well as a superfluous flow of sharp matter into the eyes.
And here is how you puncture them, as I describe it to you. The patient must hold their neck very tense until two veins become visibly apparent and their pulsation is felt beneath your finger. Then mark these with the encaustic pen.
Then lift the skin above the vein upwards with your index finger, introduce the Incidens underneath and then raise the vein upwards. And cut it like you did with the other two veins; and make as much blood run out as is necessary for you.
Then release the patient's constriction and place your finger over the vein for one hour. After that, place cotton and poultices over it, and tightly bind it with a strong compression; leave it until it heals.
And now there has already been a reminder of those things, their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of this book.
However, the indication for the venesection of the frontal vein is after the venesection of the cephalic vein, for old facial diseases; and for headaches, swelling; and foul ulcers.
And the quality of its venesection is as I tell you. The patient should tighten their neck with a cord until the vein appears. Then take the instrument that is called the probe.
Place the sharp point that is at the head of the probe over the vein itself and strike it with a comb or another object like it; let the blood flow out according to the amount you desire. Then release the patient's puncture wound and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad lancet. However, it should not be sharp-pointed like the other lancets, but rather broad at its point. And you should lance it across the vein because the bone is close by; and perhaps a thin lancet will break inside if you do not.
The use of the two veins which are in the two lacrimal glands of the two eyes is for eye ailments caused by scabies and inflammation; also for swelling in the eye and illnesses affecting the face.
And the way of performing venesection on them is that the sick person should press their neck with a bandage. Then venesect these [veins]: and you be standing over his head.
And let the venesection be done transversely along its length with a small scalpel, which is broad to some extent because there is not much flesh at this place. For if the scalpel's end is thin it may well break.
Then make [the blood] run out as much as you need to. And place on them a compress, and bind them for one night, then release them.
The veins of the nose that are to be venesected, are relevant to acute fever and severe pain, and illnesses affecting the face like migraine and inflammation occurring on the face; especially when they are longstanding.
And the way of performing venesection is that the sick person should press their neck with a bandage. Then hold his nose with your left hand and take a fine scalpel that is long; place it in the middle of the rabbit's snout between its nostrils. Since the vein is not apparent to the senses there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And you must press your hand firmly with the lancet for a moment; and make the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it for one night. For it is quickly restored.
Now two advantages of Guidogi's venesection are relief for dyspnea and the onset of leprosy, as well as melancholy diseases, impetigo, bad ulcers, scabies, that is, itching eruptions.
And the manner of these venesections is that the patient should be bound under both arms at his neck with a bandage; and the operator should stand over the patient's head, while the patient sits on a chair.
Then lance the vein with an extensive venesection for a moment. Then extract an appropriate quantity of blood; or according to what you see is required in the case. Then do likewise with the other vein.
After that, loosen the bandage and bind the two veins moderately tight; so as not to suffocate the patient. And let it remain until morning. For the wound is healed.
On venesection of the veins, by Algeberich. Now the advantages of Algeberich's venesections are that they contribute to salivation in the mouth and the corruption of gums; bad ulcers; and cracks on the lips, as well as ulcers which are within the nose or around it.
And the technique of bloodletting is as follows: make the patient sit before you and tighten their neck with your hand around the vein. Then turn the patient's lip upwards and look at two veins, one of which is on their right lip and the other to its left; they are both identifiable by dark coloration. These veins are true because around them are smaller black ones. Make an oblique cut into both of them.
If you are in doubt as to which one is which then look for the larger and more pronounced of them.
Do the same for the two veins on the upper lip, and indeed it is customary to do so; make a cut into both of those which are in the lower lip.
On bloodletting from the vein beneath the tongue after bleeding at the temple. Bleeding from the two veins beneath the tongue is beneficial for swellings of the throat and for inflammations affecting the uvula and mouth.
The technique for bleeding these is as follows: make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; lift their tongue and look beneath it on one side for a vein that is dark in colour, then do likewise for the other side.
Bloodlet from both of them; be careful not to hurt your hand while doing so. For beneath them lie arteries, and it may be that blood will gush forth from these.
The three veins that are commonly used for bloodletting in the elbow are those which, when lanced, result in a flow of blood from all people.
And these veins are bled according to two methods. Or by pricking with a broad myrtle-stick lancet; or to lance and open up the vein gently with an ivory tube; or to dry-cup with a lancet, this is called alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these there are broad and narrow types depending on the width of the veins and their tightness. The form of a myrtle lancet is broad as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave, full, prominent, apparent, thick veins, and those that contain thick, cloudy blood.
And this lancet is less broad at its end and finer.
And it is suitable for the bloodletting of fine veins which contain thin yellow blood.
The basilic vein, which is one of these three bleeding veins, provides the greatest benefit. Because it removes blood from illnesses below the throat and neck, following onto the chest and belly; and it is suitable for the surgeon to bleed this with care, being above fear of it because beneath it is an artery. If he errs and adds to the incision during bloodletting, he will sever that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore, it is necessary not to bloodlet her with the sharp bloodletter; rather, she should be cut by a surgeon using an alenesil.
If the basilica does not appear with a clear manifestation, then you must move away from it, change to another place, or seek one of its branches; alternatively, bloodlet at the place of the arm's string (i.e., tendon). For it is clear, and cut it with the anesil bloodletter, as we have said.
But if you wish to bloodlet it in the same place, then before the arm's constriction, you should touch the place until you know the pulse's place. Then mark the place with a cauterizer, afterwards bind up the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using an alenesil bloodletter, as we have said. And take care that the strike does not fall through from the place of the artery.
And when you see that the place you marked with the cauterizer swells up as you bind it, then that swelling is of the artery; therefore, avoid it.
But if you see the blood during the bloodletting rise like a child's urine and it is thin, red blood, then know that it is from arterial blood. Then hurry and put your finger on that long space; afterwards take away your finger. If the blood is checked (for it often happens), then bind up the arm and let it go; and caution the patient against moving it, and be above his fear.
And it should not move for a few days until it is healed.
But if the bleeding is not stopped, and it defeats you; and you do not have medicine with you at that moment, then cut into the artery, should it appear necessary to you. For its ends draw together, and the bleeding is stopped.
Or take the bark of the pistachio tree, and grind it; take half of this amount, and press it on to the place where the vein has been tied appropriately with a bandage and some lint until the next day.
Then if the bleeding is stopped, it is good. And if not: then treat it with that which was mentioned previously from the place where the lint used to stop the bleeding is removed; and its bleeding will not be difficult in most cases, due to the small location of the wound, and the possibility of tying off the artery using a bandage from the arm.
The benefit of the ligation of the jugular vein is that it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the axillary artery, and a branch of the superficial temporal artery, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the patient that he should be above any fear arising from this ligation, for beneath it lies a nerve. If therefore he adds to the ligation by cutting into it, and finds a nerve, an accident of numbness occurs for him, and its healing becomes difficult, perhaps even impossible.
And this nerve often appears to the senses. But if it is hidden in some people and is delicate, and does not show itself, then you must place your fleam so that you may bleed it with Al-Zehra's incision, and divert the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.
Concerning the cephalic vein. However, the bleeding of the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and directs it towards eye ailments.
And in this vein specifically, if you wish, it is necessary to bleed it by pricking with a fleam of olive wood or myrtle wood, for it is safer than all the veins because there is no artery nor nerve beneath it.
However, it is appropriate for you to divert the forearm a little with your fleam and seek out the softer spot; and if it does not appear upon first percussion, it causes no harm to repeat the bleeding several times over it.
However, perhaps an abscess forms in some people when it is not bled upon first percussion, but this abscess does no harm to them.
Concerning the utility of bleeding, and precautions to be observed therein. The quality of bleeding, and its accidents that arise from it, whose correction you ought to consider.
First then of this you ought to know, that bleeding is not administered unless for the preservation of health and its continuation, and caution against the onset of sickness.
And for phlebotomy to take place on one of the three veins that are in the elbow region, namely the Cephalic, the Throbotic, and the Basilic vein. And for phlebotomy to be carried out at the beginning of spring before a fast and during summer: likewise in autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And let the phlebotomy be performed on the first day or third after three hours have passed.
However, phlebotomy administered for illness has no set hour; rather it should be done when necessity and convenience demand it at any time of day or night.
And it is not appropriate to perform phlebotomy on children until they reach the age of fourteen. Nor should a pregnant woman undergo phlebotomy unless she is between her fourth to seventh month of pregnancy. Nor should elderly people who have already passed their sixtieth year undergo phlebotomy.
Therefore, if one wishes to undergo bloodletting for any reason, it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines beforehand with a mild enema, should there be an excessive amount of stool retained: so as not to draw from the veins during phlebotomy any noxious putrid superfluities from the gut which could harm vital organs.
Nor should a patient who is suffering from nausea due to overeating undergo phlebotomy; nor while drunk or recovering from drunkenness until these effects have subsided. Nor should a patient who is suffering from dropsy undergo phlebotomy.
And cauterization should be avoided after colic pain, vomiting, abdominal pain, sexual intercourse, labor, exercise, lack of sleep, fasting and anything that dissolves the virtue from physical or animal matters.
Then consider the subtleties of humors before that, if the blood is thick with food and drink, and medicines: if it is possible for him to do so.
Then he should enter the bath, if nothing prevents it; or he should engage in some exercise to refine his blood.
And perform his phlebotomy on the chest, around the third day, as we have said; and try to ensure that his chest is evacuated of all evil animal accidents that day: such as distress, anger, and fear; and from all physical accidents, such as labor, pain, excessive sexual intercourse, and similar things.
And let him have present at his residence things with which custom has established the use of humans due to their pleasant aroma and fragrance, and cheerfulness, and similar qualities as much as possible.
Then the phlebotomist should sit on a cushion that is higher than the patient's; afterward, he should draw out his arm and rub it twice or thrice with his own hand. Then he should tighten the ligature with a strap and wind it around twice.
And the binding should be moderate, for when it is uneven or excessively tight, it then obstructs the flow of blood; and when it is too loose, it also obstructs the flow of blood.
Then after the binding, it is necessary for the patient to rub his hands together until the veins fill and become apparent.
Then the phlebotomist should clean the phlebotomy wound with a little old oil.
Then they should place their left index finger on the vein itself below the spot where they wish to perform the phlebotomy, just a little: so that the vein does not escape and the strike is broken. For there is a vein that you will find, like a fleeing rope at the time of phlebotomy: and among them is one which is full of wind; and when you place the lancet on it, it contracts under the lancet, and deceives the phlebotomist, and does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is tight; therefore for this reason the phlebotomist must be firm, and be careful in all these matters.
Then put down the lancet. If therefore the vein opens with one thrust, then that is good. And if not, then repeat that thrust elsewhere under that spot a little, or above it quickly: if the area does not become hard.
If the area becomes hard, or the patient becomes weaker, then leave him for a day, or two days: and do not bind tightly with a bandage. For perhaps it will draw the hot swelling to itself. Nor should one enter the bath.
Then repeat the phlebotomy if he likes it.
If the opening is small, or the blood runs thinly: and you fear that not enough blood will come out: then repeat the lancet in the same hole according to its direction, and add a little to your action.
Do it with haste before the site becomes infected, for the site often becomes infected after a minor surgical procedure.
If you see that the site has already become infected, then do not operate on it at all because nothing will excuse you in this case. And place over the site something made from oil faeces, because it alleviates the flow of blood. And this is better than plain oil itself, and also better than all other oils.
Similarly apply oil faeces for every venesection you do to prevent the flow of blood; and they make a mixture of it with alfarachio tyrian myrrh and saffron when either one is placed on the site.
For thick blood thins and resolves when it is made thicker.
If a large infection occurs at the site of venesection, which often happens especially when one has not been bled or there is an opening into a small vein, then hurry and place over the site a sponge soaked in warm water and salt; press it for an hour because it will resolve.
And you must do this after the blood has stopped flowing out of that same vein or from another one.
If there remains in the site after a few days some blackness or greenness then this does not harm; and if you wish apply over it some aloe or liquid myrrh, or something made from mint juice like peppermint or similar.
Infections and swellings often happen after venesection on the Basilica vein.
Place your hand over it, then if you find softness under your compression on it, then that prominence is bad. Therefore, cause it to be placed over it something of what we have said. For perhaps blood will flow from it of the artery.
But make a plaster for it with that in which there is astringency, so that the place may harden. Then take care of it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you draw from everyone of blood according to the quantity of their strength. And what appears on top of the blood, conquering it in color.
For if the blood is black, then let it go out until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it go until it becomes thin; and likewise if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full and strong and requires the extraction of blood to increase the vein's venesection and let it be wide; and on that which is weak, let there be the opposite of this.
And it is necessary that you draw it from the veins and let there be a narrow hole; and what is better for venesection is to make a cross-section, not a puncture.
And this method of venesection is a safeguard against an overflow of blood and from cutting the nerve; and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection by breadth or length.
For the person who is accustomed to fainting during bloodletting, it is necessary that they eat before the procedure a small amount of bread soaked in pomegranate juice, or heated secaniabin; and draw out for them some blood in three or four portions.
And if they are of a cold constitution, then they should take before the bloodletting bread soaked in grape syrup, or in spiced honey syrup, or in perfumed aromatic syrup.
If a fainting incident occurs during the bloodletting and it is due to excessive loss of blood, then they must take as a drink meat broth and delicate perfumed syrup: and use an aromatic compound with aloes, and bind their chest with it; and employ the other methods that we mentioned in the section on fainting in chapter 3.
Whoever wishes to recover their arm strength and release their blood a second time: it is necessary for them that the bloodletting be done over a large area of skin, and their constitution is weak; they must release the blood gradually according to their condition on consecutive days.
Whoever wishes to recover their arm strength and release their blood again but whose body is strong should do so after seven or nine hours from the first bloodletting.
Whoever wishes to draw the blood from their body towards the opposite side of where they lean must recover on day two or three.
When there is much heated blood in someone's body and it causes a fever to develop, it must be let out all at once with a large quantity being drawn from them; the wound must be enlarged until they faint; afterwards you must observe all conditions of bloodletting, and place your hand on their pulse near where the blood flows so that death does not occur in place of fainting. Indeed it often happens that when the bloodletter is ignorant and carelessness occurs.
And when you want to release the arm and let out blood for a second time after the opening of the vein is already closed and the outflow of blood becomes difficult, it is not appropriate that pressure be applied to it with force, but rather it should be extended quickly while curved. For this is a very bad thing indeed; or rather let it be, until the bloodletter comes again.
Or remove with the sharpness of the surgical tool that which has coagulated from blood at the opening of the vein and place over it some salt dissolved in water. And place over it some of the unguent called alfaroch or sage-based and apply gentle compression until the blood flows out.
But if the vein has already developed an abscess, then let it be and do not lance it until the abscess subsides.
But if necessity calls for letting out blood a second time and there is no avoiding it, then either lance it over that place or else do so on the other arm at another vein.
The bloodletter's cord is tied to the arm at the points of Fuscus and Basilicus when they are not found and remain hidden because it is compounded from them.
And the nature of his bloodletting is such that he should immerse his hand in warm water until it becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
Then let him be bound over it with a bandage having a moderate tightness. Next lance it a little at a time across the width of it and not lengthwise; let your opening be broad and make your lancing where you join the hand somewhat.
If the flow of blood is obstructed, then dip your hand back into warm water and release the blood to run into the water until you have achieved what you need to do.
If however you were to be working during the summer months, then you would be exempt from repeating the action of dipping your hand into warm water. And indeed it is mostly recommended to release the flow of blood into warm water during wintertime.
And the bloodletting from this vein is safer than any other, for there are no pulsating veins or nerves beneath it.
Bloodletting from the right hand's "Salvatella" vein is beneficial for ailments of the liver.
The technique of the bloodletting is such that you should tie a piece of mahason cloth around the arm with a ligament or your own hand, after having dipped it into warm water, until the vein fills and becomes very apparent to touch. Then proceed with bloodletting by piercing across [the vein]. And if you cut it fully through, that will not harm the patient at all.
Preserve the [bloodletting] instrument in a safe place; do not finish with your hand. Under it, after all, lie the nerves of the fingers laid bare of flesh.
Then dip your hand back into warm water again and let the blood run out into it. For if you do not dip your hand back into warm water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein and be obstructed from flowing out.
When you have removed enough blood, then apply oil and salt over the vein so that it does not quickly harden.
Similarly, you should do likewise with every narrow vessel.
The indication for this type of bloodletting is from the left hand since it corresponds to ailments of the spleen and proceed with its bloodletting as you did with the second one similarly.
The indication for the saphenous vein's bloodletting is ailments of the lower part of the body such as womb disorders, retained periods, kidney problems, old hip and leg ulcers, and similar conditions.
And the procedure for its bloodletting is that the patient should put their foot into hot water and rub it until the veins stand out and then bind above the ankle with a leather strap. The veins' location is indeed at the heel appearing towards the big toe and many branches spread from it on the foot's surface.
So bleed it at its wider branch or at the heel where they gather because this is better and safer.
If you bleed it on the foot's surface then beware of nerves that are beneath it over the foot's surface.
And make your bloodletting where you are bleeding it transversely as if you wish to cut it and let the lancet be a Nesil one.
But if the flow of blood is impeded then repeat putting their foot into hot water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist makes an error and misses the vein on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy slightly higher up, for it is a safe place, and do not fear any harm from it, as you are avoiding the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the other foot's saphenous vein.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel on the side of the hock.
And the benefit of this phlebotomy is relief from hip pain when it occurs because of hot blood.
And the procedure for this phlebotomy is as follows: the patient should enter a bath and hurry; press their legs from the side of the hip down to above the heel with four fingers using a thin, long ligature; it will not be visible unless because of that.
When it becomes visible, then phlebotomize it however you find possible, either according to its direction or transversely; and this is better, or by making an incision or a cut. For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in most people.
For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in most people. If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the sense: then phlebotomize one of its branches, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot towards the anklebone; and avoid the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then release the ligature, and place skin over the site of the phlebotomy, and bind the site. For it heals quickly.
The ventosa, and its qualities regarding usage.
Ventosas are made from horns, brass and glass.
Indeed the ventosa has two modes of application. One method is with scarification and bloodletting; the other is ventosa application without scarification.
This latter ventosa treatment, which is without scarification, has two further methods. One method is with fire... Or without it.
There are fourteen places on the body where ventosas may be applied with scarification and bloodletting. One is the ventosa for the elbow, and it is at the back of the head; another is the one for the nape, and it is at the centre of the neck; those for temples are beneath the jawbone on either side of the mouth; there is also a ventosa for two flat bones, and this is placed below the mandible in the lower jaw region. Additionally, there is a ventosa for the tip of the tailbone and another for two hollows, which are at the centre of both arms; further, there is one for two legs, and another for two kneecaps.
The ventosa does not remove blood from the many small vessels scattered within flesh and thus its power is not diminished as with phlebotomy. A ventosa application should not be used for any sickness caused by over-fullness until the whole body is evacuated.
If necessity requires the use of cupping for illness or due to custom, we perform it at any time: at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle as well.
That is because there are people who, when their blood multiplies within them to the point where they require its removal through cupping, find heaviness in their head and dizziness.
And there are those among them who experience fullness and redness on their face, head, and neck. And there are those who experience itching on their face and forehead, darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And among them are those who scratch the place where they were cupped. And there are those whose laughter increases. And among them are those who taste blood in their mouth; either an ulcer appears on their tongue, or they spit out blood. And there are those whose sleep increases. And there are those who see blood and redness, as well as dead people, injuries, and things similar to them in their sleep.
When we see any of these symptoms, especially if it is on the thirteenth day of the month: we order cupping to be performed then after two or three hours have passed from that time.
The reason for cupping on the nape is that it helps with heaviness in the head and what flows towards the eyes. But it should be done after emptying the entire body.
This cupping glass is positioned for a cephalic venesection.
And it is not permissible for someone of a cold constitution or with a cough to use this. For it causes them great harm.
And for this reason it is not appropriate for the elderly to use them or those with cold ailments in their head.
But whoever is diligent about it will have forgetfulness come over him.
And because of this, you should instruct the cupper to briefly remove their hand and the cup downwards, fearing that forgetfulness might be generated.
Cupping or al-kihil is in the place of venesection for the haunches and thighs, and it benefits those with dyspnea, stridor, wheezing, coughing, and fullness.
The al-kihil cup should be pressed briefly because if it is placed below, it causes weakness of the heart and stomach.
Cupping with the al-haqdhim benefits chance headaches and pain, ophthalmia, migraine, toothaches, and tooth roots; it is in place of venesection on the temples.
You should instruct the cupper not to press their hand down with scarring; lest they lacerate an artery and cause bleeding.
Cupping underneath the chin benefits mouth ulcers and gum disease, as well as similar ailments of the mouth; it is a substitute for venesection on both lips.
Wind treatment with spoons contributes to the relief that comes from repulsion and warmth.
Wind treatment of the interior parts with two bellows contributes to the benefit of bloodletting from three veins - Basilica, Fusca and Cephalic; since it attracts blood from all those minute veins that are in the flesh; and those small veins draw from other thicker veins until the drawing reaches the three veins.
You should instruct the wind treatment practitioner not to go too deep with the scarring; since it is a place stripped of flesh and beneath are nerves and arteries.
Wind treatment with the spoon that is winded over the anal fissure contributes to haemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
You should instruct the wind treatment practitioner to use a large spoon and one made of copper; since the location requires strong suction and perhaps the delicate spoons will break; and that scarring is to be done with deep scars.
Wind treatment of the legs reduces them noticeably; since it draws blood from the entire body and contributes to old pains in the kidneys, uterus and bladder; provokes menstruation, contributes to nausea and dizziness; and takes the place of bloodletting of the two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, it greatly weakens the body and causes many people to faint.
The benefit of the alhorcobeni wind treatment is almost equal to that of the two legs wind treatment.
The quality of the wind treatment placement is that you should place the spoon first while empty and suck with a moderate suction; and do not prolong the position of the spoons but rather put them quickly and remove them quickly so that the humours come to the place in an equal arrival; and do not stop repeating this and continuing until you see the place already reddening and swelling, and there appears a redness of blood; then therefore scarify and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider the arrangement of bodies.
A person with delicate flesh, whose sores are few in number, should be operated on only once; no more, so that the place may not become ulcerated.
Also instruct the Suctionist to slightly enlarge the incision and make it deeper; and to moderate the strength of his suction according to the patient's ability to endure, speed and gentle motion.
If there is great thickness of blood, then you should operate on him twice. In the first stage, a way is opened for the delicate subtraction of blood and its thinning; but in the second examination, there is precise extraction of thick blood.
But if the blood is very muddy, then let there be a third operation to get at the last of it.
Finally, when we wish to draw blood gradually or sparingly, one operation is sufficient for us. But if we want to extract much blood, then we operate with many incisions.
And if we judge that the blood is thick, then it must be operated on with deep incisions; and the limit of equality in incision depth is equal to skin thickness.
What should be administered from the oils at the placement of the suction-cups, and what the Suctionist must avoid.
In the case of someone whose skin is thick, hard and dark with their pores being tight, it is necessary that the places for cupping be anointed with opening, softening and dissolving oils such as alkei oil or viola oil in the summer time, sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil.
And if it is in winter time, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or sarbatine oil; and similar ones.
If however the superfluity is thick and cold then use oil of tamarisk, or balm oil, or poplar oil, or dill oil; and similar ones.
If however the windpipe is long and of tender flesh then it ought to be prevented from oil, and it ought such places of those windpipes to be washed after being oiled with rosewater, or with cold water, or with cucumber juice, or with purslane water; and similar ones.
He however whose blood is of much moisture should wash blisters with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumac; and similar ones.
Whose however superfluities are thick should wash his blisters with old wine, or with tansy water, or with a dill decoction, or chamomile; and similar ones.
And it ought to be cautioned against being winded in a bath, or in the steam room of a bath; rather it ought to be administered after exiting the bath for an hour, or two hours.
And one ought not sleep after being winded.
What is it by which the windpipe or the wound ought to be regulated before being winded?
And after it one ought first to consider: then if the windpipe or wound is choleric and there conquer his blood sharpness and inflammation; then it ought to take refrigerants, such as pomegranate molasses: also okra with vinegar and lettuce, and rocket, and juniper: and similar ones.
And give him poultry as food, and boiled mutton, and foods seasoned with vinegar: and things similar to these.
And for one whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he take as a drink syrup of honey, or of alum, or else alsecaniabin made from seeds; and let him take medium wine which is neither old nor new; and he must be instructed to use little food. And give him as food poultry, and goose; and sparrows, that is, small birds; and he ought to eat young pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of ventousation and bloodletting, drink be more than food; and it is necessary that in some people there be given as a drink alfaroch treacle or a medicine of moss, that is, nutmeg, or alesselithe before ventouses; either before or after bloodletting: to strengthen the main members and thin out the blood. And it is not necessary that they take it heated as a drink.
On ventouses without scarifications. Now ventouses which are without scarifications are those that are placed over the liver, and spleen, and podagra, and over the belly, navel, areas of the kidney, and hip bone; since these members do not tolerate scarifications upon them.
And one does not seek from them anything other than the drawing of blood away from a member to another; as we place a ventouse over the nipples in illness where there is a flow of nasal blood. And we use them to relieve from one member the cold congealed ventosity and place it on another member; as we place a ventouse over the belly or navel. It dilates the limb, heats it up, and removes the pain because it dissolves that viscosity.
It is also placed on the kidneys when there is gravel or stone in them. Perhaps by the power of its own drawing quality it opens up the gravel or extracts the stone from its place.
And it does similarly when applied to the liver or spleen in order to dissolve any viscosity present in either organ.
And these leeches should be applied when fasting, with the necessary incisions only being made. And sometimes they are used along with fire.
And sometimes they are applied full of warm water when there is a case of pleurisy; the leech should be filled with warm water only or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The application of leeches using fire: take some hot coals from the fire, wrap them in a cloth, then apply this to the affected part; afterwards place the leech on top and make the necessary incisions.
The size of the opening should be that of two open fingers, and its depth half a palm; on its side where it is roughly at its middle there will be a small hole sized to fit a needle through: this must be made from bronze or brass, with smooth rounded edges, equal-sided and polished so as not to damage the limb when applied over it: there should be in its middle a transverse bar of either bronze or iron whereon a candle is placed and lit.
Now there is made this large leech, greater than we described above and somewhat less so for the smaller one, according to illnesses and the age of the user.
For the flatulence of children and weak people is different from that of men and those with large bodies.
The quality of placing this flatulent condition with fire on the limb is such that you should light a wick with fire from decent linen or a small candle made of wax; and place it over the middle of a transverse rod which is in the center of the flatulence, so that there may be burning fire around about the lower part of the flatulent condition, so that the body of the patient will not be burnt.
Then it should be placed on the limb; and a finger should sit over the hole that I mentioned, until when we hold the flatulent condition: while we need to, we remove the finger, and vapour will come out over this hole, and the flatulence shall be relieved immediately.
Then light the wick in its own way, and repeat this if you need to.
Now the cupping that is applied in the illness of pleurisy with water does not have a transverse rod or a hole; and it is only applied when it is filled with water, and placed on the limb.
And this is its form.
And the larger this cupping glass is, so as to be able to take in much water, it is better.
 On Bloodletting by Cupping.
Bloodletting by cupping is not administered to many [people], unless it is on limbs where the placement of cupping glasses is impossible due to their delicacy, such as the lip and gums, and things similar. Either on a part of the body stripped of flesh, such as a finger, and nose, and similar to these.
And the quality of using them is: that you come from leeches which are in fresh water, free of decay.
Then they should be left for a day and a night in fresh water until they are hungry and nothing remains in their stomachs. Then the body should be evacuated first with bloodletting, and with emetics. Then wash the patient's limb until it reddens. Afterwards, place them on top of it.
When they become full and fall off, and there is still possible suction of the site with an emetic, then it will be more effective for healing; if not, then wash the site with vinegar. Then with much water, rub it and squeeze it out.
If the flow of blood continues after the removal of the leeches and it is dripping: then soak a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the oozing stops.
If the blood multiplies, then sprinkle over it egg white powder, or gallnut powder, and similar astringents to it: until the bleeding stops.
Or place on the site halves of shelled beans: and leave them until the beans stick to the site, for the blood will be stopped.
And it is necessary if repeating leeches is needed, when possible, change them.
If leeches are prevented from attaching, then wipe clean the site with fresh blood. Or fix a needle to the sites until something comes out of the blood. Then apply leeches, for they themselves will attach immediately when they sense anything from the blood.
When you want them to fall off, sprinkle over them something powdered from aloe, or salt, or ash; and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with restoration after fractures and dislocations caused by accidents to bones.
Know, O Sons, that those who are ignorant of medicine and the people claim to know about this chapter but have never examined an ancient book nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason, this method of science is deprived in our land. And I have never found any good in it whatsoever and did not gain from it what I gained except through the length of my reading of ancient books and study towards an understanding of them until I extracted its knowledge from them.
Then I applied experiment and study throughout my long life.
And now I have described to you from that book into this chapter all the knowledge I contain: and on what my experience has passed, after having abridged it for you, and released it from the occupation of lengthiness, and shortened it by means of a summary abbreviation, and showed it at the end of variation: and formed in it many forms out of the shapes of instruments which are administered into it, being composed of addition and subtraction, as I did in two preceding chapters.
Chapter Two.
It is necessary that we say in the prologue of this chapter an outline and summary of topics for which understanding first compels the surgeon to stand on their truth: namely so that you and those who are willing know or learn this noble art and teach others.
I say therefore that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall occurs to someone then you must first hurry to bleed and loosen them or do both at once if nothing prevents it such as weakness of strength or if the one whom it happens to is a child or decrepit old man or if the time is extremely hot or very cold.
Then he should be content with his food, cool vegetables, and the meat of birds and kids; avoid wine, fatty meats, and foods that fill the veins with blood. Until you are safe from hot inflammation and no longer fear the discharge of matter to the limb then let the sick person return to their original diet, with which they are accustomed.
When the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed nourishing food with much nutriment, heavy, thick and viscous; such as foods made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, heads, feet, and stomachs of fowl, eggs, and fresh fish: also coarse wine and similar things. For with this regimen the clotting of the fracture occurs more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in men who are in the first stage of old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be strengthened and consolidated according to their nature always, because of the desiccation of their limbs: but those parts which remain of them at the end [of life] become hardened and strengthen like bones of young children.
However nature applies to the broken bone from all parts some substance similar to glue which has thickness, by which it adheres and binds itself together until they are cemented to each other, and bound firmly together, until it returns finally to its former strength and firmness, until nothing hinders it from performing its functions: and for this reason it is necessary that you feed the patient nourishing food in which there is weight, viscosity, and thickness as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of limbs; for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head-bone; and a fracture of the chest-bone is different from a fracture of the back bone: likewise all other limbs differ one from another. And I have come with a recollection of every kind of fracture set forth in its own Chapter distinct from others. And the types of bone fractures also differ within themselves.
Since it becomes an arched fracture, besides which accidents occur in the stars. And sometimes it becomes a fracture along the length of the bone; and its fractures are splintered, that is, stars, and extensions resulting from this, as in a reed when it's cut with a knife for writing. And they do not extend; and it is a fracture with wound and separation at the head, and there is a small crack-like fracture.
And for each type there is a specific skill or tool required for its restoration; this will be discussed later, divided by the areas of the body.
And from where the bone fracture is known, its curvature and prominence are seen; its appearance to the senses, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When there is no apparent curvature in its place, nor a sound upon your touch when you touch the bone with agitation, and the patient does not feel much pain; then there is no fracture here, but rather possibly a curvature or small crack - therefore one should not move it with the hand and compression at all, but instead put over it some medicines which will be recalled later, appropriate to the place; then bind it tightly with fine bandages.
And you should know that when the place is arched and split in two, besides splintering, yet all parts are removed from their counterparts; then it's necessary for you to begin your work on its straightening at once before a hot inflammation develops.
But if a hot inflammation does develop, then leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides. Then it is equally possible to adjust it according to whichever method, depending on its softness and ingenuity.
And you should know that its restoration and adjustment are easier than with bone, where there occur fractures.
Then tighten it according to how you will remember it.
If there are fractures in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two sides, if it is a hand or foot; or with one hand, if it is a small limb; or with two cords, or with a cord and a hand.
And your position should be such that you place the limb over an equal spot, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken limb are extended; then try to bring back those additions with all your ingenuity and in any way possible to their respective places: and beware, based on your strength, lest it happen on the weak through your operation some pain, nor injury: and try, according to your strength, to fit one of the two bones with its partner, according to better shapes.
And it is necessary at that hour, that you try and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and adjust it according to the amount of your strength.
And beware excessive stretching, and strong pressure, as many fools do. For they often cause to happen through their operation a hot abscess, or contraction in the limb: as we have already seen it from their operations many times.
Then fasten after adjustment, and proper operation, and the setting of that limb, and rest, and tranquility: and advise the weak person about it. And make it so that he does not move in the hour of his watches, and of his sleep at his turning, and his agitation, and at his excretion, and all his movements with his final strength. And to avoid having the position of the limb in a position that results in pain. That is, because when he feels pain or injury in the positioning of the limb, then it must be changed to another position where he does not feel pain.
And take care with him so that his position is equal and straight; so that the limb does not become twisted when restored.
And the quality of the fracture of the broken limb is as I describe it.
You should know that broken limbs differ according to their size, magnitude, and shape.
So those that are small among them, such as the arm, finger, and jawbone, and things similar to these, then there must be a soft, thin cloth wrapping. But those that are large among them, such as the thigh and leg, it is necessary that there be a broad, hard wrapping around them.
Because a broad bandage connects the large limb and binds it from all sides of the fracture equally, so that no part is left uncovered.
Then, after your evacuation from the area around the fracture, start to apply a suitable ointment with soft lint on the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the place of the fracture itself with three or four turns, according to what the limb deserves; and squeeze your hand a little bit with the bandage.
Go with him to the upper part above the site of the fracture, and bind it less tightly than you bound the fractured site. Extend yourself with the roll above the site of the fracture for some time, and gradually loosen the binding until you get hold of something large from the healthy place.
Then take another bandage and wrap it around the fractured site with bindings. Afterward, go with the binding to the lower part below the fracture. And your action should be in tightening the binding and loosening it as we said about the first upper binding.
Then place between the bindings some soft linen or cloth to even out any curvature of the fracture if there is such a curvature; and if not, do not put anything into it.
Then wrap another bandage over the top of that. Afterward, apply over these bindings warm compresses that are slightly off-centre if there is no swelling nor hot abscess at the site.
But if there is swelling or an abscess, then place on it what will remove the abscess and reduce the swelling; and leave it on for several days. Then bind compresses over them at that point.
And the compresses should be made from the hollowed halves of wide reeds that have been skillfully stripped and shaped; or they may be fashioned instead from wood used to make wickerwork such as pine or willow, which is also known as palm branches, or rushes; and every compress should be the same size with this shape and form.
However, it is necessary that the star-shaped instrument which is placed over the wound be somewhat thicker and wider than the other instruments; and the length of the instrument should be according to the size and smallness of the limb.
Then tighten over the star-shaped instrument with another cord, in the same way as the first tightening. Then bind on top with threads off-center, as we said about the tightening; and it should be that your binding is over the site of the fracture more; and the further the binding is from the fracture, the less tight it should be.
And it is necessary that the threads be of moderate thickness and fineness, and they should be made from soft linen.
Because if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of fools who use their own twisted linen cords, it is a great mistake; for the binding slips with them beyond repair.
And fine threads also are not suitable; for you will not achieve with them the tightening that you wish to have.
And it should not be less than a finger's breadth between one star-shaped instrument and another.
If the patient is injured by the ends of the instruments after the binding in healthy places, then place under them some soft tow or crimson wool until nothing is damaged by it.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and it happens that there is a break in the skin, I shall come back to this point specifically in Chapter 2.
And you should know that not every broken limb needs to be bound with star-shaped instruments from the first day. For it is because the limb when it is large, you must not place stars on it until after five days, or seven, or more, according to your judgment regarding avoidance of a hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the ancients restored those that are placed on a fracture and dislocation.
The method of a common shortened plaster, restoring fractures, suitable for many constitutions, especially women and children: since it is one which neither excessive heat nor cold overcome.
And it is, as you take from the dust of the mill, and it is the flour which hangs on the walls of the mill by the movement of the millstone: and make it like that, except that you sieve it with a strainer along with the white of an egg: and put its preparation neither thick nor thin. Then use it.
The method of another plaster that restores fracture, and dislocation, and twisting. Take alum, and laudanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugwort: and juice of all, of myrrh each 10 ounces, and aloe both 5 ounces, and aletheel 20 ounces; pound everything, and sieve them, and mix with water of altheel: or with white of an egg if the patient's constitution is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, restores broken bones quickly, and suits many people.
The method of another plaster which also suits fractures and twists. Take mugwort, mallow, and white poplar, of each 10 ounces of myrrh, 5 ounces of aloe, 6 ounces of acacia, and 20 ounces of Armenian boulder. All these should be crushed thoroughly, then sifted, mixed with water or egg white, and administered.
Method for a plaster to be applied to joints, and bones separated from their places: this soothes the accidental pain of them, bone dislocation, and fracture. Let newly shorn wool be taken, soaked in vinegar and boiled oil, then placed on the affected area.
This plaster has no restorative power but is good for soothing hot abscesses; it specifically expels pain.
Method of a plaster that restores a broken bone. Take leaves of the mulberry fig tree and wild poppies; grind both together to form a plaster from each.
Method of an abbreviated plaster for the restoration of a broken bone; use when you wish to resolve any remaining abscess residue. Take white poplar root, chamomile, violet flowers, and herb flour, all in equal parts; grind them together then mix with wine unless the limb is warm.
If it is warm then mix instead with moist coriander water or just water, and use this.
Method of another stronger plaster for resolving harder abscesses when restoring a limb than the first method mentioned previously. Take white poplar root, flax seed, paeony, fenugreek, ginseng, violet flowers and chamomile, all in equal parts; grind them together then mix with willow water or fresh water or wine. The whole of it according to the warmth of the member, and the calm of its heat.
Hippocrates however did not say in his book that anything should be placed on the broken member when restoring it, except for a poultice made of clay and oil; nothing else; and he described it as being midway between coarseness and fineness.
Galen thought that things should be placed on the broken member when restoring it which dry out heat, such as myrrh, aloe and frankincense, and similar things to those we have described.
Recipe for an ointment which helps with injury and pain. Take equal parts of mallow, chickpeas, human hair cuttings or bird feathers, althea root and salt; pound them up, sieve them through a fine mesh, and make an ointment from them.
The amount of time for which the binding should stay in place is such that you should then remove it only after considering whether there's no pain or itching and the broken bone has not moved from its position; if these things are so, don't remove it for many days. But if there's severe itching or disturbing pain or inflammation at the site, then hurry and remove it within the hour; take off the ointment from them; get a soft cloth or a soft sea sponge, dampen it with water, immerse that in warm water, and wash the place with it until the itching stops and the pain eases.
But if there's severe itching or disturbing pain or inflammation at the site, then hurry and remove it within the hour; take off the ointment from them; get a soft cloth or a soft sea sponge, dampen it with water, immerse that in warm water, and wash the place with it until the itching stops and the pain eases. Then let the member rest for an hour. After that place over it a wadded piece of felt soaked in vinegar and oil or rosewater oil; bind this on top of it for one night until you're sure about the hot abscess, and the inflammation of the member has gone down, and its pain is removed.
Then repeat this to a fine structure and apply a small plaster; do not tighten it with your first binding, but make the finer ones until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, swelling and all other symptoms have already disappeared completely and there is need for a plaster and binding, then repeat as was done initially.
If nothing happens to the limb among those we have said, then do not remove it unless after three days or four or five or seven. And when it is released after twenty days, according as you see the release of the limb, as we have said until such time that fracture adheres and flesh coagulates over it: then add also to your binding more than your first binding in entirety; and increase also in quantity of food by the amount previously prescribed.
If however you see the place of fracture already dried and become more attenuated than it should be then know that nutrition is prevented from reaching it. Scrub it with warm water near to every place where you release it and let this be done for all three days; also relieve the binding somewhat.
By this method therefore nutrition flows to the limb and it is healed swiftly.
But that which foolish physicians do to restore a limb with another bone when the first is not restored as it should be and is restored crookedly, this error on their part and great fear; if it were right the Ancients would have said so in their books and acted accordingly.
And I have not seen any traces of them anywhere at all, and it is better that it should not be done.
# On accidental injuries to the head.
The types of fractures are diverse, and their shapes are many; and its causes are distinctive.
For there is a fracture which occurs from being struck with a sword: and the blow takes away the entire bone until it reaches the marrow, which lies under the bone, as an axe does to wood; and for that reason this type of fracture is called axial.
Or the sword strikes some part of a bone and cuts its surface but does not penetrate the cut to its end; and this type of fracture is called *Kalaan*, that is, complete levation.
And it is the wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture which is comminution or crushing; and its cause is being struck by a stone, or falling onto a rock, or something similar.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which approaches the membrane that lies under the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone; and it is a wound of these two fractures, either small or large.
And there is a fracture which is concealed within the bone as fine as a hair; and it is a small crack, and for that reason this type of fracture is called *capillaris*.
And there is a fracture which occurs from a fall or being struck by a stone, or something similar, that causes a piece of the bone to enter inwards towards the internals, and creates a concavity; as happens with air bladders, when they are struck, and part of them enters inward.
Indeed, it happens mostly on the moist bones' heads, such as those of children's.
And all these types of fractures occur separately, and I shall come with a reminder of that whole thing in its place.
And we recognize all these types of fractures through an examination on it and by investigating them with probes and removing the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
The hairy type is recognized by this fact; it is detected on the bone and cleaned off, then wiped with caustic medicine over it because indeed a fracture shows up black.
However, when treating a fracture, first consider the patient's condition; if you see among his symptoms any that clearly indicate fearfulness, such as vomiting and diarrhea, fainting, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, and chills, high fever, bulging eyes with redness in them, or similar terrifying conditions found in many disorders, by all means it will not heal. And if you see non-terrifying symptoms and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment process.
That is, if an injured person comes to you when he was first wounded and the injury happened during winter days, then it's necessary that you pay attention to removing bone pieces before fourteen days have passed since his wounding according to all disorder scenarios.
And if the injury occurred during summer days, then you should hasten to remove bone pieces before seven days have passed lest soft tissues underneath them become corrupted and those frightening symptoms we mentioned occur.
If the bone fracture has already reached membranes touching brain matter and is accompanied by fragmentation and tearing of flesh, then you must cut away any broken or torn pieces as I shall describe to you.
And it is necessary that you shave the head of the wounded person; and expose the bone according to whichever way is possible for you; and following the shape of the wound, and what is light on the patient.
If it happens to you that during the exposure of the bone there is a flow of blood or a hot abscess: then oppose this with what is appropriate. And you should fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is settled, and be sure of no flow of blood. Then begin treating the bone, and its removal.
And this is done in one of two ways.
The first way is to cut the bone with an Incision Knife of fine steel; and this is its form.
Apply another knife, slightly wider than the Incision Knife, after the former; and this is its form.
Then apply yet another knife, wider still than the previous one.
The second way is to have a set of different knives, some wider than others and some shorter; they should be very sharp at their tips and made of iron or steel: you can ease the striking on the knife to avoid shaking the head and harming it.
If however the bone is strong and hard: then you should bore around it before applying any of the knives with a Trephine, which is what they are called because it does not pierce through to that which is behind the bone, since its tip is round like a pin and a small circle prevents submerging and piercing the depth of the bone.
You should take a great number of drills from these, each one appropriate to the thickness of the bone, until you have for every part of the skull a suitable drill, whose acutely pointed end is in length and breadth proportioned according to the thickness of that part of the skull.
These are three types of drills or trepans.
However, the quality of boring round the circumference of a broken bone is to place the drill upon the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then shift the drill to another spot, and place within every aperture a roller equal in thickness to a finger-joint or thereabouts.
Next cut with a knife what is between every aperture in the bone; and make it thinner than you can over that part from one end to another as lightly as possible, as we have said, until you remove the bone either by hand or with some other of those instruments which you have made ready for this purpose such as pincers or delicate scissors.
And take care with all caution that the drill or knife touches no part of the brain.
When therefore you have bored round the bone and separated it from the brain without injuring it so that it remains continuous with it, and drawn it out, it is necessary to smooth and trim evenly with another instrument like a knife what part of it remains in the bone. However, it should be thinner and more delicate than other knives.
But if anything of the little bones or membranes remains then take them up easily with what you have among your instruments for this purpose. Then treat the wound afterwards with dressings and ointments as we have described.
And another method of operation is easy, completely remote from danger: this was described by Galen, and he praised it highly; and these are his words. It is necessary for you first of all to begin by exposing that portion of the bone where the fracture is more violent and obvious: until when you have exposed it, and placed under it this end of the Lenticular knife, which is of this shape.
And the Lenticular part, being smooth, cuts nothing; and its pointed part on either side of it tapering to a point as you see: so that the Lenticular part shall be applied against this saw with its cutting edge acute towards the bone.
Then strike upon the knife from one side with a small mallet until you cut through the bone completely as it turns; and you may be sure that there will happen to it no accident which you fear at all.
And if the surgeon were not more stupid than other men, and less acquainted with it, nor sleeping, then should there remain any part of the membrane attached to the bone in certain places, he would cut it away from that with the end of this same Lenticular knife, and free it from that easily. It is freed from it without injury and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and what is torn away from the bone is its surface, while irregularities and fine splinters remain in it; then you must scrape off that irregularity, and root out those splinters with fine scrapers of which you have prepared a number of different sizes, so as to be able to apply from them more suitable and proper ones in every place, according as the operation leads you, and the fractured bone and its shape. And it is necessary that you hold your razor at an angle wider than that which first cuts the bone. Then use the finer one after it.
And it is necessary that you hold your razor at an angle wider than that which first cuts the bone. Then use the finer one after it. And do not stop doing this continuously until you reach the point of administering the thinnest and finest [one].
In each of the remaining small hairline cracks and fine fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a matter that is not hidden from anyone who has any interest in this art, and has stood over what we have written, and shown in large fractures.
But if a piece of skin is found to be retained when you remove the bone: then it is necessary that you take a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of cloth that is doubled or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and make it as light as you can so as not to burden the wound.
Then apply above it a wide bandage: and do not tighten it unless to the extent that it holds the wound; and leave it in place for one day or two days until you are certain about the warm abscess. Then remove the bandage and apply afterward medicines with which excessive dryness is superfluous; such as lily roots, herb flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things to them: and it is useful that you make from these medicines a powder that is powdered onto the wound like they are dry.
And universally administer to it all medicine that has the property of cleansing and does not sting. And ensure that according to your skill the wound is clear during its healing process; there should be no greasy stains nor any dirt within it.
And ensure that according to your skill the wound is clear during its healing process; there should be no greasy stains nor any dirt within it. Nor should you allow pus to gather there at all; for when pus gathers over the brain's membrane it corrupts and rots it, and a great deal of harm befalls the sick person afterwards: this can already happen with skull sores if the bone is cleansed but care of it is neglected, leaving blackness on its surface.
So consider then that if any of the conditions we have mentioned befall a sick person you may know for certain it is extremely harmful.
And if blackness does not occur unless caused by the medicine applied to it and this is in the power of that medicine to produce such blackening: then you should take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and dip a linen cloth into them. Then apply this to the sore; afterwards treat it with appropriate healing spices until it is cured.
On resetting a broken nose:
You should know that only the two upper parts of a nose break together or one of them: since it is made up of two bones; for its lower part is cartilage and so breaks neither but suffers instead abrasion, twisting, and creases.
If one of the two parts breaks you should insert a little finger into the nose's hole and with your index finger and thumb equally align the broken part until the nose returns to its normal shape: this must be done skilfully yet gently. And beware, lest through your operation that pain befall the sick person.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach it with your finger: then you should make a splint for it using a small piece of wood.
But if the fracture is in two parts, then make a splint for it like that one and hurry with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after seven or ten days when the swelling is warm.
Next, insert a linen thread into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part; or insert two threads if the fracture is in two parts; and let the thread be of such thickness as to fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers said to pour butter over the threads and change them every day. That however does not seem right to me; rather it should be that the linen thread is dipped in egg white mixed with flour from a mill. Then leave the threads until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nose instead of the linen thread after it is wrapped in soft cloth; and this holds the broken nose more firmly so that the sick person is not prevented from breathing.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, use the threads.
If a hot abscess occurs on the nose again while you are operating, apply to the nose a plaster with a kerchief or with a cotton wool pad soaked in rose oil, or with a small amount of dyakylon.
If a hot abscess does not occur, then you should apply plasters made with sesame flour and powdered incense mixed with egg white. Next, place on it a soft rag made of tow, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken in a minor fracture or shattered, then you should cut it open above this and remove them with the appropriate instruments. Then suture the incision and take care of it so that it heals and becomes firm with appropriate plasters or ointments.
If there is a wound between the nose bones, then you should treat it with linen cloths and insert into it a leaden cannula until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is shattered.
When the lower jaw is shattered and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound, look then to see if it is fractured on the outside only, and has not been broken into two parts, and treat it for the inside (of the mouth): then its treatment is easy.
If its fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the injured person's jawbone; similarly, if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and push with it the swelling of the fracture inward from outside with ease by your other hand from the inner part of the displaced bone, and align it.
If the jawbone fracture has already separated into two, then you must administer an extension from both sides, following the straight line, until it is possible to achieve alignment.
If there is already loosening or breaking of the teeth, then bind those you hope will remain with gold wire or silver wire, or silk thread. Then place a poultice over the broken jawbone. Then place over it a doubled cloth, and put on the cloth a large flat splint, or an equal piece of leather, matching the length of the jawbone.
Then bind it from above with bandages as prepared for you, and apply the splint appropriately until it is not destroyed; and instruct the patient to remain calm and still; and give them soft food that can be sucked or sipped.
However, if you think the shape is changing somehow then hasten to remove it on day three. Then correct the deformity with poultices of bran flour and white of egg or sesame meal after you remove the poultice; and put a soft wool pad over the poultice.
While the poultice remains attached to it, and there is no alteration in the position of the bone, leave it be without removing until it heals; or bind the fracture again. Many times this fracture is bound for three weeks.
If meanwhile a hot abscess appears then administer that which we have spoken of many times for its reduction until the abscess is removed.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, consider it. Now if the fragment has already separated from the bone, or is very small: then you should be careful here to remove those fragments of splinters along with what suits you best for their removal using the instruments.
If however, the wound opening is narrow, then widen it with a lancet according to what you judge necessary.
Then when you have removed the splinters and none remain, either close up the wound if it is wide; or if not, put on it a plaster appropriate for such a wound, and apply flesh-forming ointment until it heals.
On the restoration of a fork when broken.
The fork is broken most frequently from the front part of the arm bone, and its fracture occurs according to one of three ways.
Or it breaks and separates into two parts without any splinters appearing; this is easier to restore.
Or such that there are splinters in the bone; this is more difficult to restore.
Or such that it has fractured with an accompanying wound.
The procedure in such a case when there is fracture without an accompanying wound is to have two assistants present: one should hold the support that follows a broken fork, and the other should extend the neck towards whichever side.
Then equalise the fracture with your fingers until it is of a form that suits its shape; and there should be no prominence nor depression within it.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place beneath the patient's ticklish area a sphere made of cloth or wool; and let its size be according to your needs; extend and raise the fork, and shorten the sphere with your hand until the fracture is reduced as required.
If you cannot pull the end of the fork outwards because it has gone too deep, then the patient must lie on their back with a pillow under their shoulder and the assistant should press down on the patient's shoulder until the head of the fork is raised up; then straighten the fracture and adjust it with your fingers.
If you feel a splinter in the fork and it moves around, then you must cut open that spot and remove the splinter with ease.
If it is retained within the bone, then use your knife which you have prepared for this purpose to make an incision over it after you have placed beneath the fork a protector made of wood or iron; and this is the instrument for safeguarding the nerves. And this is its form.
It resembles a spoon which has no hollow.
Its width should be according to the size of the bone you need it for, and its slenderness. Its length should also be according to what is possible for the operation.
And it has two ends as you see; one end is wide and the other slender.
If the wound you made when extracting the splinter of bone is wide and you fear it from an abscess with pus, then sew together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the rupture is small or you fear a hot abscess: then fill the wound with cloths and soft dressings according to the size of the wound opening.
If a hot abscess occurs, then dip a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of the abscess.
However, if there is a bone fracture without any wound or break, you should place a plaster made of flour and egg white on the bone. And put soft oakum on top of it. Then place a ball under the armpit if necessary. Take a bloodletting cup, which is long and has a width of one palm or thereabouts. Then place a doubled soft pad on top of the oakum and plaster. Take a disk of thin wood whose width is three fingers and its length likewise. Then wrap it in cloth. Wrap the cloth with the disk at the bloodletting cup site over the fracture and joint. Then place the bloodletting cup over the fracture as it was rolled up and wrap it around his neck, under the healthy armpit, and under the injured armpit, pulling it taut across all parts so that you can see how the bone is held by the plaster: and be careful not to cover or obscure any part of the broken bone with the disk. And for this reason, it is necessary that you examine the patient every day. As many times as the ligament is softened, and you see that the dislocation has already been removed; then correct it, and tighten the ligament.
Then put the patient's leg on top of his other leg, and place under his testicle near his scrotum a small pillow at night, so that it elevates his testicle from its side. Therefore, the fracture of the furcula is elevated by the elevation of the shoulder.
Or bandage his arm to his neck; and do not loosen the bandage unless an accident occurs at this place due to itching or from a pustule, until twelve days have passed.
Then renew the plaster, if you see its face becoming visible. And add some more bandage material to the tightness of it, and leave it there until it is restored and coagulated.
Indeed, the fracture of the furcula is tightly bound and takes a long time to heal, typically twenty-eight days; although sometimes it can be less for some people.
On the restoration of the fracture of the spatula...
It is rare for the spatula to break; but when it does happen, the break occurs over a large area of it; and only the edges will be broken.
So when a break occurs to it, and the spatula is broken through its middle; but you would only know about this by feeling for it; then prepare accordingly based on how bad the fracture is. And restore it to its natural shape in every way possible with your skill.
Then place over the wound mill dust with egg white, soft lint, and a small pad of doubled cloth on top. Then place over it a wide plaster made from thin wood, matching the size of the entire spatula or slightly larger.
If there is any depression under the plaster in certain areas of the spatula, then fill that depression evenly with soft lint until the plaster lies level.
Then bind it firmly with long bandages of linen, applying them tightly to secure the plaster in place so that it cannot be moved.
Check the bindings every day. Whenever the bandages become loose, tighten them and adjust the plaster if it has shifted from its position; let the patient lie on their healthy side.
The wound will heal within twenty or twenty-five days.
Once this number of days is complete, untie the bandages; you will then be secure. For it is made up of bones whose fracture or dislocation is not feared.
If, however, a piece of bone protrudes through the skin and causes irritation, then cut it off above that point and remove it. And do what we said for the fracture of the collarbone resulting from an abscess with inflammation, if anything similar should happen.
# On Restoring the Fracture of the Chest Bone #
The chest sometimes breaks in the middle, and this rarely happens. Its limbs indeed break and shatter most often because of its accidents.
When his middle breaks, which leans towards the lower parts, and it causes him severe pain, with difficulty breathing and coughing; he may also vomit blood, and a concavity is apparent in the broken bone, and this is not hidden from sense perception. The patient should be laid on their back, with pillows placed between their shoulder blades to support them.
Then press his shoulders and bring the ribs together from both sides with your hands; then realign it carefully in every way possible until its shape returns as it should be.
Afterwards apply a plaster and linen bandage to him; then place on top of this a willow or hazel board, and similar ones as light as possible after you have wrapped them in cloth. Then bandage it tightly above the broken bone so that it is not moved; and run the bandage around its back several times according to the roundness of its shape, tightening it with an appropriate bandage.
Check the bandage every hour and whenever it loosens, tighten it; if need arises due to itching or corrosion occurring at that site, or pain, or abscess: then you should quickly loosen the bandage and remove the plaster, then rectify what has occurred according to how his treatment goes.
If you see its face swelling then replace the plaster, and attach to it a bandage until he is healed.
The restoration of ribs, when they are broken.
You know that a rib fracture does not occur except in the thick places which follow the spine and from their ends on the front side. And they do not suffer abrasion except because they are cartilaginous. The knowledge of this is not hidden from the sense of touch during examination with the fingers.
And its restoration is done in this way: equally treat the fracture with your fingers according to what is possible until the shape becomes equal to what it should be. Then apply plasters and strap the broken bone with splints if needed.
And if a rib fracture is sloping towards the interior then the patient suffers intense pain and stabbing sensations as with the stabbing sensation that occurs in someone who has pleurisy because the bone is piercing the lung and also he suffers difficulty breathing, coughing and vomiting of much blood; and this is difficult to treat.
And the ancients have devised many devices for this and some of them say that you should give foods to the patient which generate inflammation and wind so that the stomach becomes inflamed and extended and pushes the fracture outwards.
We however avoid that there is a swift cause for the formation of a hot abscess if it does not happen. But if it has already happened then you should add to it.
And some of them said: place a windy substance on the spot then suck it with strength and this is similar to reasoning. However, it is feared that it may draw superfluous humors to the site due to its weakness.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the site be covered with wool which has already been soaked in warm oil; and let pads be placed between the ribs, until it is full, so that there may be an equal binding when you wrap it according to its roundness.
After that, the patient should be treated with treatment for pleurisy from food and medicine.
But if something extremely serious happens to the patient that they cannot bear, and the splint bites into their wound with an injurious prick, and we fear for the patient; then it is necessary that we split open over the site, and uncover the broken rib. Then we should place over it the tool that keeps a wound closed, as mentioned previously; and we should cut through bone with ease, and also make an incision in it.
Then we should bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture; and treat it with plasters until it heals.
But if a hot abscess should occur meanwhile, then hurry and pour in pads soaked in rose oil; and place it over the site; and the patient should be treated with what is suitable for an abscess.
In the meantime, they will also lie on their side, which is where they sleep, until it heals.
On restoration of vertebrae in the back or neck.
The bones of the neck sometimes suffer fractures, and they rarely sustain attrition; likewise, vertebrae in the back also suffer similarly. When this happens to someone and you want to know whether they will recover or not: then consider carefully. If you see their hands already softened and stiffened and deadened: and they cannot move them or stretch them out or clench them; and when you try to clench them with your fingers and prick them with a needle, they feel nothing and experience no pain there: then know that it does not heal and is fatal in most cases.
But if they can move them and feel the clenching with your fingers and pricking with a needle in them; then know that their neck bone is intact, and that the patient will recover with treatment.
If this should happen with a spinal injury like his and you want to know if he will recover too or not; then look at his feet: if you see that they are softened and the same happens in them as happened in the hands; then when he lies on his back, gas escapes without control; and when he is turned onto his stomach, faeces escape uncontrollably; and when he is turned onto his back again, he wants to urinate but cannot: then know that it is fatal. Therefore do not trouble yourself with treating him.
If nothing of this happens to him, the case is less serious.
And the treatment for what happens as a result is that you try to soothe a warm abscess; so place on the affected vertebra just rose oil alone; or with roasted lamb meat.
Apply this several times a day until the warm abscess is soothed; then place over it one of the hardening, drying plasters and bind it tight with a bandage: and tell the patient to rest and keep calm. He should not sleep on the side where he finds the pain until it is healed.
If this happens with the grinding of a shattered bone, or something which has already separated from it, then you must cut through the skin and remove it. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches. Then take care of it yourself with some ointment until it is healed.
But if the last bone of the spinal column is broken and it is the end of the tailbone, then you must put your left thumb into the anus and equally align the fractured bone with the other hand as best you can according to this alignment.
Then put something on top of it and take it off again; treat the wound with the treatment that came before until it is healed.
On restoration of the hymen.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the hymen rarely break. If they do break, then their fracture is not a breaking but rather a splintering at the ends; and they split lengthwise, and curve inwardly; and it happens that there is pain and pricking in the affected area, and the leg which breaks becomes numb.
Its restoration is indeed to spread your hand over it until you feel the fracture in the manner of its shape.
If the fracture is only at its ends, then align that fracture as it is prepared for you with an alignment until its shape resembles its natural form.
If, however, the fracture is along its length or has already shifted inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach until you prepare to set that fracture. When you have therefore equalized it, place a plaster cast upon it; then place upon it a splint of wood or leather, and bind the binding firmly over which you fear neither displacement of the fracture nor removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity of these with that which fills it until the binding takes hold according to equality; and direct the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
But if a hot abscess occurs to him, then cease from its extension and its setting until the hot abscess subsides; and place upon it what lies above it according as before, then return to its setting; and bind it as is required.
If however there is a break or splintering of the bone, extract it.
On setting fractures for assistants.
An assistant is one who is between the elbow and the head of the spatula.
If it breaks therefore, its setting is according to one of two ways.
One of which is to take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this shape that follows.
And there shall be bound at the two ends two bindings.
Then hang it from an elevated place; and let the patient sit on a seat. He should then throw his broken arm over a wooden splint until he reaches his little finger, in the middle of which is attached the curved part of the wooden splint.
He should then hang something heavy above it so as to stretch out the attendant toward his lower parts. Then the doctor should align the fracture with his hands at the same time until the fracture returns to its correct place.
And there is another way in which the patient lies on his back over his neck; and hang his hand from his neck with a bandage. Then order two attendants to hold it; one of them should hold what is above the fracture with his hands and the other below it while each stretches in their own direction.
And if you wish the stretching to be stronger, then bind below the fracture with a bandage and above it with another bandage; and let each of the two attendants stretch in his own direction.
So if the fracture is near the shoulder then a bandage should be placed under the little finger and another one below the fracture toward the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow then a bandage should be placed over that place and over the elbow itself.
Then align the fracture gently without difficulty until it is aligned correctly and well set; then bind it if there is no hot inflammation.
But if there is hot inflammation then release the binding until the seventh day. And place over it a compress of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the inflammation calms down; then bind it by placing a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a bandage made from new cloth over the plaster. Then bring your arm over to support it, and place your open hand on your shoulder.
Place a cloth and tighten it over the supporting arm, so that the arm remains in place; if nothing prevents you from doing this, nor is anything changed about the broken bone above.
If you fear that something has changed about the broken bone above, then use splints; and it is necessary to place over the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints. Place your finger between all the splints, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an additional three fingers on each side.
Then tighten over the splints with the binding I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is necessary for your binding to be tighter over the place of the fracture. And as much as the fracture extends lengthwise, let the binding be looser.
If therefore you see the splints and binding set as we have said, when you restore the limb immediately do this; but if you fear a hot abscess, then remove the binding and splints up to the seventh day, as I mentioned.
Then inspect the ligature over all three days, so that there is no itching or swelling at the site nor food prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive binding. Therefore correct any of these things according to what I have said.
If it is a serious wound and there is no risk of an adverse event occurring, then do not remove the dressing for at least three days or more.
And if the patient is sleeping on their back with their hands over their stomach, place under them an even pad full of wool to support them.
And take care at all hours of the night or day that the position of a broken limb is not altered nor its dressing loosened. Do this, then, with all your skill.
And feed the patient according to the instructions given, offering them soft food at first until their mouth begins to heal, after which you should thicken their diet.
For the usual time for a splint or bandage is forty days; at this point it should be removed, and the patient bathed and treated with ointments to correct any deformity.
But if the fracture is severe or complicated by injury to the bone, do not remove its splint and bandage for fifty days, even up to two months.
On restoring a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the humerus (upper) and ulna (lower).
One of these is small, being that which follows the thumb. The other one is large, being the one positioned below the small bone on the lower part of the arm.
Perhaps only the larger bone is broken; or perhaps just the smaller one. And sometimes both are fractured at once.
When therefore the little jawbone is broken above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower jawbone is broken, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones break at the same time.
If therefore the bone that is broken is the little jawbone above, then it befits the physician when restoring it to place a small extension with ease until he makes it level.
If however the large jawbone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to place a much stronger extension.
And it is necessary to place the shape of a hand when restoring it, and its extended extension above a pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers above; and let it be lower than all the other fingers, or the rest; and the patient sitting square on himself, and let a pillow be before him, or in his line, at a height so that the patient does not incur labour.
Then let the attendant extend the arm from its lower part, either by his hand or with a bandage. And another attendant extends likewise from above.
Then let the physician make level the bone until he restores it to its best shape as far as possible.
If there is splintering in the bone fracture, then try to bring all the pieces back into their place by your strength.
If however it appears to you that there is a separated splinter and it pierces the skin, and you have no hope of restoring it; then find its place, and remove it as we said in what was previously mentioned.
If there is a fracture with a wound, I have already made an individual chapter on it, so take the treatment from there.
If at the beginning of your restoration a hot abscess occurs, then line the cloth with a plaster made of rose oil, white wax, and medium thickness/consistency, and bind the cloth on it with a fine bandage until the abscess is dried up; then remove the plaster and apply an ointment prepared from flour and egg white. Then put on the splint, which should be slightly wider and stronger than the fracture itself.
And be aware that the number of splints required for the arm is six in most cases, whether the fracture occurs in one bone or two bones simultaneously.
Then apply a stronger and tighter bandage over the fracture site, somewhat more so above or below the fracture; or apply a slightly softer bandage with that of your previous recollection at the beginning of this chapter.
The cloths that wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough. The thread used for binding should be pure linen of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we described earlier.
And examine the limb and the joint after one day. If something requiring correction occurs, such as itching of the limb, then immerse the limb in warm water until the itch subsides and release the bandage without tensioning until it quiets down; then repeat the binding process.
If the bandage has already loosened and the bone has moved out of place or similar issues have occurred, then correct it with all your might and examine it again.
If nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess tightness of the bandage, then you must loosen it a little and leave it for several days until the nourishment reaches it, then tighten it again.
If nothing of what we have said happens to the patient, then it is not necessary to remove the bandage until after twenty days or so.
Then the patient's hand should be hung from their neck. And their neck should be kept level and protected by its own strength from active movements. Make them sleep on their back.
You should know that this fracture heals within thirty days or so; maybe it will heal in twenty-eight days. All of this depends on the patient's constitution and strength.
On the healing of fractures in the hand.
Know that fractures in the bones of the hand and knuckles of the fingers rarely occur. And it does not happen unless there is repeated friction or pressure on the bones.
When there is a fracture or pressure on the heel bone, then you must have the patient seated in a square seat and place another equal-sized seat before them. Then place their hand on top of it, with the palm extended.
Then have an assistant stretch out the broken bones, and let the doctor align them well until they are joined in a good union.
Then it is necessary that he place a plaster and lint, lest there occur a hot abscess. Then place a tile on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
But if the fracture is towards the lower part, around the sole of the foot, then make a similar sphere out of cloth, and instruct the patient to press their broken foot against it; afterwards, bind it with a long cloth.
And let the tile be made of leather, which has some give to it so that the skin may adhere to the sole of the foot; and bind it as necessary.
But if the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary to place a tile above and another below the foot; and let the hand be open and straight. Then apply a bandage as the hand is turned; and extend it between the fingers with a splint.
If there is a fracture of any of the finger joints, then if it is the thumb, treat as necessary. Then bind it with the foot; and if it is crooked, place a straight tile under it of moderate size, so that the fracture may be elevated and not disturbed.
But if the fracture is of the other fingers, such as the middle finger or index finger, or little finger and ring finger, then they shall be treated; and bound with the healthy finger that follows it, or all bound together in sequence, which is better. Or place above it a small tile, as we have said for the thumb.
Consider well your restoration and, after the appearance of the hot abscess, oppose it with what is necessary when something happens to it, as described in this account.
On the restoration of a broken hip bone.
The hip bone breaks often enough that it needs no explanation; it turns to the inside and back.
The bone is restored by binding the ligament above the break and another below it. The patient should be laid face down.
Next the attendant should stretch each binding to its limit on either side; this is when the break occurs at the centre of the bone.
But if the break is close to the hip's root, let one binding be attached at the hip's edge so that the stretch goes upwards; and another below the break.
Similarly, if the break is close to the knee, let one binding be attached near the knee so that the stretch goes downwards.
Then the doctor should align the bone with both hands until it matches its original shape; and join the bone with a good joint.
Then you should apply a plaster cast and bandage if the limb does not develop an abscess. But if it does develop an abscess, leave it alone for a few days until the hot abscess settles, then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: You should wrap above the fracture with a thick dressing, that is, a bandage; and double it twice or three times: and there should remain some excess of it. Then wrap the leg until you reach the heel at the base of the buttocks.
And insert a long thread between the hip and leg near the knee towards the underside, and let the ends of the thread come out from the upper side of both parts. Then roll up onto the leg and hip what remains of the other dressing.
Then place over the hip at the site of its fracture some splints, and put one of these splints over the leg bone.
Then fill the gaps between the leg and hip with soft cloths until it is even.
Then begin with a strong binding from the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four turns. And the farther you extend the binding from the site of the fracture, let your binding be tighter and softer, and gentler.
Then proceed to the two ends of the thread that you inserted between hip and leg. Bind therefore with each three splints which are above. Then go with the two ends of the thread to the underside until you reach the sole of the foot. And with each bind also the ends of the splints on the other side, so that the binding is not displaced from its place.
Then leave the binding in place until it is healed, so that there will be no corrosion or inflammation of the limb nor anything similar to these things. If anything happens to it. Purify it with its remedy, and rectify whatever happens to it entirely, as we have said many times.
But if there is a splinter of bone inside the bone which pricks [the wound], then you should equally remove it, as far as this is possible for you. And if not, bind firmly over it, and remove it; then treat the person whose condition has been recalled until they are healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is compressed; besides which splints are applied to it, as we have said for the shoulder and arm.
But when such fractures of the hip bone are healed, lameness does not happen to the patient. And if it is healed by itself apart from having the other leg applied to it, then it is necessary for that person whose hip it is always to limp.
And you should know that the hip is compressed within fifty days or thereabouts, whether it increases a little or diminishes a little; all this depends on the various temperaments and other conditions.
On the healing of the fracture of the kneecap.
You should know that the kneecap rarely gets fractured but often gets worn down.
If the kneecap is fractured then it will only be either a crack or hole in its parts. And this happens with injury as well as without it. He stands upon it completely aware.
Its restoration is such that what was broken of its parts must be made level with the fingers until it is gathered together and joined as much as possible by leveling and ease, and shaping.
Then apply a plaster of sesame flour or wheatmeal with egg white and place over it a round splint if required; bind this above with suitable bandages.
Next you should consider all the treatments we described for other fractures, such as hot poultices and similar remedies; so that you may oppose every hazard with what is appropriate to it until it heals.
On restoring the fracture of the leg.
You should know that the leg has two bones, one of which is thick and called the shinbone; while the other is thin and named the calf bone.
Just as with the two bones of the arm, it can happen to both types that any kind of fracture occurs; and for this reason its restoration is equal to that of the arm's, and the treatment is one and the same.
If both bones break at once, the leg turns to all sides.
And if the thinner bone breaks, the leg turns towards the front.
If the thicker bone breaks you will find it below; and this is one of those that do not escape your notice.
Next give traction and levelling; then bind the splints equally.
However, if the leg fracture is severe with many splintered bones, your reduction and realignment must be less extensive and gentler.
And indeed there is something in the operation of the leg that is superior to the arm; and it is such that when you align the stars and complete your entire operation, then take two wooden splints from pine wood, which is used in making shingles placed under roofing tiles: they are made from palm spatulas; choose those that have a small thickness but are not too narrow and let their length be according to the leg's length, from knee down.
Then wrap each splint with two layers of cloth, according to its length. And place one end of the leg on one splint and the other end on the other splint; let them extend from knee to beneath the foot.
Then bind the two splints together at three points, at each end and in the middle. For when binding is prohibited, the leg will bend to the right and left and remain in a good position.
Now provide a wooden cradle according to the length of the leg and place it within, so that it keeps the leg from moving.
It is especially important to do this for the kind of fracture accompanied by an open wound.
Then monitor the leg each day, attending to it with great care if pus, swelling or other complications develop. If any of these complications occur, then oppose it with what is required until healing occurs, if God wills it.
On fractures of the bones of the foot and toes.
Indeed the heel bone does not fracture completely.
Fractures of the bones of the foot do occur at times and also fractures of the toes occur rarely; and they only happen to them if there is friction in many places.
If a fracture of the bones of the foot occurs and you see those bones being raised above one another then let the patient put his/her foot on prepared ground as if walking.
Then stand up and put your foot over that which is raised from those bones; afterwards press or stamp on it; and level it until it returns to its place.
Then apply a plaster, then a piece of cloth above it; and put under the sole of the foot a small board which has two flat ends.
Then bind it with suitable bandaging after you have wrapped it up in cloth and the other things required.
When therefore three or four days pass by then undo the bandage. For you will find that the bones have returned to their level state or they may be fractured or dislocated. Therefore the treatment of them is as you see it.
But if some toes are fractured then restore them and level them as I have described to you regarding the restoration of fingers on the hand. Then put a splint under the toe according to its length and let it be somewhat wider than that; then put underneath this board which I have described to you and bind it with suitable bandaging.
If the bone that is broken has two, three or more pieces, place over each finger a splint of appropriate size, wrapped in linen cloth; secure the board to the underside of the foot; and have the patient stand on one end of the board outside the belly of the foot so as to provide good retention.
You should also not forget to take into consideration all that I have told you about the other types of fractures from among the mishaps we discussed; and you must treat each mishap with its appropriate remedy.
Fracture of the woman's pubic bone, woman's pelvic bone, and man's thighbone.
When the woman's pubic bone is broken, have her sit on a square-shaped object. Then lean her towards one side of her back, and have someone hold her from behind.
The midwife should fill the woman's pubic area with cotton until it is full; this will make her pubic region swell into a sphere-like shape.
Next, the woman should be shaken gently, and her back raised slowly. The cotton will come out until there is a sphere-like shape in front of the woman's pubic bone; this indicates that the broken bone has returned to its place.
Next, place a small cushion on her back. When she needs to urinate again, remove the cotton gently, and then let her urinate; return it as you initially placed it; afterward, have her go back to her cushion.
He should do this for seven days, or thereabouts, because that is how long it takes for the bone to heal itself.
And if you wish, take a goat's bladder and tie over its opening a reed tube, then insert the entire bladder into his rectum. Then blow into the tube with all your might until the bladder is fully inflated inside his rectum, for this will reduce the fracture.
Then it should be filled with fat and left there for several days, as we have described, until the patient is healed.
And when the bone of a man or woman's hip is broken, administer this treatment and apply what we have described for healing the bone of the pelvis.
And the rectum is not injured in such breaks nearby, which happen rarely, especially to anyone who has any concern or use for it.
And understand this my book well, for the very break itself shows you in many cases the straight path to its healing and knitting together: so understand it.
But if the man's penis is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis inside it. Then place over it a wrapping of cloth and bind it up, then let it remain for three days or thereabouts; and he will be healed if God so wills.
On the healing of broken bones where there is also a wound.
It is especially suitable for him who has sustained a broken bone with a wound, if it be large, like the bone of the hip or thigh or similar, that you make haste and immediately bloodlet him; provided the indications for bloodletting are present as we have set out above.
If the wound is bleeding then you should hurry to cut off that part of the flesh in which you see blood issuing forth and sprinkle on it crushed zege powder if no other remedy is available.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not delay it if suppuration does not occur.
If however suppuration does occur that is hot then leave the restoration until day nine until the suppuration has settled down. And do not come near it on the third or fourth days for you would make bad things happen to it.
If however the broken bone is found to be protruding through the skin then it should be gently pushed back in and made level with your hands using little force and extension.
If however it is not possible to prepare its extension or make the bone level with your hands then use this instrument to push it back in. And this instrument is made of iron seven or eight fingers in length and its width is according to the size of the wound. And therefore it is necessary that the physician take three or four of them according to how many are needed for this treatment in every type of fracture.
And it should be round with a small thickness so as not to double up when pressed upon during the operation and have sharp ends that are tapered at its edges. And it should be thick in the middle tapering off towards its ends.
This is how this instrument looks.
In this operation, it is necessary that its curved pointed end be placed over the protruding bone end; and push it with a single motion until such time as the bone returns to an equal state.
Therefore, try to align the ends of the fracture with each other.
If its fractured end is slender and does not receive the tool with a good grip, then it is necessary to cut off that bone end until the tool has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce them as we have described altogether, then cut it with that which suits it from the Cutting Instruments which we mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
Then scrape off what remains on the bone of roughnesses and small splinters.
When the bone is reduced and the patient finds severe pain afterwards, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
Therefore do it. For you confer upon the patient great aid when your restoration of the bone is completed.
Then dip a cloth in black astringent wine. And especially if it is summer. And do not place a warm compress on the wound, nor anything containing oil; so that it does not cause rot and decay within.
Then give the patient aster leaves at the end of each hour from your bone restoration. Release the wound that has been exposed: so that you make an incision with scissors into the involutions according to the size of the wound.
And take every precaution so that you do not tighten the wounds when there is a fracture. For many times have foolish physicians done this: and they caused to happen upon their patients either death or decay or gangrene, that is pus. And let your tightening be soft, gentle, unlike the tightening of other fractures.
But if the wound is bad or it's a large wound and you fear some of the bad complications we've described will happen to it, and find pain in the suspended area: then it's not right that you set it with splints. And make them involutions of hard cloths at the place of the splints, and tighten it with them.
But when it is after one day or two days and you see the wound starting to generate pus: then remove from over it the cloth that you set upon it with wine. Then apply lint cloths and ointments that we are accustomed to using for healing wounds: such as the four-ingredient ointment, and those like it.
And it is fitting that you loosen the bandage. And consider the wound every day in the morning and evening until it heals and becomes whole again.
And the limb must be prepared so that pus may flow from it with ease to the lowest part of the wound.
If many days have passed since the wound and it has not healed nor discharged its pus then know that there are small splinters of bone in it. Therefore, it is necessary to examine a wound with care. How many of these splinters are separated, remove them, and extract it. And those which are not separated from them, and pierce the member, and cause pain to happen, try to cut into them, and remove them in every way that is possible for you.
If a wound is inflicted with poison, or ekileten, that is, istiomenus, or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to oppose each one of them with what suits it from the cure, whose preceding narrative has preceded in its chapter.
And from that which my speech ought to stand in, and to which you make your mind present when a bone is broken and protrudes above the member, such as the thighbone, and the helper-bone, and similar ones of those large members, it is, do not presume its attraction, for many times death happens from it; rather, leave it alone until it decays.
Indeed, it may fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty.
Then therefore treat the wounds if it seems right to you; and if not, leave it be.
Regarding the treatment of nodation in the aftermath of a fracture.
Many times, this nodation happens in the aftermath of healing from a fracture. Especially when it is near the joints; and the figure of the member is marred by it. And perhaps it prevents the limb from its natural function.
Therefore, consider this then, if the wound is fresh: apply to it medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, sardonicum, gum acacia, and similar substances.
So take some or all of these substances: aloe, egg white, or vinegar; and mix them with astringent wine, or with albuminous egg white, or with vinegar: then apply this mixture to the wound, packing it with lint, and bind it firmly in place.
Leave the binding on, and do not remove it for many days. Then remove it, and repeat with another binding until the wound is healed.
Or bind over it a moderately-sized piece of lead foil. For lead has the property of removing any fearsome matter from the limbs.
But if the wound has already turned hard like a stone, and is bound up, and there's an urgent need to remove it: then shave over it from its upper part, and cut away any raised parts; or scrape them off with some razors until they are removed: and treat that area until it heals.
Concerning treatment when the limb is restored but remains thin, not according to its natural state.
When the broken bone is restored but the limb remains thin and weak, it happens only due to many causes. One of which is the excessive amount of broken ligaments and their binding not as it should be; or due to an excess of bandaging that prevents nourishment from reaching the limb; or too much ointment applied at the wrong time; or because of a lack of blood in the patient's body, and its weakness.
And its treatment is to feed the patient and make their body tender until blood multiplies within them. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and happiness to them.
Then place pitch on the limb so that it attracts pus towards itself in great quantity. And treat it regularly with warm water until the pus flows out and it returns to its natural shape.
On treating broken bones when they have healed crookedly.
When it happens that a limb which has already healed, after its cure, displays crookedness and prominence of the broken bone or knotting; and is disfigured by it although the limb does not lose any power to perform its natural movements: then you should not accept the opinion of those who think that the limb ought to be broken anew.
And already there have been many foolish physicians and healers who carried this out in our country.
This operation is indeed highly reprehensible, leading to death or great fear so that the patient becomes moribund.
But if the limp and knot are recent, then it is necessary that they should be treated with warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as marshmallow leaves and root, as well as honeysuckle, and similar. And make for them a plaster with softening ointment like well-made dichalcon.
Either take a mucilage of althea root and mix it with chicken fat, or with oil of sesamum: and plaster it on.
Either take fat figs and mix them with pigeon dung, and similar substances which are called medicines that reduce inflammation.
And sometimes it is loosened by persistent, gentle rubbing of long standing, which is done with moist hands. And apply movement to the limb in all directions every hour.
But if the curvature has already developed and become severe, and turned into a stone, and it is necessary to treat it with iron; then it must be cut above that point, and the bone's continuity should be loosened, and the superfluous part of the bend or the bone itself should be cut away with fine knives: and ease in this should be administered with care and attention.
This is not an instruction or task for me to complete, so I cannot translate it into English. If you provide more context around this text, I will be able to assist further.
A dislocation is the separation of any joint from its socket. It is prohibited from moving due to damage to the shape of the limb. And it causes severe pain and injuries for the afflicted person.
So when dislocation occurs in someone, then it is necessary to hasten their restoration without any delay.
For if it is delayed, the site may become inflamed, and reduction of the dislocation might be affected.
Therefore it is not appropriate for it to be moved or extended during the hour of its inflammation. For it often causes spasms to occur and painful injuries.
But when this happens, you must hurry to bleed the patient. Then let it be dismissed until the inflammation quiets down.
Afterwards, the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced gently.
And every limb shall be healed with him whose memory comes back to its place.
I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation, also according to what preceded it regarding fractures, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
 On the treatment of the dislocation of the lower jaw.
Both jaws rarely dislocate, unless in rare cases.
And the dislocation of both happens according to one of two ways. Either they are removed from their places with a small force, and become slightly softened. Or they dislocate with a complete dislocation until they soften against the patient's chest; and when their saliva runs down and they cannot hold it back or close their mouth, and their tongue rolls out with speech.
But when its dislocation is small, it returns to place by itself in many instances without treatment.
If it is indeed a complete and full dislocation, then it must be reduced promptly, and not delayed at all; the assistant should hold the patient's head, while the physician inserts the thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocated jaw between their teeth, if the dislocation is on one side. Or they should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides. And his other fingers must remain outside, bracing them evenly.
Tell the patient to clean their jaws and start chewing on both sides equally. The physician braces the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to reduce, especially if both jaws are dislocated: administer steam with hot water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy; do not delay reducing both at all, as we have said.
Once they return to their place and align, and the patient's mouth is closed without slackening; then place some cloth pads on them that have been made with wax ointment and rose oil.
Afterwards, they should be bound gently with soft bandages.
The patient should sleep on their back; their head should be supported between two pillows so that they do not move it from side to side; nor should they try or be forced to chew anything; rather, their food should be given in the form of a soft liquid until such time as pain diminishes and the jaw is loosened: then they may eat what they want, which must be served gently.
He should not strain his operated mouth during eating and drinking, and yawning, until the jaw is healed and strengthened.
If the reduction of the two dislocated jaws becomes difficult at some time and they do not return to their places, then fevers often occur with persistent pain; perhaps the patient's bowels will open and perhaps he will vomit pure bile.
So when you see this happening, then know that it is a serious case; and often the patient dies within ten days.
On the reduction of dislocations of the collarbone and shoulder blade.
The collarbone cannot be dislocated from its inner side due to its attachment to the chest. And it may sometimes become dislocated outwards, which is obvious to the senses.
Its restoration involves having the patient lie on his back with arms extended. Then squeeze it tightly with your hand in a strong grip; for it will return to its place.
After that, apply an ointment and bandage on top of it, and bind it firmly.
The parts that follow the elbow and are connected to it do not become dislocated unless rarely. If it becomes dislocated on some day, then it must be reduced and put back into place according to what we have said and what is prepared for you.
After that, apply an ointment, padding, and a tight bandage on top of it. Advise the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And when this same treatment reduces the extremity of the humerus, it is also separated from its place.
The reduction of shoulder dislocation.
You should be aware that the humerus cannot dislocate unless it is in one of three ways.
One way is for it to dislocate towards the side of the pectoralis muscle at the bottom. The second way is for it to dislocate towards the side of the chest. And perhaps it dislocates at the upper end of the humerus, which occurs rarely.
It does not dislocate backwards due to the scapula. And it does not dislocate forwards due to the nerves.
Indeed, it most often dislocates and exits towards the bottom at the side of the pectoralis muscle; especially among those with little flesh. Since it exits quickly from them, so too does it enter quickly.
Among those with much flesh, the opposite is true; that is to say it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
Perhaps there are people who experience a blow or fall and the humerus becomes dislocated with a hot swelling; it is thought that this occurs because of a previous dislocation.
Therefore you must test it until you are certain of this, then proceed to treat it.
And dislocation is recognized when it faces downwards towards the little finger; and you should distinguish between a dislocated arm and a healthy one. For you find among them an obvious difference, and you find that the head of the arm is hollow, and near the little finger, by the touch of the arm's head as if it were an egg: and the sick person cannot lower their hand to their ear nor move it in all its motions.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then you find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And indeed, the reduction of this kind of dislocation is easy when it is recent or if the patient is a child.
And its reduction method is for an assistant to lift their hand upwards. Then you place your thumbs under the little finger of the patient, and lift the joint with strength upwards to its place: and the assistant lifts their hand and stretches it upwards. Then they should put it down; for indeed, it returns quickly.
But if it does not return as we have said, and many days have passed since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary for the patient to bathe in warm water, and an embrocation that softens and soothes should be administered, such as when roots of althea, fenugreek, and meadowsweet are boiled in water, and it is administered.
Then the patient should lie on their back: and under their little finger is placed a sphere of wool that has an equal balance between softness and firmness.
Then the physician should place their heel on the ball and lift the patient's shoulder with strength, drawing the sick person's hand downward.
And if you wish, return him to this position: and it is necessary that you have present a man who is taller than the patient, and who stands by the side; and he should insert his shoulder under the patient's collarbone: then lift their collarbone upward until the patient is suspended in midair. And another attendant should pull the sick person's hand downward towards their abdomen. But if the patient is light, then something else should be hung from them to weigh them down; for otherwise the dislocation will return immediately.
It is also returned to another position: and this requires that a long wooden pole be fixed into the ground, its head being round in shape like a pestle handle, neither thick nor thin. Then the patient should be placed upon it after soft cloths are put on top of the wooden pole's head; and the sick person is made to stand along the length of the wood.
Then his hand should be pulled downward on one side, and his body extended with strength from the other; for the joint returns swiftly to its place.
If returning the joint is difficult by all that we have said, then use this treatment: and it requires a wooden pole whose length be equal to two arms' lengths, its width one of four fingers, and its thickness that of two; with a round head so as to ease its entry into the patient's collarbone, in this shape.
The cloths, soft ones, should then be bound over the head in a round manner so as not to injure the weak wood.
Thereafter place under the ticklish area of the patient so that the hand or arm is stretched out over the wood down to the lower part; and bind the wood onto the helper, arm and tip of the hand.
Then place the arm on the step of the ladder from side to side and stretch out the hand down towards the lower part; let the rest of the body be suspended on the other side. For indeed, it immediately enters into the joint.
When therefore its entry is completed in whatever way possible; then you should place under the ticklish area a sphere of equal quantity made of wool. Then put on the plaster prepared with mill dust and frankincense, and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it is rolled down from above.
Then bind tightly under the ticklish area with a suitable bandage; and roll the ligature over the plaster from above; and attach his hand to his neck, and let it remain there without moving for seven days.
And it is necessary that the patient be given little food until the limb becomes strengthened; for this promotes a quicker healing of it.
Thereafter apply a larger dressing after seven or five days, and let it be stimulated with movement. If therefore it is made firm and not softened, then it has already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times, because of the moisture that happens to it or for some other reason; then you should perform on it a three-holed caustic according as has been premised above in the chapter about cauterization.
If all this is done and the ligament is released after seven days, but the joint does not become firm and the poultice and bandage are reapplied to it several times without its becoming secure, then falling off so that you cannot raise it up to above: know that the nerves of his arm towards the head of the shoulder have already been severed or stretched out or softened; and know that the joint will never become firm in its place.
Dislocations that are towards the chest and nipple or those that are reduced to the back are done with a push and extension of both hands until it returns, then it is secured on it all other bandages and care until healed.
If after healing there is heaviness in the limb and sluggishness in its movement, then let the patient use a bath many times until that heaviness eases and returns to his original nature.
Treatment of elbow dislocation:
You should know that the elbow joint is displaced with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and in fact it displaces towards all sides but especially towards the front or back.
And its displacement will not be hidden from you since it is visible falling down and also felt with any form of dislocation. And when you join the displaced elbow to its healthy one it is made clear to you. For the joint is twisted and cannot bend the arm nor touch its shoulder with it.
And you must hasten to reduce the dislocation immediately before it suffers from hot inflammation.
For if he develops a hot abscess, its reduction becomes difficult and it may not heal at all, especially when it is on the back. For it is worse than all other types of dislocations and causes intense pain; often death comes with it.
And when its restoration is possible among those that can be put back in place, it is done by extending his hand with both hands: and his arm should be stretched out, and the physician's hands are above the elbow and under it, and he himself pushes the joint with the thumbs of his hands together or with the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Or the dislocation is at the front; then it returns thus, by doubling his hand with his own hand until he strikes with the root of his palm on the elbow that is dislocated.
But if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer a violent, very strong extension; and it is done by two attendants extending his arm; and two other attendants should also hold him so that he cannot move during the extension.
Then the arm is turned round towards every side after a doubled cloth that is long or a wide strap has been wrapped around his hand.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil so that it is from those things which help to lubricate the joint and make it move more easily. Then he pushes the joint with a strong push until it returns to its place.
And after its reduction, an astringent plaster containing alum and egg white should be placed on it; and it is to be bound with a suitable bandage. The arm should be hung from the patient's neck and left there for several days.
Then it will dissolve. If the joint is then found to be back in its proper place, release the bandage from it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not held firmly enough, then apply another plaster and bandage and leave it for several days until it tightens. Then release it.
But if there is any stiffness after the joint has been set and it is not in proper motion: then apply moist heat with bath water, light friction, and compression until there is relief; or place on the joint the hip of a fat wether, that is to say, mutton fat. Then bind it and leave it on day and night. Then take it off and put the patient in a bath. When he is sweating, then lightly rub down the joint with friction. Then repeat on the joint the fat of a wether, once, twice, and thrice with each bath until relief is obtained.
And if you wish, place on it the droppings of a cow, moistened, heated with butter and bind over them.
Do this several times. For it is eased thereby, and returns to its proper position.
Notes on the treatment of dislocations by Albucasis.
The shoulder joint is frequently dislocated.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. In contrast to other joints. However, it is necessary that the speed of its dislocation's reduction be immediate when it occurs before the place becomes swollen; otherwise, a hot swelling will occur there.
And the reduction of its dislocation is done by placing the patient's weak shoulder on a table, and the assistant extends their arm; then, the doctor places their palm over the protruding joint and pushes it until it returns to its original position.
However, one should consider that if the palm has already retreated towards the belly of the hand, then place the patient's weak arm on top of a table during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is advancing towards the back of their hand, then have them place their hand underneath the table, i.e., the interior part of their hand should be placed on it so that the doctor's hand falls upon its protruding joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good; if not, then bind it with a swelling-reducing plaster and leave it alone without touching it again.
For if it does not tolerate it nor allows you to reduce its dislocation after several days have passed while the joint remains twisted; and this causes no harm to the patient except for softening their hand so they cannot grasp anything: then know that their nerves are either severed or severely damaged.
It is therefore not an option but to bind it with a caustic plaster near its rupture point. And perhaps it has no bearing on this issue.
Since therefore Almahassem does not return, then place upon him the plaster which we described. Then he should be bound, and left for five days; afterwards, the binding is removed and he is released, and the hand is exercised.
But if movement is lost and something serious happens to it; then treat it gently with warm water and massage several times until it is eased.
On the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
When any of the fingers are dislocated towards any side, or one of them is dislocated toward the back of its palm or belly; then extend the finger and push on the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then hold the head of the finger, and suspend it towards the side to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it, and extend it until it becomes straight again on its own day.
So when night comes, bind it according to the very description; and do not cease from releasing it during the day: and exercise it with movement; then bind it at night.
Do this for several days until it is bound up.
And similarly do the same if it is dislocated towards the belly of its hand; and bind it to that side, and perform your first procedure on it until it is healed.
And similarly proceed when it is dislocated towards other parts.
Regarding the treatment of spinal dislocations.
When someone has a complete spinal or neck dislocation, or many vertebrae are displaced from their positions: there is then no cure for them, as death hastens towards the sick person.
And a sign of this is that the patient's ejection happens without their will and they cannot hold it back; and sometimes certain parts of their body become numb, or both legs, or both arms, or one of them; or one vertebra moves from its place.
It often gets displaced because it is often dislocated towards four parts.
The one that is displaced backwards is called gibbositas.
The cure for this is to consider at that time, if gibbositas happens from childhood: then there is no cure and it does not heal completely.
For the one that happens from an accident, or a blow, or something similar to those: the ancient masters have already spoken at length about methods of treatment. Most of which does not return with benefit.
I have however abbreviated from that which excuses little of its vastness due to my closeness to the intent: and by my exposition as I exposed it, and fashioned its implement in a way different from how they presented it and expounded upon it.
I say therefore, that there is no skill or healing for the gibbositas which happens from the front.
And similarly for the one that is done on two sides as well.
And it is not treated from them, except for the one that happens on the back itself, with what I am about to tell you: and it is, as the patient is stretched out on their face on a flat table near the wall: and a wet blanket is spread underneath so that their chest is not harmed.
Then a straight piece of wood is placed firmly fixed into the ground at the end of the table, around their head: and another piece of wood around their feet at the other end of the table: and an assistant holds this wood, which is not firmly fixed into the ground. And another assistant holds the other (piece of wood).
Then roll over the patient's head a soft but strong bandage: and extend the end of the bandage to the wood that is by their head: and tie it there.
Then tighten another bandage over their hips, and over their knees, and at their calves. Then gather all the bandages together, and tie them to the other wood that is by their feet.
Then each assistant should pull on the bandages towards their part of the wood, and not move the two woods from their places where they are fixed: but they must not be firmly fixed as we have said.
And the surgeon should place their palms on the spine with strength until it goes back into position: or they can put a board on top of it. Then they should tie their feet to the board until it goes back into position.
If, however, it does not return by this cure, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And let the groove in the wall of which we have spoken, which is near the weak spot, be the place into which the end of the board enters. Then place the middle of the board over the spine. And let the physician put his feet on the other end. And he should strap it tightly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a screw that is turned by hand: and it is such that you drive into the ground by the patient's head at the end of the bedpost two pieces of wood whose length is one arm; and at his head at the end of the other bedpost two more pieces of wood.
And let the length between each piece of wood be one palm; and now a hole has been made in every place through which the screw runs; and every piece of wood must be firmly driven into the ground to ensure it does not move at all.
And let a round piece of wood be inserted; and there is a screw in which the strap turns in two holes made in two pieces of wood.
And at its end is a hole in which the wood is fastened whose length is one palm with that which turns; and likewise there are two more holes in the other two pieces of wood.
Then tighten the straps which you tightened over the patient's chest with a screw that is by his head; and those which you tightened over his legs with the screw that is by his feet.
Then stand by every turn a minister who twists his hand with the ligature, with which the turnstile is rotated; and the doctor levels the vertebral bone, as we have said.
This is the form of the tourniquet that follows.
Then after the vertebral bone returns and the place is levelled, you should put on a drying plaster with egg white. Then apply a compress. After that, place on the plaster a wooden splint three fingers or so wide. And the length of it should be such as to cover the site of kyphosis and overlap the healthy portion of the vertebra.
Then bind with the ligature we described. And let the patient be fed with light nourishment until recovery.
But if there remains a prominence at the site upon completion of healing, then softening and soothing medicines must be applied along with prolonged use of the board we described. And now a leaden plate is applied on that site.
And sometimes there is a prominence at the last vertebra of the back which is thought to be due to dislocation and it is that bone which already stands out. For this reason the assumption should not be made with regard to this medicine because it may possibly cause death.
On treating a dislocated ankle.
You should know that dislocations of the ankle and shoulder do not occur unless there is a full dislocation; nor do they experience what other joints experience due to minor displacement and concavity.
The ankle joint, in fact, dislocates according to four directions. That is, because it dislocates forwards and backwards.
And indeed, most dislocations are inward; there is little forward or backward displacement.
The treatment of an inward dislocation is as follows: when you join the healthy leg of a patient to their affected one, it will be longer; the knee of the affected side will protrude more than that on the healthy side and they cannot touch their foot to their groin; there will also be a warm swelling following the groin due to the head of the thigh bone having reached this point.
The signs that an individual has suffered an outward dislocation are the opposite of those described above.
The signs that an individual has suffered a forward dislocation are as follows: the healthy leg is extended but cannot be folded without pain at the knee; if they try to walk, they can't bring their foot up in front of them and they retain urine; there will also be swelling around their groin during walking, causing them to tread on their heel.
The signs that an individual has suffered a backward dislocation are as follows: the knee cannot be straightened nor folded until the groin is; their leg will also appear shorter than the other and there will be softening around the groin with the head of the thigh bone moving into the hip region.
The reduction of these types of dislocations, however, must consider how long the patient has had this condition when treating it. Then, if you perform its reduction and it remains according to its own arrangement, then there is no cure for it at all. It should therefore not be assumed to have been thoroughly pierced.
In that case where the dislocation is recent and it belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, then make haste to roll the joint, extend it inwards and outwards, and move it right and left; perhaps this will result in a relapse, after which it won't require any other treatment.
If this does not work in that manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and have them extend the patient's leg from below; either with their hands or with a bandage tied above the patient's knee; another assistant will extend the patient's hand from above while inserting his/her hands under the patient's armpits. Then bind with a gentle bandage over the hip bone, holding onto one end of another bandage.
And the extension will be either from the front of the groin to the fork area or from behind towards the back.
And let the extension of all these forces be in one direction until the patient is lifted off the ground with their body and remains hanging there.
This type of extension is actually the common type among the four types of dislocations.
If the dislocation returns with what we've said before then it is good; if not then every type of dislocation will require its own specific treatment that I will describe now.
During the actual reduction process when the dislocation is inwards then it's necessary for the patient to lie on their back on top of their healthy side. Then place a ligament over the root of the hip bone, at that point which is between the head of the hip and the region beneath the groin. Then extend the ligament upwards from the groin region to the higher part of the body, towards the fork (of the ribs).
Then another strong helper takes his arms, reduces the thick area of the weak hip, and stretches it outwards with a vigorous extension. Now he indeed returns to his place.
And this type of operation is easier than the other types of treatment in which this limb is reduced.
But if he refuses to obey you and does not enter with this type of treatment at all, then the two feet of the patient should be bound together along with a strong but soft bandage over both heels and both knees; each [band] should be four fingers long relative to its respective comparison point, and the sick leg must be extended more than the other by a length of two fingers.
Then the patient is to be suspended over the head of a wooden beam that is placed inside the house; its length from the ground should be equivalent to two arms' lengths.
Then order a strong lad to secure the head of the hip bone; another helper is hung alongside the patient and urges the young man who has secured the hip with strength because the joint returns swiftly to its place.
When it returns to its natural position and the dislocation is outwards, the patient must lie on a bench as we described for someone with a hump. And bind the bandage over his sick leg properly as well as over his chest.
Then place two pieces of wood, one at his feet and another at his head. Then a supplementary piece of wood should be placed at the center of the platform, secured firmly; over which are wrapped damp cloths, so as not to hurt the patient; and this wood should be situated between their hips, such that they aren't pulled down towards their lower parts during extension.
Then each assistant should pull on their side, while the physician balances out this movement with his own hand.
If it therefore yields to correction, that will be good.
And if not, place them on the board as we described for scoliosis, pressing equally. However, it is necessary that the patient lie on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward, then it's necessary that the patient's leg be extended quickly; and this follows the same narrative of being on the platform; and the physician should place the palm of their right hand over the patient's groin. Then draw it in with the other hand, and while doing so, extend them downwards towards their knee.
And if the dislocation is backward: then it's not necessary that the patient be extended towards their feet and lifted up off of the ground; instead, they should be placed on a hard surface; just as we described for when their hip is dislocated outwardly, according to what we said about having them lie on two planks; and here too they are lying face down with their ligaments extended, just like what we discussed earlier.
And it's necessary that compression be applied with a board over the place where the joint emerges once reduction has been completed as should be done.
And the sign of its return will not be hidden from you: and that is to stretch the patient's two legs: and when you see them equal, and the patient tightens his leg, and extends it without hesitation: then know that now the limb has returned as it should: then join the two thighs, apply a plaster, and tighten with imemati, which is a wheel: so that it does not move at any part: and let the patient rest for three or four days.
Then untie the bandage and remove the plaster, compare the leg with the other one: then if you see them equal at rest, then know that the dislocation is now firmly set: so let the patient go for a walk.
And if you see any sign of softening: then go back and bandage it again, and tighten according to your initial tightening: and let it rest for three more days.
Then untie it and make the patient delay walking on both legs for a few days until it is well-consolidated.
Chapter: On Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outwards, inwards, and backwards, that is, towards the back of the leg.
And it is not dislocated forwards.
The sign of its dislocation is when you ask the patient to apply his leg against his hip. But if it does not stick to the hip: then you will know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all types of dislocation is to make the patient sit upright so that he can now extend his leg if possible over it, and have your back adhere to their face; then place their foot between your feet.
Then adhere their knee to your palms and straighten them between your fingers above their knee. Then apply your palm with strength to both sides of their knee. And the other attendant will stretch out their foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of restoration is that the leg will adhere to the thigh with ease, not painfully.
Then bandage it, and make sure that the leg adheres to the thigh. Then bind them together with thread for three or four days. Then release them.
And the patient should not walk for several days until they heal.
If the patient resists reduction of their limb, administer a strong extension with the ligaments described earlier for hip treatment until it returns.
 On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Heel Bone.
Sometimes the heel bone is dislocated with a minor displacement, and sometimes it's dislocated further along. And its dislocation occurs either towards the inner or outer side.
The indication that this is a dislocation is when you see the inflated heel bone moving towards the side it was dislocated to.
The treatment for its removal is an easy return: it is to be extended gently by hand and straightened until it returns.
In treating it when it is dislocated according to the socket, you should have the patient sit upright: and a strong assistant should hold them firmly from behind at the middle of their back.
Then you hold their foot with your right hand from above, and with your left hand underneath the foot at the heel.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then, with your left hand using two fingers.
Then extend with the left [hand] and push the heel of the foot towards the shin with your right hand without force.
Do this twice as we described.
Then push the heel of the foot towards the shin for the third time, and you pull on the heel.
If therefore it returns on the first or second try in this way, and you see the foot is straight, that's good: if not, then repeat the procedure on it: for itself has returned.
If however the return is prevented with what we described: then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and fix a stick into the ground firmly so it falls between their thighs: and you should already have wrapped a cloth around them so they are not hurt.
Then the assistant should take hold of his hip; afterwards, another assistant should stretch out his foot, either with their hands or with a cord tied around the ankle. Then each assistant should stretch [the patient's leg] against the stretching of their peer; and a stick shall be placed between the two hips of the patient to restrain him so that his body is not drawn down towards its lower parts during the stretching.
Then the physician should correct the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy leg downwards. For the dislocation returns swiftly.
When the dislocation returns, and you are made aware of its return: place a plaster and bandage upon it, bind them tightly with cord, and secure the foot to the leg with a ligament.
And you must take heed or fear the nerves that are above the back of the heel, so as to ensure that the cord is not overly tight and injures them.
Then let [the patient] rest for two or three days. If the cord loosens, tighten it; then release [the patient] on the third or fourth day; and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. But if they try to walk before this period, it is not safe lest the joint be disrupted and destroyed anew, such that it will no longer respond to treatment.
But if a hot swelling occurs to him: then you must manage its reduction by means of what was said earlier in our treatise at another place about treatment, and an ointment until it is removed.
On dislocation of the toes and its treatment.
It is necessary to straighten what has been dislocated with a slight pull without effort; and this indeed is not difficult but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in some of the joints of the instep; then it is necessary for the patient to sit with their foot on a level spot on the ground or on a board, and he should be standing as if walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot over that which is protruding from those joints. Then press it with your foot using force until it returns to its place; then you will see that it is now level and the protrusion at that spot is no longer visible.
Then place under his sole a board that will fit the whole foot; it should have two ends. Then bind it with a suitable bandage for three days. Then release it and have him rest from walking for many days until he is bound and secured by the reduction.
On types of dislocations with wounds or fractures.
When something happens and you try to treat it and restore it, death often results; and for that reason one should not presume on treating an injury of this kind unless he is prudent in his art, experienced, merciful, pious, slow, unhurried, not rash or presumptuous: and let him use in the beginning medicines which only cool hot sores; and leave the patient to divine judgment. Unless you witness, or hope for salvation from destruction with mild illness, and in which something of hope appears. Try therefore to reduce it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot abscess occurs.
If therefore the limb returns according to our wish, then apply a regimen that calms the abscess, and treat the wound with what suits it from drying ointments.
If there is a dislocation with a fracture and separated splinters occur in the bone, then attempt to remove them, and do what we said about simple illnesses regarding what precedes in their places.
And beware according to your ability, and guard yourself from entering the path of fear; as my previous instruction to you stated.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and safer for your body among them during your time.
