After I have completed for you, my sons, this book, which is the ultimate book of knowledge in medicine with its complement, and having reached the end of it through its expositions and declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise, which is part of surgical operation, namely surgery by hand.
Since surgery by hand has been neglected in our region and in our time: until perhaps its knowledge is lost and its trace is cut off; and there remain only small descriptions of it in the books of the ancients, which have been changed by other hands; and they suffer error and hesitation, until their intentions are obscured and their insight is weakened: It seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise concerning it according to the way of expositions, declarations, and abridgments; and that I should come to the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of surgery: as this is done through adding declarations and by expediting what is necessary.
The reason why a good practitioner of this kind of surgery is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long, and its author must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, as described by Galen, until he knows the limbs' benefits, their shapes, and their connections and separations; and has knowledge of bones, nerves, sinews, and their number, their exits, pulsating veins, quiet veins, and their places.
And for this, Hippocrates said that names are many with names, but few with deeds; and especially so in the art of hand-surgery.
We have indeed spoken about it in the introduction to this book.
Since those who are not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will inevitably fall into error, which leads to the death of people; as I have seen many of them, trained in this science, boast about it without knowledge and without experience.
What happened is that I saw a foolish doctor cut into a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck and he struck some arteries in her neck; therefore the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who presumed to extract a stone from an old man, and the stone was big. He reached for it and extracted it with a piece of bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself had already been called to extract it; and considering the size of the stone, and the condition of the patient, I saw that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was taking a fee from one of the Dukes of our land for his medical services; and it so happened that a black eunuch who belonged to him suffered a fracture in his leg near the heel bone: and this physician hastened with his ignorance, bound up the fracture above the wound with swathes, splints tightly binding them on with a strong ligature, and he gave no breathing space to the wound.
Then he released him according to his own wishes. After a few days he let him go and ordered him not to remove the bandages; so he remained thus until an abscess had formed on his leg, foot and reached death's door.
I was called to him and I hastened to release his ligaments; and there followed calmness and he escaped from his pains.
However, the injury was already too advanced in his limb; and I could not reverse it.
Therefore, the injury ceased to progress further into his limb until it perished.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess; and it became ulcerated after days until its evil was magnified against its owner.
This is because when a cancer is purely from melancholy humour, then it ought not to be approached with iron at all unless it is in a limb that can tolerate having the whole of it cut away.
And for that reason, O sons, you need to know that operations with the hand are divided into two categories: namely, an operation associated with safety; and an operation which carries danger in many of its aspects.
And I have raised the point in every place throughout this book where an operation comes up which inspires terror and fear.
It is necessary for you to beware of that and avoid it so that fools do not find a way to talk about it and bring dishonour upon it.
So take the measure with care and protection; treat your patients with ease and confidence; and follow a better way leading to salvation and laudable succession by God's grace; and cast aside terrible illnesses difficult of cure; and lift from yourselves that which makes you afraid, so that hesitation does not enter into your faith or your benefit.
It is indeed more conducive to your glory, and elevates you higher in this world, and ultimately to your greatness.
For Galen has already said so in some of his admonitions. Do not treat an illness badly, lest you be called bad doctors.
I have now divided this treatise into three chapters.
Chapter one.
On cauterization with fire and sharp medicinal instruments, catalogued and arranged from head to toe, along with the forms of cauterizing tools and equipment, and everything else that is required for this operation.
Chapter two.
On cutting open, boring through, bloodletting and blisters, wounds; extracting arrows and the like; catalogued and arranged along with forms of instruments used for these procedures.
Chapter three.
On restoration, dislocations, treating twisted injuries and the like; catalogued and arranged from head to toe with forms of instruments.
But before reminding you of the procedure with him, it is necessary to say something about the advantages and disadvantages of this treatment; which constitutions it suits.
I say, therefore, that discourse on the quality of cauterization and its harm is a lengthy and subtle matter, knowledge, and a hidden secret.
There also spoke to him a multitude of wise men, and they disagreed about it; for my part, I have had enough from their speeches, fearing the lengthiness of them.
I say, therefore, that cauterization suits universally every constitution which is with matter and without matter: except for two constitutions, which are the warm constitution without matter, and the dry constitution without matter.
However, they disagreed about the warm and dry constitutions with matter. Some said that cauterization is beneficial in these cases. And others said the opposite, namely that cauterization is not suitable for an illness which arises from heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is hot; and it is inappropriate to treat a hot and dry illness with something hot and dry.
And the one who said the opposite argued that cauterization is beneficial for every hot and dry illness which occurs in human bodies; because when you compare a human body and its moisture to the constitution of fire, you find the human body cold.
And for my part, I say by his argument; because experience has already proven this to me on several occasions.
However, one should not proceed with this unless he is already proven and practiced in the final exercise of cauterization, and has understood the variety of human constitutions, and the disposition of illnesses within themselves, their causes, circumstances, and duration.
From other complexions, there should be no fear upon you: especially in cold and humid illnesses. For indeed all physicians have agreed on them: and they did not dissent from assisting with cauterization on these.
And know, my sons, that from the secrecy of cure by means of cauterization with fire, and its superiority over cauterization with burning medicine, is that fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized: and it harms no other member connected with it, save with a small harm.
However, the action of burning medicine reaches that which extends from the members: and perhaps it causes to happen in the member a difficult-to-heal illness, and perhaps kills (the patient).
But fire, because of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless it exceeds (what is necessary).
Now indeed that has become known to us through experimentation, because of the length of our service and study with this art, and our stance upon the truth of things: and I am absolved from the length (of this discourse).
And if it were not for the fact that it is not permitted to my book to bring you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodily expulsions, by which it expels illnesses with a philosophical demonstrative discourse, which would sharpen your minds.
And know, my sons, that they themselves disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform a cautery, and suggest that spring is the better season.
And I say that a cautery is appropriate at any time: for the accidental harm because of the time is submerged in the benefit which is drawn with the cautery. And especially if the cauterization is for pains arising from necessary, strong, urgent pains that cannot tolerate delay; for this reason because it is feared that a worse evil may occur which is greater than a small harm that goes untreated due to time.
And do not let it enter your minds, O sons, that which is not held in contempt by the masses and foolish physicians, namely, that for an illness that is healed through cauterization, there is not always a relapse; and they consider this as a consequence, but the matter is not as they think: because cauterization is nothing other than a type of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moist humors which are the cause why pains occur.
However, the cautery is superior to medicine for its speed of healing, and the power of its operation, and the strength of its dominion; and it is possible that illness may return at some point in time depending on the complexion of the patient, and where the illness is located, and their own constitution; and what has accumulated in their body through the aggregation of excesses there; and what they have acquired for themselves through diet and similar causes unless the illness which requires cauterization.
Subtle illness in a limb due to few excesses and humors, such as toothache cautery, because of pain, and similar cases, it is possible that the pain may not return. But this occurs rarely.
But the talk of the common people is again wrong; that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is a correct statement, not in the way they intend it; for they believe that there is no cure which can be combined with medicine or anything else after the application of cautery.
The truth is the opposite of that, and the intent is that cauterization, which is the last resort in medicine, is not so unless we have administered other treatments for a particular illness but they were ineffective; then as a final measure we administer cauterization, and it works. Thus, in this sense, cauterization can be considered the ultimate medical treatment, contrary to popular understanding among laymen and many foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron; they said this only due to the equality of gold and the high regard for its substance, and they claimed that a cauterized site does not produce pus. However, this is not always the case; I have proven it myself and found that cauterization with gold does not prevent pus formation in certain bodily tissues more so than other metals.
And cauterization with gold is good, and better than iron, as they said. However, when you heat the gold cautery in fire, it is difficult to determine when it reaches the desired temperature due to the melting point of gold; and if you apply too much heat, it will liquefy and turn into sheets.
The artist falls short due to this issue; therefore, cautery with iron is quicker and more convenient for us to use in practice, which is the right approach.
I have organized this chapter on cautery according to different sections; I have arranged them from head to toe so that the reader can easily find what they are looking for.
Chapter II.
Here cauterization is applicable for the control of moisture and coolness in the brain; these are two causes of frequent headaches, and profuse discharges from the head into the regions of eyes and ears, and excessive sleepiness, toothache, sore throat; and universally all diseases that occur due to cold, such as paralysis, and sodae, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The method of cauterization is as follows: you should instruct the patient to first evacuate their head by cleansing it with three or four nights of purgative medicine, according to the strength of the patient and his age and habits.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor. Then have him sit between your hands in a square position so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that spot with an unburnt cautery iron.
Then fire the olive oil cautery which has this form.
Then place the iron on the marked spot, gradually lowering your hand until it is constricted, and you turn the iron round and round. Then lift your hand quickly and examine the spot.
If you see that an area the size of a bean or a quantity of rue has been burnt off the bone then lift your hand. And if not, repeat with your hand the same iron, or with another from the same if it gets cold: until the bones that I told you are visible.
Then take some salt, and dissolve it in water, and soak the dressing in it, and place it on the site: and leave it for three days.
Then place the dressing soaked in butter on top of it, and leave it in place until the fire blister is destroyed. Then treat it with the four-herb ointment until it heals.
They already said that the longer a wound stays open, the more it discharges pus: which is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized down to the bone: and the cautery should be held in place until something thick from the bone is burned.
Then scrape after what has been burnt of the bone, then it should be treated.
And others say that it is necessary to reach with the cautery until an imprint of the foot of a teapot is made in the bone, so that the bone falls out which becomes like the mold of a kirate: or an instrument that women put infused almond oil into: and they estimate that vapors exhale from this place, and leave the wound open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it consolidates.
To me, however, these two types of cautery do not seem suitable except for certain people according to the way of fear.
And in my view it is better to leave it with his health.
The head is weakened due to the dissolution of its natural continuity; as we have witnessed with other body parts; especially when the patient's head is naturally weak; and I find the first kind of cauterization safer and better, so that is what I use; thus let us proceed with it for the sake of healing.
Head three.
When a prolonged chronic headache occurs all over the head; and it persists with the patient; and they have used hyeris, cochiis, caputpurgiis, oils, and emplastra. And especially if it has already been cauterized once with the cautery that we described and none of those things help; then consider this. For if the patient's head is of a strong natural constitution and not weak, but they experience severe cold; then cauterize with another small cautery underneath it. Then cauterize it over the entire horn of its head with a cautery, but do not let it pass through the skin and expose bone in the quantity that we described. And cauterize it with one cautery on the occipital bone of its head, in the place which is called vas; and this is the spot where the windpipe is placed; and raise your cautery here, but do not expose the bone. For the patient will find relief from that severe pain which is different from the pain of all other cauterizations of the head.
And I will call this the Cautery of its place; and it must be a cautery which is thinner for cauterizing the horns of the head and the occipital bone than the one used for cauterizing the middle of the head.
Chapter 4.
When pain and numbness occur on one side of the head, or when the pain extends to the eye, and it is evacuated with cleansing medicines for the head, and the rest of the treatment that I mentioned in the divisions of diseases does not help: then cauterization is performed on it in two ways: either cauterization with burning medicine; or with iron.
Cauterization with burning medicine is as follows: take one brick and scrape it, then cut off its ends on both sides. Then split the painful area at an appropriate time with a wide bloodletting instrument until there is a place beneath the skin where the brick fits.
Insert it into the space under the skin until it is hidden; then secure it over the brick with a suitably tight bandage and leave it for fifteen hours before removing it, taking out the brick, and leaving the wound to rest for two or three days afterwards. Once pus forms at the site, treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do it with some burning medicines that I wrote about in the twelfth treatise on Caustic Medicines, you may.
Cauterization with iron is as follows: A hot cautery of this shape should be used.
It is called a "clavelis", because the shape of its head resembles that of a nail, with some curvature and a small prominence at its centre.
Then place it over the site and hold your hand; you turn the blade gradually with speed; and let what is cauterized in depth of skin be like half its length. And raise your hand so that the artery below is not cauterized, otherwise a bleeding will occur.
Then soak the dressing in salt water and place it over the site for three days; thereafter apply a dressing with butter; later dress it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this half of the skull with the second blade-like end of the Cautery. And excavate from the incsion of the artery on this half of the skull, not that ancient one specifically.
ยง On the method of cauterizing an ancient half of the skull.
When treating a half of the skull, with what we said in the previous treatment and what we mentioned in our classification of diseases, if the treatment does not work: and you see from the disease that it is not sufficient for what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you must use the fiery blade-cautery until it becomes white after marking over the painful site with a line whose length is half of a finger, or close to this: and lift your hand once, and press on it until you cut the artery, and arrive at the bone.
However it is necessary for you to avoid the continuation of the jaw which moves during chewing, so that the side or nerve moving it are not burnt, otherwise a spasm will happen.
And it should be above the wound, and take care of the flow of blood from the severed artery. For its severance is feared, especially by him who does not know what he is doing and is neither studious nor experienced; and he abandons the operation with it in the first place.
And I will come with the reminder of the treatment of accidental bleeding from an artery according to its own manner and in this book's place.
If you see that the illness is not sufficient for this cautery, and you see the patient's body bearing the cautery on the top of the head, as we described, take care of the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, apply the cautery we mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction using a cautery with two knives. For this cauterization is better and more effective.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for ear pain.
When there is ear pain due to cold and it is treated with solutions and the remaining treatment we mentioned in the division, and the pain is not removed, then cautery by fire: and this is what is called a Point, whose form is as follows.
Then make points with it after its heating around the whole ear as it turns; or around either one if there is pain simultaneously in both. And move away with the cautery from the root of the ear slightly after you have marked the places with encaustic: and let there be ten points of the cautery on each ear, and almost that.
Then treat the wound until it heals.
On how to cauterize in tortures.
Chapter 7.
A torture which is cured by cauterization occurs only from the types which happen because of phlegm, as we said in our classifications of diseases.
And the deviation of this cautery is due to desiccation or nerve spasm.
When you treat this type of torture with eels and enemas and gargles but it doesn't help the patient then you must cauterize him three times: once at the root of the ear, second just below the ear lobe, third where the two lips join together.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part. Because softening does not occur unless it happens to the part which appears healthy.
And the shape of this cautery is that you burn it with a cautery on the extreme upper edge of the ear near its horn slightly, and another under the lobe; each to be as long as one's thumb. And remove your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burnt.
And this is the shape of the cautery and it belongs to the knife type which has been mentioned above; however, its thickness isn't very fine as you can see, there should be a little bit more thickness than what's needed for a knife.
Then treat the wound with what has been mentioned above until it heals.
The method of cauterization for old apoplexy.
When old apoplexy is treated, and you treat it with what we have said, but your treatment does not take effect and the patient has no fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries over each corner of their head, one on the middle of the head as we mentioned, and another at the back of the head, depending on which occurred; the method of the cautery should be according to what was previously said.
It is also cauterized with the cautery over the stomach bone, which is more effective.
Then treat it with what was previously said.
Chapter 9.
The patient should be given large draughts of fresh water to drink first, and then purgative pills that clean the brain.
Then completely shave the patient's head, and apply to their neck a plaster made with mustard described in the treatise on plasters; do this several times.
For this is the method of cauterization; and do it in the same way as I said there.
If therefore it heals with that treatment, it is good. If not, then give them three cauteries at the back of their head that extend downwards from the top of the head to just below the eye level; and leave a digit's width between each cautery.
Then treat the cauteries with what was previously said.
If however you wish to add an extension and the patient can tolerate it, then make a cautery mark in the middle. If you wish to add an extension, then cauterize it above the two corners.
Then treat it until it is healed; let the cautery be anointed with oil according to the form that has been set forth.
On the method of cauterizing for paralysis and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleaning of the head using leeches, and with what we have said above.
Then scrape the patient's head; afterward cauterize it with a cautery mark on the middle of the head, and a cautery mark above each corner of the head, and a cautery mark at the back, and three marks over the vertebrae of the neck.
If however you need to soften a bodily illness with many of these [cauterizations], and the patient can tolerate it, and the sickness is strong; then cauterize it with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and the last one with a cautery until it burns through most of his skin, and lift your hand. Then treat it until it is healed; and thus anoint the cautery with oil.
On the method of cauterizing for epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless it is an epileptic whose epilepsy arises from phlegm.
You should therefore clean his brain first with leeches and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in this section; when the patient is large or can tolerate taking medicines.
If it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then a gargle and chewing cleansers for the brain are administered many days beforehand with the right choice of foods.
Then you shave his head, then cauterize it with one cautery iron in the middle of the head, as previously described in this way: and another cautery iron on his occipital bone, and over every horn of his head a cautery iron. If the patient is strong and able to tolerate it, then cauterize him with the cautery irons that I mentioned for someone with paralysis, and apply a softening agent to the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back: and let the iron be olive-oil heated according to the method described earlier.
If however the patient is a child, then place a fine iron, according to this method.
On the method of cautery for melancholia.
When the cause of melancholia is corrupted humours, and thick phlegm, then cauterize with the irons that we described for someone with paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholia is an excess of black bile towards melancholia, and the patient's body is moist, then give him in his drink something that cleanses his brain, as described earlier in this book: then shave the patient's head, and afterwards make a decently-made linen pad like a circle.
Then place this on the middle of the head: and let the patient be held from every side while sitting upright.
Then bring forward an ointment. It is better to use old butter from sheep's milk. Heat it over a gently warming fire to the measure that it can be tolerated by the finger when inserted inside. Then squeeze it out on his head in the middle, and leave it there until it cools down.
Do this to the sick person once every week, along with the rest of his good diet, until he is cured.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small points on him, apart from the part where you are holding your hand with the cauterizer; let it be fragrant.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then put on it a poultice soaked in butter, or in hen's fat.
On the way of cauterizing downward to the eye with water.
Chapter 13.
When it is declared to you that water has come out of the eye through signs, which I mentioned above, then begin and make the sick person drink with something that will purify his head.
And guard him from all moisture, and make him sit in the bath, fasting for a few days.
Then order him to scrape his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over the two temples with two cauterizers, if there is a beginning of water coming out of both eyes at once; or from one side, if there is a beginning of water in one eye; and cut off all veins and arteries that are under the skin with the cauterizer; and let the cauterizers be as long as the width of the temples; and beware of blood flow.
If you see anything coming out of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I will come with the wisdom that is in extracting arteries, cutting them, and being cautious of blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two final cauterizations.
On the method of cauterizing in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and persistent: and they are on the veins and arteries that are visible on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is due to excess cold phlegm; then cauterize with a cautery as I described at the beginning regarding descending moisture, a cautery in the middle of the head, two cauterizations over each temple, and two cauterizations on the neck below two bones. And if you need additional treatment, then cauterize it on each side of the eye carefully, at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
On the method of cauterizing nasal odor.
When you treat it with what we have said regarding division, and the treatment is not effective; then proceed quickly, and give him a drink of infirmochia three nights in a row: then shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cautery, using olive oil. Then cauterize it with a claw-like cautery with two cauterizations over each eyebrow under the hair slightly.
And take care to avoid the artery, so as not to cut it.
This is the form of Clauelis cauterization.
On the method of cauterizing a softened eyelid.
When the eyelid of an eye is softened by disease or moisture, then it should be cauterized with a single cautery, using this crescent-shaped cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above both eyebrows with two small cauteries on each side; and let them be stretched from the two temples; and let the length of every cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow; and do not remove your hand with the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third eyelid is burnt.
On the method of cauterizing an eyelid with ingrown hairs that irritate the eye.
The cautery for this is according to two methods: either a cautery with fire, or a cautery with caustic medicine.
But in the case of a fire cautery, instruct the patient beforehand to remove their hairs, if they are among those who do so, until they are extended and equalized. If however they irritate him at their root, then compress his eyes with cloth so that they do not move until they are burnt.
When therefore they are burnt and equalized, then place the patient's head in your lap; next mark over the eyelids of his eyes with the cautery iron, a sign that is according to the shape of a myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the sign be close to the hairs.
Then place a poultice soaked in egg white: or in psyllium mucilage over the eye.
Then apply a cauterizer with this form.
Then cauterize over the shape you marked out slowly with many passes until the skin surface is burned away, revealing a figure like that of a myrtle leaf entirely visible.
And the sign of your work's success is: if you see the eyelid already closing and hairs rising near the eye wound.
Therefore raise your hand then: and leave him for three days.
Then place over it a poultice with butter until the scab is removed. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
If any of the hairs grow back after this time and the eyelid softens again then repeat the cauterization over that spot as you did at first.
But if the hairs are on the lower lid then cauterize it until they rise up to their proper place and level so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is as if you advise the patient to let his hairs grow until they are long enough and levelled so that they do not prick the eye. Make a myrtle leaf shape out of paper.
Then take from well-known soap and from quicklime an ounce weight of each one or something like that then grind them together finely and do so swiftly so they don't get cold. Then cut out a piece from it in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one eyelid or both. And place under the eye a poultice soaked in egg white; make sure the patient's head rests in your lap.
Put your index finger on the medicine and press it down lightly. Move it around every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, because its sting is like fire.
So while you persist with this stinging sensation that he feels, then let go of the medicine and move it around using your finger. Once the stinging sensation subsides, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Then examine whether you see the eyelid swell up like it does when exposed to fire or a small incision; if so, that is good. If not, then apply more medicine on the area where the medicine has not been applied and has no mark until your procedure is even and the eye contracts.
Then place on it a poultice with butter until the burnt skin is removed. After that, treat it with diaphony ointment or another, until the wound heals.
During your procedure you must pay special attention to the final check to ensure that none of the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid softens after a few days and something gets stuck in the eye from hairs, then reapply the medicine to that area of the eyelid that softened as you did initially. Then take care of him until he is healed.
This is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
And you should know that human eyes vary in size and smallness. So let your consideration be accordingly: the path of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing a tear duct.
When you treat a fistula, as we said in the classification of diseases, and your treatment does not bring about a cure: then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and have an assistant hold his head with their hands so that it does not move or shake.
Then place a cautery of the form described below, soaked in egg white or psyllium mucilage, on his eye; then apply fire to the cautery.
It should be a tube like the shape of an eagle's-feather quill from one end to where it is applied as a cautery; and if you wish for it to penetrate all the way through, or upwards, then make sure that side is open.
However this tube is better for your purpose.
Then squeeze the fistula if it is open and extract any blood from it; dry it out thoroughly. If it isn't open then open it and extract its pus.
Then place on it a very hot cautery iron.
And hold your hand with it for a moment near the cautery iron away from the eye, towards the side of the nose, so that your hand does not stray or disturb the patient; and place the cautery iron on the fat above the eye, and burn it.
If therefore you reach with your cautery iron right up to the bone, it will be fine. And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, should you need to; and leave it for three days.
Then apply a poultice with butter, and treat it with drying ointment until it heals.
But if forty days pass by and it does not heal: then apply over it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and scrape it according to what was said in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for fistula, which some have previously described. Pay attention to the place of the fistula, and find it; then put into this fissure a fine probe, that is, a slender cannula, whose form is as follows. And pour into it an amount of molten lead weighing one drachma, and hold your hand with the cannula firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that he does not jump or bring the molten lead to his eye.
And it is necessary that you place on the patient's eye a poultice soaked in egg white or water.
For the lead burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with an astonishing healing.
If the fistula heals with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal opening and redirect the fistula towards the course of the nose, as it will come to its proper place.
The method of cauterizing labial fissures.
There are many times when there are labial fissures, which are called 'piles', especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures as we have said in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not work, then use a small knife-shaped cautery with fire according to this form.
And let its depth be according to the thinness of the knife.
Then place it, being ignited, quickly into the very fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with a caustic until it heals.
The method of cauterizing an oral fistula.
When there is an abscess at the root of the gums or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth: then it makes pus and breaks open; afterwards it heals and runs with pus and becomes a fistula; then you treat it and the treatment does not work, then one must use a cautery according to its size that can fit into the fistula. Then introduce the ignited one into the hole of the fistula and hold your hand there until the heated iron reaches its depth and end: do this once or twice.
Then treat the wound afterwards with what we have said regarding treatment until it heals.
If therefore pus is cut off and heals, then that will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place, and remove the corrupted bone according to what comes into its head.
The way of cauterizing gums and softened teeth.
When the gum softens due to dampness and teeth loosen, and you treat it with medicines but without success: then place the patient's head on your lap.
Then apply the cautery with fire, which will be formed as follows: place a tube over the tooth and insert the hot iron into it quickly; hold your hand there for a while until you feel that the patient senses heat of the fire has reached down to the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand; afterwards repeat the cautery several times, according to what you wish.
Then the patient should fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it there for an hour; then spit it out.
For the loose tooth is strengthened, the softened gum tightened, and the corrupted dampness dried up.
The way of cauterizing for pain of teeth.
When toothache is due to cold, either there is coldness or worms inside it and treatment with medicines does not take effect; then cautery on the tooth is carried out in two ways: by applying an ointment or by means of fire.
When using a cautery with butter, take fresh butter and boil it in an iron spoon or a small pot. Then get a cloth and wrap it around the end of the probe. Then dip the probe into the boiled butter and quickly place it on the painful tooth; hold it there until it cools down. Repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip wool or a cloth into cold butter and place it on the aching tooth; put a red-hot iron on top of this until the heat reaches deep into the cavity of the tooth.
The cautery method using fire involves attaching an iron or brass tube to the probe. If there is any thickness on its surface, make sure the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then apply the fire cautery, which has a round shape; place it on that tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery cools down.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed either that same day or the next.
And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter while keeping it pressed against the mark of the cautery for an hour; after that, he may spit it out.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
Cauterize with whichever end you wish as possible; and this is the shape of the cannula.
On the method of cauterizing styes.
When styes are caused by phlegm and cold humours, and they do not respond to treatment with medicines, and you wish to digest them quickly: then use a concave cautery, the form of which is this.
With two tight ends so that the smoke emerges from the cautery at one end; and place it, heated, on the stye once, or twice if necessary, until you reach the depth of the stye.
If the stye is small, then adjust the cautery according to its size.
Then leave it for three days, and apply to it a poultice soaked in butter until that which was burnt by the fire is removed.
Then treat it with tooth ointment until the shape of the tube is restored.
On the method of cauterizing hoarseness of voice and tightness of breath.
When humours overwhelm the windpipe and especially when it is accompanied by a cold constitution, then the patient ought first to be treated with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it at night at the root of the throat in a hollow place; and take care not to reach with the cautery into the throat or onto the skin except for one bit of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the joint of the neck on its last vertebra; and let this cautery be a nail-shaped one according to the model described previously.
Then treat it with what preceded, until it is healed.
...Concerning the way of cauterizing lung disease and cough...
When the cough and lung disease are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or wasting disease, nor is it an old complaint: then cauterize him with two cauteries above the fork in hollow, soft places. And with the other cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let it be a hollow tube-shaped cautery as previously described.
And if you wish your cauterization to be by pricking with a cautery, which is called a 'Point', of the form previously described for earache pricks; and let the points be from thirty to almost forty in number.
Then treat it with what preceded until it is healed.
And now let there be a three-pronged cautery of this shape. Why is the cauterization mitigated when you do with it by turn three cauteries?
Chapter 27.
When the head of the humerus is dislocated due to moisture and is not put back into place within an hour after its displacement, until it becomes accustomed to returning, then displaced by a slight motion which occurs as we have just witnessed, you should first reduce the dislocation... The patient should then lie down on their back, or on their healthy side. Then lift the skin that is inside the upper part of the armpit with your left hand's fingers: and if the joint is dislocated towards the inside.
Then take a cautery, which has two bars. Whose form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the cauterization figure will appear with four cauteries.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three bars, which results in a figure of six cauteries; and the bars are made as thin as possible.
And this is the form of the three-bar cautery.
And sometimes one more is added to this method, resulting in eight cauteries.
Then place on the cautery crushed onions with salt. Then make the patient adhere to rest so that no limb is moved until they are comfortable.
And if the dislocation is upwards, which rarely happens, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a clavicle-shaped cautery, or by puncturing multiple times with cauteries.
For the joint is made firm, moisture is removed, and the patient recovers health.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When there is coldness and excessive moisture in the stomach, which has not yet been eliminated from its constitution, and catarrhs frequently form as a result of this condition, and frequent treatments are applied without benefit; then the patient must lie down on his back with legs and arms extended. Then causticate with three caustics: with a sub-conch caustic of the size of one finger on the clavicle; and two caustics below at both sides, each the size of a single caustic, until the figure of the caustics forms a triangle. And extend [the cauterizations] so that they do not join each other; when the caustics begin to discharge pus.
And let the depth of the caustic be two-thirds [of the thickness] of the skin.
And let the figure of the caustics be according to this shape, without addition; and if you wish to caustic with a large caustic in the middle of the stomach, according to this shape: then let the caustic that is used for this procedure be one shaped like a circle, according to this form.
And the stomach is causticated by having the area around it pricked with a small pointed instrument which has been heated red-hot; and [the process] may be done as follows: first mark on the stomach an area according to whatever size you wish, using the encaustic iron; then causticize this marked spot with a causticizing iron; afterwards treat [it] with the treatment that preceded until it is healed.
On how to causticize a cold spleen.
When there is pain in the spleen due to coldness and moisture, or due to a thick wind, which has not yet been eliminated by its natural superfluous discharge; and the patient is treated with what we have said above, but without improvement: then he must lie down on his neck; then mark three cauterizations according to this figure and size using an encaustic iron, below the spleen from the hypocondriae where it reaches the length of a man's elbow. The distance between each caustic should be equal in width to one finger; while each caustic should have the same length as the body of the patient. Do not press your hand too hard with the causticizing iron.
And its amount that is burnt from the thickness of the skin, half the amount not added: and let it be a patient standing on his own feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him be lying down, having already stretched out his legs and raised his arms.
This is the shape of the cauterization.
And indeed it is possible for you to carry out these cauterizations with a knife-like cautery when you have skill and prudence in the art.
And guard against proceeding too far in the cauterization and burning through all the thickness of the skin so that what is burnt is the whole body and it reaches the entrails, for there the skin is thin; know this therefore.
Paragraph about the method of cauterizing hepatic abscesses.
When it becomes apparent and you wish to know whether the abscess is in the liver's flesh or its membrane, then if it is in the liver's flesh there will be pain but no sharpness, while if it is in the liver's membrane with the pain comes a fierce degree of acuteness. And you see now that its cure has tired out his physicians.
It is therefore necessary for the patient to lie prone with his neck bent backwards. Next trace the shape of the abscess with an encasutry; next take a fiery cautery that resembles a spoke. And this is its form. Cauterize it with one such cautery until all the skin is burnt and it reaches the subcutaneous tissue, until all pus emerges; then cure it as for discharging abscesses, until it is cured.
One should not use this type of cauterization unless one's study in the art of medicine is prolonged and these illnesses have been encountered several times through the hands of that person, then indeed may they dare to perform such an operation.
But as for letting her go, in my opinion, it is better for me.
ยง On the method of cauterization in pleurisy.
The ancients said that a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia for cold pleurisy should be done in this way. And it is that you should take from the roots of dry long Aristolochia one root longer than the others which can be found among them and is as thick as a finger. Then immerse it in oil, and light it on fire. Then cauterize with one large cautery at the place where the fork of the neck is joined to it and two small ones slightly sloping downwards towards that side which is under the beard.
And two more on that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs sloping a little towards the back, another at the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And three more behind the back; one at that which is between the two scapulae, and two on the sides of the chest lower down, one being between the two scapulae.
And you must not press your hand with the cautery but let it be held open on the skin without pressure.
And some of the ancients have said that there are those who use an iron cautery similar to a radius; they light it and insert it inside towards that which is between the ribs until they reach with it the abscess, and pus comes out as we have said for liver abscesses.
But in this perforation, when cauterization is performed out of fear, either the patient dies immediately or a fistula occurs in the place, which has no cure.
On the method of cauterizing spleen head 32.
When you treat spleen illness, as we said before from the treatment section of illnesses, and your treatment does not help, then a cautery on it is performed according to three methods, which are all correct.
One of which is to make three or four cauteries in a row along the spleen's length following the shape of the liver cautery described before.
And there should be an interval between each two cauteries equal to the size of one finger or more or less.
And the method of the cautery should be as we described before for liver cauterization equally.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery; let the patient lie on his back supine.
And another method for the cauterization is to hold the two pronged cautery with fire that we described in the dislocation of shoulder chapter: and lift up the skin which is over the spleen where the patient's left elbow reaches; your lifting should be along the body width such that the cauteries fall on the body length.
Then insert the two burning prongs until you penetrate through skin from the other side; then extract the cautery; thus four cauteries are made.
And if you want to cauterize with another three pronged cautery.
Then treat the cautery after you let it release its puss for many days; this is more effective than any other treatment described before.
On the method of cauterizing for dropsy.
The cautery should not fall on dropsy unless it is suitable for the patient.
When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment that we have described earlier, and if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another on the liver, one on the spleen, two between the vertebrae at the back, and one each in a direct line from the breast and stomach; and let the depth of the cautery be almost equal to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the open cautery to discharge pus over a long period.
And do not discharge the patient from treatment after the cautery with it: which ought to have two intentions applied, and recovery will be quick with God's help.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is to be cauterized should be that of a key, according as its form may have been; and that of the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according as its form may have been.
On the method of cauterizing feet and legs.
When blisters fill with yellow water in a dropsical patient, you ought to cauterize over the back of the foot at night, which is between the little finger and ring finger; then raise your hand holding the cautery, without twisting it; next lift your hand; and do not repeat this treatment at all.
It [the wound] should be washed with lemon water and a caustic should be applied in this form.
Then make two caustics on the two legs, one in each leg, and make a caustic with the knife-like end of the caustic instrument; and let the caustic be made along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another lower down, about mid-leg. And make two caustics over the whole hip region: then leave the open caustic without any treatment for a long time so that some water oozes out from it; then treat it with what we have mentioned above.
Paragraph sign. Chapter: On the method of caustication for hernia.
Chapter 35.
When the hernia has resulted from cold and moisture, weakening the retaining and digestive powers which are located in the stomach and intestines; when it is treated with methods of treatment but does not heal; and you see that the patient can bear a caustic of excessive power: then causticate on his stomach itself according to what was said earlier about causticating on the stomach with a circular cautery, and four thin cauteries around the navel, with a fine nail-shaped instrument, plus one large caustic above the alhosos or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moisture and the patient can bear it, then causticate on the spine with a single caustic and one over all of the flanks; and perhaps add two small cauteries above the stomach near the navel.
It is an effective treatment when its benefits do not go astray [ie: it does what it says on the tin].
Paragraph sign. Chapter: On the method of caustication for haemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus or just one that is formed from thick fluids and cold or corrupted moistures, and treatment with what has been said above does not work; then cauterize it with three cauteries on the lower vertebra of the back below the waistline to a small triangular shape and another underneath the navel almost as large as two fingers.
And if you think his stomach is being cooled down and food is not digesting properly, and you see the face breaking out in spots then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has been said before; another one above the Epar (gall bladder) of that person, another over their Spleneum (spleen), along with a clavicle cautery: and leave the open cautery for some time; afterwards cure them until they are healed.
Chapter 37.
When you excise the hemorrhoids then light up a cautery that is similar in size to a rod. Then insert the lit cautery into the excised hemorrhoid; and your last hand should reach to where the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice.
If therefore the hemorrhoids be many then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described. Afterwards cure them with what works for them from the ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize them with a large cautery over the Alcatin (bladder) then it is more beneficial as a final treatment.
The method of cauterizing a fistula in ano.
Chapter 38.
When the patient does not obey the incision and operation that we have described in its proper place, and is afraid of it, he is perhaps cured with a cauterization.
When therefore it happens to someone that they get a fistula, and it becomes old, pus runs out of it, and corrupted moistness. It is therefore appropriate to examine it with a thin probe. Then recognize the depth of it with the probe.
Then light up a cauterization iron, which is similar in size (to the fistula). Then introduce the heated iron into the fistula itself, and (introduce it) as much as the probe entered.
And repeat the cauterization over it, until they burn all those corrupted bodies (i.e., pus and moistness), once or twice or three times according to the amount that you need.
And take care to avoid burning the nerve, if it is there or a large vein; or if the fistula enters into the body of the bladder, or the body of the intestine, then take care to avoid these places.
And do not do it (i.e., cauterization) unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if the place becomes sealed, and substances separate from it (i.e., dry out), and remain like that for a long time; then know that it is now entirely healed.
If it does not cut away the material from it, then know that it is penetrating or there is a rotten bone deep inside, or something like this happens among those [instances]: whose recollection will come to its place.
On the method of cauterizing kidneys.
When there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or heavy wind and it diminishes because of weak constitution, you must cauterize them over almethenem on top of the kidneys themselves with a clavicle-shaped cautery previously mentioned.
And perhaps we cauterize it a second time at the very almeidatu. Why will three lines appear. Therefore, the last one will be more helpful.
On the method of cauterizing bladders.
When weakness and softening of the bladder occur due to cold and moisture until the patient is unable to retain urine, you must then cauterize it on the lower part of suminis over the bladder where hair starts growing with a cautery from the right side of suminis and another one from its left; this cauterization should be as long as the width of a thumb; and cauterize with a cautery of the lower back or two cauteries if needed: and use the clavicle-shaped cautery previously mentioned.
On the method of cauterizing wombs.
When cold and moisture occur in the womb, and it is prevented from conception, and her menses are corrupted, and their onset is delayed, and she experiences pain around the time of their arrival, then she ought to be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in vesical cauterization, and one cautery below the back on the buttock, or two cauteries; and let the cautery be a clavicle.
The method of cauterizing an ankle when it is dislocated: you should incise between the tendons, and insert the iron between them, so that the flesh may be opened with a chisel. It must then be cauterized from below, not from above; otherwise there will ensue much loss of blood and tissue mortification, and perhaps gangrene may follow.
When the mucous moistures are poured out onto the ankle bone, and become the cause of its exiting from its place: and its sign is that the leg is extended over the other when they are compared together, and the site of the dislocation is found to be empty.
Therefore it is necessary that the sick person be cauterized over the ankle bone with a similar round cautery; after you have marked with the encaustic around the ankle bone as it turns, and so that the ankle itself falls in the middle of the circle.
But if you do not have this cautery available, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive-shaped cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of all the skin.
Then treat him until he recovers.
On the way of cauterizing for sciatica.
When pain occurs in the hip joint and its cause is coldness and dampness; and when treating the patient with what we have said in our division (of causes), it does not help and it gets worse: then you should treat the patient by removing excess humours using fetid pills, or artificial pills, and their likes. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization on it is according to two methods: either a cauterization with medicines that burn, or a cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire is according to many methods.
One of which is that you cauterize over the hip joint itself with three triangular cauterizations, according to this form: [please see reference material for image] And make them deep or shallow as appropriate. And let there be the space between every two cauterizations equal to the thickness of a finger, and also anoint it with oil.
Sometimes there is a cauterization right on top of the hip joint. Because they are four in number.
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, which preceded the form of cauterization for hip dislocation, one must do it so that the circle contains the whole joint.
And burn all the thickness of the skin.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica, when the pain adheres to the hip itself and does not extend down to the thigh and leg.
If, however, the pain extends down to the thigh and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh, over the place where the patient indicates that the pain is, and perform cautery on your own forearm four fingers from the wrist towards the elbow: and let the cautery be a lancet-type.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends down to near the toes, then cauterize it there where they indicate with a puncture cautery, three or four times, or more if needed.
And if they indicate that the pain is beneath the knee towards the leg, then cauterize it there with a single lancet-type cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not push the cautery so far as to burn a nerve or large artery, and cause great harm or contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen one or two who cauterized on the forearm and went too far in their cauterization, and the leg became inflamed until swelling reached the foot, and it was perforated all over, and the whole foot became gangrenous: then they suffered a rupture of the bowels, and death followed.
If pain is present in two places at once, cauterize each place according to this method.
And certain wise people have said about the cauterization of the hip, for which this is the method: Make a similar [instrument] out of iron, its diameter being half the width of a palm; and at its opening let it be as thick as the core of a finger or slightly less: and within this instrument, insert another small one.
And let the space between each instrument be the length of the knot of a thumb; and let the instruments be open on two sides; and let their height be that of a knuckle, or two knuckles; and make for them an off-centre iron handle fitted to the instruments.
Then it should be heated in the fire until it glows red and throws off sparks; then place it on a jar of weak vinegar with the afflicted lying propped up on one side. Cauterize him, therefore, with three round cauteries in succession.
Then leave it for three days. Afterwards, apply plasters with butter; and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says of this kind of cauterization, my sons, we have made little use of it because of the fearfulness of its appearance; and also because there are few who can bear to wait for it.
Nevertheless, this is one of the good cauterizations for him who endures it, and he will find its place.
But for cauterization with medicated oils you should make two instruments that have a pierced collar into which descends the hinge of its door made from brass or iron, the length of its wall; whose height is two knuckles, or as much again.
There should be a space equal to the thickness of two fingers between them, and they should remain open both above and below; and let there be such that they hold themselves in place according to this form.
Then place it on an anchor-shaped pillow, with the patient lying on the healthy side. And press your hand firmly over the anchor-shaped pillow. Then pour between the two circles warm water that has been heated over a fire for a short while, and keep it there for about an hour: and let the patient bear its biting and burning, since he finds the bite like fire, until the bite quiets down.
Then raise your hand with the instrument, and wipe off warm water from the whole anchor with fresh water: then remove it after three days.
And put butter over it until the blackness of burning is removed: and leave it for several days, and you will find that it oozes with pus. For this is the last thing in the cure.
Then treat it with ointments until it gets healed.
But if the pain extends to the hip or leg: make for him an appliance containing water in that place, just as you made it for the anchor equaly.
And this is the way of warm water: and I have already written it down in my book about correcting medicines. Take an equal part of each of alkali and unslaked lime: pound both, and put them in a new pot whose lower part is pierced with one small hole according to the size that will fit inside it radius: and place under the bottom of this pot another worn-out pot: and pour over the alkali and lime fresh water so as to cover both by about an inch: after which you press these down with your hand firmly: and leave the pot until cold water runs into the lower part of the worn-out pot.
Then pour all that water in, and throw it over another lime; and let it be boiled until it is renewed.
It will then be very strong caustic, which is applied in many medical operations and for the cauterizing of other parts of the body. Because it brings about the action of fire itself.
And they are among the medications with which warts and corns are cauterized, as well as thesisie, and nut butter, and lime combined with soap so that both may be mixed together.
Galen indeed has related the cure of a certain man among the ancients, by which he was cured of pain in the wart and sciatic vein; and he extolled it as being very efficacious. And he said that he needed no other cure and was healed by a single application until he related that perhaps the man entered the bath while being carried in and came out of it already cured.
And it is to be taken from fresh green nut butter; and if not found green, take the dry kind, when new: and grind it a great deal with some fat and place it on the wart where there is pain, or on the leg, or on the hip; and bind it, and leave it on for three hours, or for as long as the patient feels that the burning has lessened. Then put him into the bath.
When his body becomes moist, put him onto a couch. For the pain goes away, and he is cured.
And you should know that no one ought to use the cautery with these medications unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that goat dung, when used to cauterize the sciatic vein, benefits it; and the cautery is done in this manner. Wool should be taken and soaked in old oil, then placed on the deep spot located between the big toe and the one next to it.
Then take dry goat dung and set it on fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place [the charcoal] on the wool and leave it there until it goes out. Then repeat this process. You should not stop doing this until feeling returns through the intervention up to the hip joint, and pain stops.
And this method of cautery is called the Goat Dung Cautery.
On the cauterization for back pain.
Back pain sometimes occurs due to many causesโbe it from a fall or a blow; over-evacuation, and similar things, such as the infusion of cold, moist matter: cauterization is not suitable except in this one case that results from the infusion of cold matter.
After evacuation, it is necessary to apply fetid pills and similar things over the back where there is pain, in three lines according to the length of the patient's arm; once you have marked five cauteries or more along each line depending on how much comes out due to the tolerance of the patient's strength: and perform cauterization using a brand.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations using a claviform iron in the middle, following this pattern.
A description of cauterization at the beginning of a hernia operation.
This illness often occurs in young children.
And the sign of its beginning is, among children, that a painful sensation occurs when they take a breath at the moment of elevation or movement; and you find in their last vertebra of the spine and its knots which has now started to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When you see it in this way and wish to operate on it then cauterize with an iron that is circular according to the following pattern.
And the iron should touch every part of the vertebra evenly; and if you wish to cauterize around its circumference use an iron that is two or three lines long for puncturing; and have these holes close together.
Then treat the place until it is healed with what we described before.
And beware of applying the iron to a hernia which is formed from a spasm of the nerve.
A description of cauterization for gout and joint pains.
When joint pains are from cold humidity which is poured into any part of the body, then when they occur in the feet it is customary for physicians to call this gout specifically.
When gout caused by cold is treated with therapeutic methods and pain does not subside, then the cautery removes it.
And so you cauterize him after evacuation around the joints of the feet with multiple cauteries; and let the cautery be olive-oil.
And if it be necessary that you make a puncture above the surface of the foot, then do so with a cautery point. But if the pain ascends to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it over every knee with three cauteries, or four on each side, with this same cautery instrument of 'clavili'.
If you require more of these cauteries, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but rather make it about the thickness of the skin.
But if the pain ascends to the knees and back, then apply what we have said from the cautery in its own chapter.
If the pain is in the hands only, then make a puncture around the joints where two lines rotate.
But if any of the pain remains in the fingers, then puncture them, over every knuckle a puncture, and on the palm.
But if the pain ascends after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both on all sides.
And do not discharge the sick person from their good regimen, or from taking medicines. For if a good diet is followed and phlegm is evacuated, it will heal with the help of God using this caustic.
Regarding the method of cauterizing ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groins and the intestine descends or drops towards the testicle and is about to come close to it, then you should tell the patient to omit eating on that day. And let him take some laxatives so that his feces will come down from his belly.
Then have him sit between your hands on his back and tell him to hold his breath until the testicle or intestine comes out or appears.
Then draw it back with your fingers and cauterize under the rupture on the pectineal bone with a mark whose end is like half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then heat this cautery with the following shape until it becomes white and sheds sparks. Then bring back the intestine or testicle to its place. Then let the assistant put his hand on that place so that the intestine does not come out and you have now opened between the patient's legs and placed a pillow underneath him and another servant under his legs while another is over his chest holding the hands of the patient.
Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight. And hold it until you reach the bone with it or repeat with another one if you have not reached the bone with this one.
And be mindful to observe from the exit of the intestine during your cauterisation, lest you burn it and bring about for the patient either death or great harm.
And be aware that when you do not achieve with the cautery the desired effect on the bone, your operation will be of no benefit.
The cautery for infants must be fine in size, according to their measurements.
Then tend to the rest of the ointments until it is healed.
Let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
You should provide nourishment for the duration of their treatment that soothes their stomach; so that it does not leave the intestine during their effort and expulsion.
Then when they wish to rise after forty days, you must apply a ligature that is loosely made, and have them wear it for another forty days.
They should be restricted from labour, and overfilling of food and drink, and loud voices.
For when one follows this regimen, they will heal with a complete recovery.
And I shall speak of the treatment of ruptures with incisions in its own chapter.
When ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen and are beginning to form, and you wish they not be added to, then cauterise their rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let that which is burnt be like a third of it. Then tend to it with what we have said: and it will not be added to.
And now some say that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular-shaped cautery instrument like this.
Once it is sealed with the encaustic, a line is drawn across the width of the upper side of the rupture and another line on the lower side. Place your hand in the middle with the handle of the cautery instrument.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Paragraph on how to cauterize bruises caused by falling or being struck.
Chapter 48.
When there is pain in some limbs caused by falling or being struck, and that pain persists for a long time without any improvement with medicinal treatment, then it should be treated by cauterization with the point-cautery instrument.
The choice of the cautery instrument for each limb should be according to its size, and taking into account its weakness, strength, the position of the injury, and the severity of the pain.
If it is healed by the first application of the cautery, then that's good. If not, repeat with the same instrument.
For it is usual for this type of pain to move from one limb to the adjoining one. That is why you should follow them with the cautery instrument until the patient is healed.
Paragraph on how to treat leprosy by cauterization.
Leprous people are sometimes aided by cauterization to a great extent. And especially the kind of leprosy that is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: therefore, when you want to cauterize it, consider this.
If therefore the leprosy is in its beginning, and you have treated it with that which we said in the section on divisions, and it has not descended nor stayed still: and you fear for the affected person, lest corruption should spread throughout their whole constitution: then cauterize them on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the skull, a second below this towards the front at the end of the hair, and two above the two corners, and one behind over the nape of the neck.
And lastly hold your hand with the cautery for a short while, until it imprints a small impression in the bone, and the cortex is dislocated from it: so that exhalation of gross vapors from it may be eased, and cauterize also over the spleen itself with a cautery as previously described.
But if the leprosy is already spread over the affected person and appears manifestly: then you must cauterize with these cauteries, which we mentioned in the head, and with a cautery on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on the two jaws, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one over the coccyx, and one above it, at the almeidati; and two on the hips: that is, with one on each hip, and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the chest muscles: and cauterize them over every joint, from the joints of their hands and feet: and cauterize over every heel of their feet, and palms of their hands.
And beware of the nerves that are above the back of the heel so as not to burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cauterizing iron over the breastbone, and another over the stomach, and yet another over the liver.
And you must know that the more you apply the cautery iron, the greater is its benefit and aid.
And you should know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery iron as do healthy people because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that there be cautery irons of various sizes and shapes according to the members and joints as was shown previously in regard to instruments.
Then take care that the cautery iron is covered with the powder of herbs mixed with honey, as well as the other treatment until it heals.
On the method of cautery for unconsciousness.
When any member is numb and it is treated with medicines, oils, or plasters but does not heal then cauterize the affected member with a suitable-sized cautery iron according to its size or smallness.
And let your cautery iron barely go through the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes a certain kind of numbness that happens to the hand or foot is cauterized at the vertebrae of the spine where the nerves that move those members come out and the numbness will be moved.
Indeed, do not presume to operate on it unless you are wise in anatomy and the exit of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter 51.
When you want to reopen an albaras and do not add anything from the arts of medicine to it: then cautiously apply a deep cautery to it in moderation according to the thickness of the skin until its whiteness is removed and its colour changes.
Then treat it with a paste of herb flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnoglossae leaves, and the blood of pigeon and swallow; each ingredient must be in equal parts. Mix all these ingredients together, apply them to a cloth and let them adhere until healing has occurred.
On the method of cauterization for cancerous growths.
When cancer is just starting out and you want to stop its progression, then apply a circular-shaped cautery around it in the same way that a circle revolves.
The wise have said that one should apply the strongest possible cautery in the middle [of the cancer].
I myself do not think so, because I fear it might get ulcerated; and indeed I have seen this happen on several occasions.
And it is better to apply the cautery around its circumference with a circle, as we said; or with multiple cauteries.
On the method of cauterization for abscesses.
When someone has an Adobelat (swelling) that is slow to mature, either due to the superfluity of its cause or because of the patient's age and feebleness having little blood flow, or due to time constraints and the need for haste in maturing the swelling, then cauterize around it with multiple small cauteries by puncturing. Then leave it alone. For it will hasten itself with its own maturing.
If however you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then fire the cautery which is of this form: [an image or figure would be inserted here].
And place it in the middle of the swelling until it penetrates the skin; and let this cautery be prepared from what follows according to the patient's ability to withstand pain so as to alleviate the course of pus.
Then treat it until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing for corrosive sores.
Chapter 45.
A corrosive sore is but the corruption of an ulcer walking in a limb eating it away; like fire consumes dry wood.
If you see a corrosive sore in a place that can tolerate being cauterized with fire, then burn it away with fire using many small and large nails according to what is appropriate for the site of the corrosive sore.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate the entire corruption, leaving no trace of it whatsoever.
Then leave it alone for three days, and place powdered sulfur mixed with oil on the cauterized spots until all scabs and corruption are eradicated.
Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days healthy flesh is born without corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on what remains of the affected areas.
And corrosive medicines are sometimes treated with sharp medicines. For it arises in the place of the cautery itself.
However, the cautery with fire is of quicker assistance: and I have already spoken of its cauterisation with sharp medicine above: so take it there when you need it.
On the method of cauterising wens and warts.
Chapter 55.
Frequently this ailment occurs in the lower parts of the foot: and it is a gross, filtered thing that injures the foot.
And indeed there is cautery on them in two ways: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
However much with fire is like a cautery bowl similar to an eagle's feather: which is made of iron, according to the size that contains a nail on every side: and let its edges be fine.
Then place it heated over the nail. Then rotate the hand with the cautery around the nail until you reach the depth of the nail: and leave it for three days until it starts to discharge pus. Then apply plasters made with crushed myrtle leaves and salt to it; leave the plaster on overnight. It will indeed be removed from its roots.
Then treat the place with generative ointment until it is healed.
If they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then apply hot water cauterization to them; it is advisable that you take a pipe made out of brass or iron or an eagle's feather: put this over coals or charcoal. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the pipe; hold your hand and rotate it with some force for a short while so that you seal off the opening of the pipe at the end of the coal, and let the hot water find its way down to the root of the nail: have the patient wait there a little while over the bite of the hot water for about an hour.
Then leave it be; the nail will indeed be removed with its roots.
Do this one after the other until you have covered all of them on the body.
Then treat those areas with something that generates flesh from ointments once they have been removed.
On the method of cauterization for tremors.
When someone suffers from tremors as a result of cold nerves or quartan fever or other causes: then you should cauterize them with four or five cauterizations over the vertebrae and between each vertebra one, and in their chest one, and on their stomach another.
The tremor subsides with olive oil cauterization and healing is hastened for cold ailments.
On the method of cauterizing, according to Albucasis.
Chapter 57.
Sometimes the foul material, that is, pus, which forms from corrupted coarse matter, is expelled from the body according to Albucasis.
Therefore, it is necessary that when they first appear, the small pustules on top of the head should be cauterized with a myrtle stick whose end has been ignited by fire. Or with the root of long aristolochia. Or with a small bean-shaped cauterizing instrument.
And sometimes they are cauterized when the matter is first discharged according to this method; and they do not increase but rather the superfluity which forms them is ruptured and they heal over.
However, it should be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterizing an arterial bleeding wound.
It often happens that there is bleeding from an artery which has been cut at the wound site or during the incision of an abscess or cauterization of a limb and similar cases; and it becomes difficult to stop this bleeding.
When this happens to someone, then hurry with your hand to the opening of the artery and place your index finger over it; and press on it very hard until the flow of blood is stopped under your finger and nothing comes out from there.
Then place the small olive oil cautery into the fire, and add several more large ones; blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one of them, small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery is torn, and place the cautery on that vein; then remove your finger quickly, and hold the cautery until the blood stops flowing.
If blood spouts out when you lift your finger from the artery opening and the cautery goes out, then quickly take another cautery from those that are prepared in the fire.
Therefore do not stop doing this with one after another until the blood is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, so as not to bring about another evil on the afflicted person.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped, especially if the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or by extraction if it has not been extracted already. For when it is pulled out, its ends contract and the blood stops flowing. Or bind it with a strong thread. Or place on it medicines with the property of stopping blood, and compress them with a suitable bandage.
Whoever administers the stopping of bleeding with a thread and compression using cloth, or the application of burning objects and cauteries, should not bring them close except rarely.
If it happens to someone and they have no doctor nor medicine present, then they should start by placing the index finger over the vein opening itself as we mentioned earlier, and applying significant pressure until blood flow is restricted from the upper part of the wound as well as the artery above it. The finger should not be removed from the wound but remain on top of it with cold water of intense freezing constantly until the blood becomes frozen and swollen so that it can be severed.
During this time one should observe what is needed: either cauterization or medicine.
On incision, perforation, and phlebotomy of wounds and similar injuries.
In the first chapter we already mentioned every disease where it is appropriate to use a burning cautery with medicine and its opportunities, causes, instruments, and types of cauterization.
And there I listed the topics from head to toe.
And now I will proceed with the same path in this chapter so as to alleviate the seeker's inquiry.
And before I begin it is necessary that you learn, my son, what differentiates this chapter from the terror of cauterization mentioned in the first chapter.
And for this reason one must be even more cautious as the operation described in this chapter often leads to an evacuation of blood alongside which life depends when opening a vein, or performing an incision on an abscess, or a perforation intended for healing wounds, or extracting arrows and stones, and similar procedures; all of which cause trembling, fear, and among many death.
And I warn you not to stumble over that which causes hesitation, for sometimes people of various kinds with various illnesses fall to you in this art. For among them are those who become angry when ill and for whom death is a light matter due to the severity of what they experience from their illness and the length of their suffering. And when ill, it is out of fear that signifies death.
And among them is the one who offers his musician and enriches you with him, hoping for health, while his illness is harmful.
Therefore, you ought not to agree with him who comes to you from among them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be more severe than your greed and avarice. And do not presume anything about him until after certain knowledge that verifies for you what the successful outcome attains.
And apply to the treatment of all your patients a prognosis and an indication that will lead suitably to their health.
For in that is your help concerning the attainment of fame and glory, memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with his understanding, and may he not withdraw from you guidance and inspiration, for it is in his hand.
And I have indeed arranged this chapter by dividing it into sections, as has been done previously in the chapter on cauterization from the neck down to the feet, so that your search for what you wish and need out of it may be alleviated.
The treatment of water accumulation in children's heads.
Chapter 1.
You know that this illness often befalls children at birth; or when the midwife grasps the child's head without care.
And whenever it happens also for an unknown cause which is not known.
And I myself have not seen this sickness in anyone other than children; and among all those whom I saw it rushed towards death; because of that vision, therefore, it seemed to me to give up operating on them.
And I myself saw among them a child whose head was filled with water, and the head swelled every day until he could not sit up because of the size of his head; and humidity increased in it until he died.
And this moisture either accumulates between the skin and bone; or it accumulates beneath the skull above the brain.
And the operation for this, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head as wide as your finger; and let its length be about two fingers long until moisture flows out.
And this is the shape of a spatula.
If therefore the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then make two such incisions there.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and its sign is that you see the cranial sutures open from every side; and water is depressed when you press it with your hand towards the inside, and it is not hidden from you: then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this manner.
And after the incision, extract all moisture. Then bind the wounds with cloth and lint. After that, irrigate it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the binding, and treat the wound with stitches and ointments.
And do not stop binding the head in moderation. Feed the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to note where the size of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is more on the occipital bone, or on the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left.
So ascend with the incision where the abscess and water collection appear to you, and split it as best you can.
And observe, do not cut the artery, for a flow of blood may occur and the patient will die from that flux with evacuation of moisture.
On the Incision of the Arteries which lie behind the ears.
Chapter 2.
When someone has catarrh which affects the eyes or chest, and is not healed by medicinal treatment, then this ultimate cure lies therein, the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore when you wish to make an incision on them, it is necessary that the patient bow their head. Then scrape the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear. Then have the patient strap their neck tightly using any piece of cloth available to them. Next, take note where the pulse in the vein is felt. And these places where the pulse is felt are areas behind the ears that are depressed (sunken); and it is rarely not felt there except for some people.
Then mark both sides with an encaustic (hot wax seal); and cut each side to a depth of two-fingerbreadths using the knife on either side, making the cuts right up to the bone; and make this incision as wide across as the breadth of your head.
And if you wish, insert the knife beneath the artery and cut it open above with an upward stroke.
Let the length of the incision be as wide as two fingers side by side.
For when the vein is cut open, the blood will come gushing out in a pulse that will leap up towards you with frequent spurts.
But if the artery does not feel apparent to your touch, then you should measure three fingerbreadths away from the ear. Then mark with an encaustic (hot wax seal) and make your way right up to the bone.
And what needs to be let out in terms of blood volume is six ounces; perhaps you will let more or less. The whole of it (the amount bled) should be in proportion to the strength apparent in the patient, as well as the fullness of his arteries.
Next, pay attention to the wound (the cut). If any bone remains exposed after the incision, then cut it away so that a hot abscess does not form; then bind the wound with linen cloths.
Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Chapter 3.
When a man suffers from chronic hemicrania or acute catarrh on account of acrid humidities and heat in the regions of the temples, or an old headache, intense and similar to these, and it is treated with the methods of medical cure without avail: then we have found in these ailments the extraction of arteries from the temples or their cauterization, as we have related.
And the manner of operating for their extraction is this: the patient should have his hairs shaved off where the temple shows blue. For it shows itself to you by its pulse, and is rarely hidden except in a few persons or extreme cold.
And if it is hidden from you, then the patient should bind his head with any of his own cloths; then rub the place with a coarse cloth. Or else fomentation of the place should be made by means of hot water until it shows itself to you in a visible manner. Then take the spatula which I have just made. Then scrape away the skin with it gently until you reach the artery. Then thrust a hook into it and extract it upwards until you have pulled it out of the skin and made it emerge from beneath its tunics on every side.
If however the artery is slender: then wrap it with the extremity of a hook. Then cut from it a portion according to the quantity by which its extremities are extended, and they contract, and no bleeding will occur. For if it is not cut, and if it is not severed, the blood does not fully recede.
Then draw out six ounces of blood from it until three.
If the artery is large: then you must tie it in two places with double thread, strong, of silk: or from cords of aloe, so that it does not hasten to itself putrefaction before wound healing, and bleeding occurs.
Then cut the excess, which is between the two ligatures. Do that at this hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with the cautery until bone, with the knife-like cautery: until its extremities are cauterized, and will stand in place of that same work.
And it is better work, unless the patient has fever, or is of hot constitution. For the cautery is among those things which help to dry up moisture. Therefore it is better assistance.
And it is necessary after the removal of arteries, that the place be filled with old tallow: and decently made poultices are placed on top.
And after the filling is cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with lint, until it is healed.
If in the meantime, while you are operating, there occurs a flow of blood from an artery, then hurry to cut it off with a cauterizer or fill the place with zegi: and squeeze your hand until the bleeding stops. If none of those are available to you then put your finger on the spot until the blood freezes. And irrigate the place with very cold water until the sharpness subsides and it tightens as needed.
And for that which is lighter and easier to remove by way of the artery, it is done with this two-bladed cautery; let the sharpness of the two blades be like alum. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are sharp like two knives, it hastens both coldness; and it doesn't cut the flesh quickly. Since there is a little roughness in them, the fire's heat is retained in them and it cuts flesh quickly; with this one, therefore, the operation is better than any other, and lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between the two blades be the thickness of a finger; after you mark two spots with encaustic; and place both very hot until they reach the bone, and cut into the vein at two points so that what is between its ends will stretch out. For they do not heal completely with this cautery.
Chapter Four.
On treating the incessant flow of sharp tears from the eyes.
When tears are continuous and their flow comes from the veins which are on the exterior of the skull above the head; and you don't apply any medical cure or medicine to them, and you see that the patient's face is already red, and he feels crawling in his forehead, like the crawling of ants: and his eyes are strained, wet so much that their lashes are already corroded with corrosion; and his eyelids are heated from the sharpness of tears: then ancient physicians required this operation for their cure, and they named it a cure *with the Sword*.
And you should advise the patient to shave the hairs that are on his forehead. Then make three equally spaced incisions on the forehead along its length; and let the length of each incision be about two fingers, and let one incision be equidistant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little from the movement of the temples, and the third on the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries that are on both sides; and stretch your hand away from the joining of the two jaws, and let all the space of the incision be as long as three joined fingers; and have ready for you a piece of sponge, or many dry pieces of cloth, with which you will dry the blood.
Then introduce a spatula of two sharp ends, whose following shape is as follows: From the first incision which is on the side of the temple, to the second incision; and scrape with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, together with the sinew that is above the bone. Then do it again from the middle incision to the second incision. Then extract this spatula and introduce into the first incision again another instrument called a sharp scalpel on one side, blunt and not sharp on the other side. And this is its shape.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh attached with skin, and its blunt side towards the bone; then push it until you reach the mid-fissure; and cut through all the sinews that descend from the head to the eye: except where the incision is continued up to that which appears on the skin.
Then make it in the mid-fissure up until another fissure.
And after an equal quantity of blood runs out, press the places from clots of coagulated blood.
Then place in every fissure old linen from cotton, and put on them compresses soaked in wine or oil, or vinegar. And see to it that no hot abscess occurs.
And on the third day dissolve the ligature, and apply a large quantity of lotion with warm water. Then treat it with the ointment known as basilicon, and other things which are used to heal wounds until they are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of acute tears and catarrh in the eyes from internal head conditions.
When someone suffers from acute, sharp, frequent catarrh and you see his eyes are tired, small, and their appearance is already weakened; and the eyelids have become ulcerated, hair falls out of them, and there is a sharp, painful headache in the depths of the head with sneezing afterwards: then take as your starting point for these symptoms that those substances and catarrh do not come but from many veins.
And this is a better cure for them. And it's best to advise the patient to shave their forehead. Then make an incision in the forehead, one in the middle or slightly off-center and across its width; start with a fissure from the left temple to the right, making sure it reaches the bone beneath. Extend your hand out as far as the temples move when chewing until you feel the bone. Then dry all of the blood away using a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision using an old rag or linen strips. Afterwards, bind it from above with lint; dip the lint in a mixture of wine and oil to avoid hot abscesses.
And when you remove the binding and see that the hot abscess has shrunk, it is necessary to rub the bone until flesh starts growing over it.
Afterwards treat it with a drying regimen that makes flesh grow; such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and prepare from them a plaster to be applied at the birth of flesh on these wounds.
Chapter 6.
On treating what has fallen into the ear:
Anything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral substance like a stone; or something similar to a stone such as iron and its filings; or it comes from plants, such as chickpeas and beans; or it's a fluid-like material like water, vinegar and things like them; or some animal.
When a stone falls into the ear, or a piece of rock from those that are not added to, nor grow in the ear, expose the Ear to the sun; if you then see the stone, drop into the Ear a little of either violated oil, or sesame oil. Then perform its extraction, and make him sneeze with the medicine, and hold his nostrils shut at the approach of the sneeze, after you put around the ear a piece of cloth or wool, and stretch out the ear upwards.
For indeed it often comes out with this treatment.
But if it does not come out, then perform its extraction with forceps, that is, fine tweezers; whose form is this.
Therefore if it comes out with the forceps, it is good.
And if not, then perform its extraction with a thin blunt hook of little curvature.
If it does not come out by that, then make a brass pipe and insert the end of the pipe deep into the ear-hole, and plug what is around the pipe with softened wax mixed with oil so that there be no way for the wind but through the pipe; then draw it forth with your strong suction.
For indeed it often comes out with what we have narrated. But if it does not come out that way: then take some fish-skin or from glue, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught, a little piece; and put it at the end of a stick after you wrap around it an untrimmed cloak; then insert it into the earhole easily, after you dry the ear of moisture.
If it does not exit with all that we have described, then proceed to cutting before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
The method of the incision is such that you should use a lancet on the patient's head first; and draw out blood according to the measure of his strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and find a small incision in the root of his ear near its fat at that depressed spot; and let the incision be of lunar shape until you reach the bone; then remove it with what is possible for you from among your instruments.
Then suture the incision with your needle swiftly, and take care of it until it is healed.
If the thing that fell into his ear is one of the grains which grow and swell; then administer its extraction.
But if it does not obey you by coming out, then take a thin, fine spatula in this shape.
And administer with it the abscission of that kind from grains which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that the grain has been moistened by the vapour of the ear until you have tried many times; then draw them out with hooks or with a fine probe or with suction as we said, for its extraction will be made easier.
In the case of water which enters the ear, the patient must use sneezing first; and then fill his ear with some old oil; and lie on that ear in which is the water. If it therefore comes out by that, it is good.
And if not, then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin and soft, and heat them with fire for a while; and let the patient introduce one of these into their ear hole: and let him leap upon his foot on that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear. Therefore he will not stop doing that with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now water comes out like this, you will take a piece of papyrus or reed and introduce one end into the ear; light the other end with fire until most of it is burnt. Then repeat with another reed and do this many times until all the water comes out; and extract it with a tube as previously mentioned for stones.
But for the extraction of an animal that has entered it, if it is a small body like a flea or similar, take care as I said in the division.
But if it is a large body which can be felt; then apply forceps and hooks to its extraction; and this procedure is easier than all those for things lodged inside the ear.
But for the extraction of worms generated inside the ear, when you treat it with what we have said before in the division and in the chapter on distillations; if your treatment does not help then you must look at the patient's ear in the sun. So if you see anything there of the worms, then extract it with forceps or fine hooks.
But if nothing is seen there; then take a tube with this form, narrow at the bottom and wide on top; introduce its thin end into the ear as far as it can go; then suck hard upon it. Do this many times until all the worms come out.
If they do not obey you at the end, then apply oil around the pipe with leather, as I said on page 32.
If they do not leave with what we have said, then administer the distillations that the ancients already experienced in worm killing: and you will find it in the treatise of distillations.
And let your pouring be such that you pour the oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or bronze, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, wide at the top.
Therefore, let it be so that the driver which is in the cavity of the pipe, is off-centre and made from bronze. And if you wish, take a stick and wrap some cotton around one end with an appropriate number of turns; then pour oil or juice or any medicine from these into the pipe, and let it be inserted into the ear; then insert the stick with the wrapped cotton on top and squeeze it with your hand using moderate pressure until the oil is driven into the cavity of the ear, and the patient feels it inside; and whatever you put in the ear, let it already have been heated by fire for a short time: and beware that what is distilled into this should not be very cold: for medicines cannot tolerate such things.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of blockage in an auricular prosthesis.
Sometimes children emerge from the abdomen of their mothers unperforated.
And now it also happens to some men that wax builds up in the ear canal due to injury or flesh growing there.
This wax buildup sometimes occurs deep inside the ear canal, where it cannot be seen; and at other times it happens closer to the outside of the ear, where it can indeed be seen.
That which occurs deep inside the ear and cannot be seen is often difficult to heal in many cases.
And for that wax which can be seen, you should place the patient's ear in the sun and look into it; then, if you see the visible wax, open it up with a thin spatula, whose shape is as follows, with its end having a small width, of which one part is sharp: and let the rest of the spatula have two gentle sides: so that it does not harm the ear.
So if the wax is caused by flesh growing inside the ear canal: then hold it with a thin hook and cut it out easily until all the flesh is removed.
But if the wax is deep inside the ear then take a thin, gentle rod and warm it slightly over a fire; next put it into the ear canal.
If you feel wax with that rod which the patient has trouble hearing, try opening it up gently; and be careful not to injure the ear's nerve.
Next put into the ear some linen rolled up in Egyptian ointment according to the size of the opening; do this for a few days until you are sure the wound has healed.
Or take some linen and soak it in rose water; then sprinkle on it some powdered frankincense, and use this.
If you see the ear has already formed an abscess: then you must remove the pus and allow it to remain with another linen cloth that you wrap in a poultice made with rose oil until the abscess becomes warm; afterwards treat it until it is healed.
If there is bleeding, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear; use the rest of the treatment that stops bleeding as mentioned earlier in the chapter on distillations.
Regarding the treatment for inflammation of the eyelids.
Chapter 8.
These inflammations of the eyelids that occur on the eye sometimes are wet, and sometimes they are dry.
Therefore it is necessary that you hold them with forceps or with a hook, and cut them out with a small spatula from their roots. Then put on the affected areas some crushed egg white.
If there is bleeding from them, then cauterize them with a thin lens-shaped cautery tool.
And cauterizing after cutting is better. For they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots get burnt, and they do not return.
Regarding the treatment for styes on the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter 9.
It often happens in the eyelids that there is something like a sty in its strength and hardness; because of this it is called a stye, which is a collection of thick humours on either eyelid.
The operation for these patients is as follows: you must consider it then, if there is a progressing granuloma that appears on the eyelid and moves to any area, and its condition is easy to treat.
Therefore find over it an incision of appropriate width. Then scrape away the tissue on all sides with ease until it emerges. Next lift it up using a hook, then cut it away.
However if you cannot cut it away unless after you have made an incision into the eyelid itself, then this will harm the patient in some way.
If however the incision is large then stitch it together with sutures and treat until it heals.
And if small, no harm will come to you from it. For the ointment restores it and causes it to flesh over.
And if the granuloma declines towards the inner surface of the ear then turn the eyelid inside out and lift up the granuloma with a hook; although you will need an incision, press it from all sides.
If however the eyelid is lengthened by incision then this will not harm it at all.
Then wash the eye after this granuloma incision with salt water and treat the site of the flesh-over until the patient is healed.
On treating swelling of the eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a build-up of fat beneath the skin of the upper eyelid which most often occurs in children; it burdens their eyes and brings cataracts upon them in the morning when they cannot look at sunlight due to how tears rush into their eyes, for this reason you see them always leaning over on their faces and sleeping upon those, and there are wet eyelids under their eyebrows that have been covered by swelling. The Axirnath prominence is apparent to the eye; when you press the site with your fingers you feel axirnath between them.
The method for this operation is to have the patient place their head on your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare it with lint; make from this lint a circle according to the size that fits around 'Axinam' on all sides. Then place it on top and press with your fingers from all sides so that 'Axinam' gathers at the center of the circle.
Then find at the center of that moisture with a pointed spatula any cracks across its width; do not let the crack be larger than what is made during phlebotomy in depth.
Or you should cut the skin entirely until you reach 'Axinam', as in many instances 'Axinam' proceeds from a crack according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract it therefore with a cloth which you have inserted between your fingers towards the exterior; and you turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed: be careful not to add anything into the crack such that you do not reach the eye with the pointed spatula and injure it.
If however 'Axinam' does not appear to you at the start of the crack, you should add a little with care until 'Axinam' proceeds. Then extract it as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, place them on the spot, and bind it with compresses.
There are those among men who rub salt and place it on the hollow of the crack so that what remains of that moisture may liquify.
Then treat it until it is healed.
If however there is a warm abscess in that place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.
On the ways of eye droop, that is, when the eyelid softens around the eye, causing it to sag as it shouldn't.
Chapter 11.
When additional hairs grow on the eyelids beyond the normal course of hair growth and turn white: these are harmful to the eye and can cause conditions such as persistent tears, eyelid softening, and whiteness until the eye is destroyed.
Eye droop is treated in four ways. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization. Or eye droop is treated by incision and suture. Or with tubes, as I will explain.
You should place the patient's head on your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it turns easily, that's good. If not, insert the needle into it with the thread attached from the lower part of the eyelid and make the needle penetrate upwards with the thread, near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow: then draw the thread upwards on the eyelid and turn it back with a rod.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid beneath the hairs with a spatula inserted from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct.
Then extract the thread and place a small piece of cotton or cloth beneath the eyelid; then mark over the eyelid with cauterization in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the shape be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: for it varies greatly among men.
For there are those who require that an extensive portion of the eyelid be cut away according to the size that is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the spatula find over the two lines that you have marked and begin from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct, and let there be one incision close to the natural hairs like the thickness of a needle.
Then introduce a hook into one of two corners of the skin. Then scrape it all away. Then bring together the two lips with a suture of fine thread and needle: wipe away any blood and make adhere what remains of the threads above the eyebrows with some sticky substances if you wish to do so; but if not, pay it no mind.
Then leave the suture and threads for three or four days; afterwards take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without suture and care for it with something that dries and tightens. For the eyelid is elevated at the wound's seal and its bringing together; but it will be better still.
The ancients taught this method of healing.
However, there is concern for the patient, and it comes from good work, and there is no fear in it.
Another method is also described by Albucasis: it involves making a mark on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have explained.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or combined hooks according to this shape that follows, then cut away what is superfluous with small scissors following this shape, with an even cut.
If you cannot hold the hook and it does not fit evenly: take a needle with thread on it and insert it in the middle of the shape; then insert another thread near the larger lachrymal, and a second thread near the smaller lachrymal; and gather together the threads between your fingers with an even pull.
Then raise your hand evenly; and lift the skin over where the boil is marked, as we have explained.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches; and look after it until it heals.
If a boil occurs at your incision or your wound: treat the boil with caustic substances and similar things, from soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelid turns its hairs inwards.
It is therefore necessary to use what we have said about the incision; but stitching is more artificial for both. On Albucasis' treatment with reeds.
And so, turn over the eyelid and split open the inner incision as I have described. Then you will take two reeds or thin sticks and make them into canes of a length equal to that of the eyelid, their width being narrower than a spathe. And already have made incisions at both ends in which you hold the threads.
Then bring together each one carefully over what is left of the eyelid and tightly bind both canes on either side with a tight strapping; leave this for several days. The skin will die off, shrivel up, and rot away until it falls by itself.
If this is delayed then cut it with scissors. Then care for it until the wound heals.
As soon as this has healed up, lift the eyelid; and the hairs will not scratch it.
And this is the shape of the two canes which you will make according to this figure as regards length and width.
Chapter 12.
Regarding lifting out stinging hairs from the eye with a needle.
The procedure for this is to take a fine needle and put into it a thread of the thinnest silk and softest. Then bring together its ends and fasten each with a small knot; the length of these threads should be one palm's width.
Then add beneath it another fine thread of short length and knot its ends if you wish.
The invalid should then place his head on your lap and be close to the sun so that the operation is revealed; because it is a subtle or minor operation.
Then introduce the needle with a thread into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you draw out from above a natural hair.
Then draw the hair up above the thread and introduce into the thread that hair, or if there are two or three, not more.
Then draw your hand with it until the hair comes out with the thread from the eyelid along with a natural hair.
But if the thread is drawn and not the hair with it, draw the thread downwards with the thread that you put on it until the thread comes out through the upper opening; look at it with your eyes: then pull both thread and hair and close the eye. Leave it closed for two or three days until the hair attaches to its place and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short then either attach a longer one of the natural hairs and raise it with that or leave it until it grows long and then pull it out.
Chapter 13.
When an abscess of this kind happens to the eye it is called a hare-lip.
This type of abscess may be either congenital or accidental.
The accidental kind comes about due to the healing of a wound or incision or burn or something similar.
And the method of operating is such that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place between them a lint dressing, then bind it until it heals.
And you must not use things that dry out and constrict in its treatment; for if you do that, the Alxatrati returns worse than it was before. Rather, use things that soften, such as fenugreek: and poultice with water in which althea has been cooked, flax seed: and diakoudion ointment, liquefied with one of the oils: and wrap with this lint, and treat with it.
And your aim should be to try by every means that it does not consolidate again in the way it was at first.
And this operation we have described is nothing other than a correction of the Alxatrati, so that it does not return to the shape of the place exactly as it was.
ยง On the treatment of Alxatrati which occurs in the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 14.
This Alxatrati which occurs below is what is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental type happens from a wound, or a tear, or a cauterisation, and things like them.
And the method of operating on it is to take a needle with double thread and dip it into flesh, and make it go through from left lacrimal to right lacrimal until the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with a needle, and cut it with a spatula that is half an inch wide. If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, that is good.
And if not, take a rod and place it in the crack, and turn the eyelid with it: and make two incisions on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two incisions be from the two corners of the incision until they meet and form an angle: so that when they are joined together this shape is made, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount which is its sharp edge below, from what follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts: or sew it together with woolen thread.
Then treat them with what we have said about softening medicines, and with linen cloths until they are healed.
And if any aloes happen to fall out of the crack or stitches, or by cauterization: then you must make a flat incision underneath the eyelashes of the eyelid, also according as was done before. Then separate between the two lips with linen cloth, as we have said.
And the summary of the treatment for aloes when it is above or below, is that the procedure should be carried out according to how the aloes are prepared.
For it has many variations in form: and a prudent practitioner prepares their skill with whatever way is possible to them, until they restore the shape to its natural form, or near it; and themselves being infirm, according as suits them from the operation and instruments in most situations.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or the cornea.
Sometimes this adhesion happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes stuck to the white of the eye, and prevents it from its natural movements.
You should therefore insert the end of a spatula under the eyelid and lift it upwards; or extend it with a hook; then cut the adhesion with a thin spatula, which is not sharp like surgical spatulas, but rather slightly blunt; so that the patient is not troubled during the operation, and the spatula does not move and injure the eye with its sharpness: and let your incision be as if you were scraping off that adhesion easily, until the eyelid returns to its natural shape, and the adhesion is completely healed.
Then pour salty water into the eye, wash it with water; or distill onto it from a sieve made for this purpose, from zinjar dissolved with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a linen cloth; and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white; and after three days use a sieve and compresses until it is healed.
On the incision of the fingernail and the prominence of the fleshy part of the tear duct.
Chapter 16.
Know that the fingernail is of two types. Or it is nervous; and it is like hard but thin wood. Or it is not nervous, like frozen white moisture; which when it touches cold iron, or you try to grasp it with a hook, breaks off and the hook does not stick into it.
Both types do not begin unless from the greater tear duct, as it gradually advances until it covers vision, and obstructs light and eye movement.
And the mode of operation for its incision is: that you place the patient's head on your lap. Then open their eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand. Next, gather the claw with a hook twice its size and extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse, cow or goat; let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle slightly, then fasten it in the middle of the claw; penetrate with the needle and bind the claw with thread and extend it upwards; scrape with the hair the side of the claw that follows the pupil as if you were plucking it with a hair until its very end.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small scissors; and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct so that there is no frequent flow of tears from its incision.
And sometimes the claw is extended with just a hook; or with thread, as we have said. Then scrape it gently with a thin spatula of this shape.
And beware that the spatula does not touch the corneal layer, lest it tear, and the pupil be perforated.
Then after the incision, throw into the eye some crushed salt or some made from saffron, and leave it there until the next day. Treat him with what is necessary until he recovers.
If the hoof is not damaged and you cannot insert a needle into it or hook [a lever] into it, then this kind of hoof injury should be treated with medicines many times over until it heals as I described in the division on the subject.
If you want to cut it, then open the patient's eye and take a very thin, soft, blunt spatula of this shape. And scrape off the top surface of the hoof with a chisel, carefully. If you see that the hoof is softening and cracking under pressure from the chisel then drip into the patient's eye every hour one of the following medicines which you have made yourself: zinja oil, red zief, or powdered salt; cover the eye until the next day.
Then repeat this procedure on it until you have removed all of that. Unless there is hot pus in the eye; then leave it alone and treat the inflammation until it heals.
Then repeat this procedure on it with the chisel until it heals.
If the flesh of the tear duct is causing significant harm to the eye then suspend it with a hook and cut off some of its parts; do not make too deep an incision in case this interrupts the flow of tears.
Then drip into the tear duct red zief or oil until it heals.
On cutting an alguardenic (swelling) and flesh growing over the eye...
Chapter 17.
There is sometimes born in certain human eyes a red fleshy growth, or one that lies over the eye, until it covers the pupil, approaches it, or presses against it above the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outwards; and it resembles a wild rose.
And the operation on this is also for the sick person to put his head in your lap. Then open their eyes, and gather all that flesh with suitable hooks; and hold it with one forceps or hemostat.
Then cut the flesh first, until you have finished all of it with the scalpel. And take care not to harm the eye during the operation; and let your cut be made with either a small knife, which we described in nail cutting, or with small scissors, like those used for hair-cutting, as will come up later in this chapter.
So when your cut is complete and all the fleshy material has been removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt; or else distil into it red powder, and similar corrosive medicines; and place over the outside of the eye a poultice made from the white of an egg: so that it may be protected from hot pus.
But if any of the fleshy material remains and hot blood flows from it, and you fear a hot abscess; then leave the eye alone, and treat it with whatever will calm the abscess.
Then return to them with an operation until they are healed.
And do likewise for any added flesh that happens to grow in the eye from this condition.
However, it is necessary that you treat any weak eye through natural means or by operating with iron; and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you have seen that the member can withstand this treatment.
On draining pus from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Pus is red veins that are formed over the eye, preventing its sight; and it weakens the eye with time.
It is necessary that you first determine if the eye with pus is strong and free from other ailments; then drain its pus.
And you should advise the patient to put their head on your lap.
Then tie those veins with one hook or two depending on your judgement; and let the hooks be thin needles shaped like this, or they can be two-sided ones made of one body shaped like this.
After that, remove those veins with a thin pair of scissors carefully; and wipe off the blood every hour until you see the veins are removed from the eye, and dissolved; and beware not to injure the eye with the edges of the needles.
And let your treatment be done at noon under the sun; and you should be very firm during the procedure lest you cut other veins besides those targeted ones.
And when you are done with the procedure, then drop into the eye green vinegar or red one so that its sharpness dissolves what remains of pus.
If you are unable to remove all of the pus in that hour; then cover the eye with a plaster that treats its pain and leave it for some days until its ache is settled; and keep this away from heat during these few days: later repeat the same procedure over and over again until it heals.
And this is the shape of scissors.
On the repair of the nose by means of cartilage.
Chapter 19.
Physicians call this nose repair a fistula which is treated with the cautery or sharp medicine burning it, according to what precedes its narration.
And if it does not heal then there is no skill in it unless you cut open the abscess at its base and extract all the moisture which is in it as well as the pus until bone is exposed.
So when bone is exposed and you see that it has been corrupted or turned black then scrape it with an instrument of this shape.
This is called the rough head.
Let it be made of hardened iron and let its head be round like an awl which has been scored with the marks of a file or the scoring tool for fine lines, and apply it to that part of bone which is corrupted.
Then rotate it between your fingers and press down a little with your hand until you know that the corruption has been scraped away and do this several times.
Then restore the place with drying and binding medicines.
So if the place becomes firm and flesh grows back and there is no more discharge of pus or blood and it remains this way for forty days without any renewal of corruption or abscess formation nor any other event occurring, then you know that it has healed.
And if not then there is no skill to it except returning the fistula to the nostril according to this pattern.
And you should expose the second bone using a knife or sharp medicine; and when the bone is exposed, then take a drill in this form, with an iron tip that is triangular; and its wood is tapered like a pyramid to the end, as you see.
Then place it on the same bone; let it be near the lacrimal bone; and extend your hand slightly away from the eye. Then rotate your hand with the drill until it penetrates the bone and you feel it weaken; by this you will know that air is escaping from it when they hold their hand over their nose.
So then restore the place with astringent drying medicines, as I have taught you.
When flesh forms and the place hardens; then the matter that was discharged outwards returns to the nose; it is therefore lighter over the weak one.
ยง On the reduction of an elevated eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes with all of it and there is no harm nor reduction to vision; then you must relieve the weak one by bleeding it; afterwards place leeches on the neck without scarring but with suction.
Then apply to the eye an ointment made from acacia, aloe, frankincense, and storax. Then bind the eye above with a plaster containing many chickpeas.
The manner of the chickpeas is this; take soft cloths many in number, and fold each cloth four times over; make many of these; then place them one on top of another according to how much the eye needs; then bind them firmly with a strong hard cloth.
Repeat the cupping procedure with suction only, without making an incision.
Then remove the cups and leave the eye covered day and night.
But if the sinew becomes slack again, it must be tightened further; then remove the bandage after a day and night, as I said.
If you see that the eye has regained its shape and colour, that is good; but if not, then repeat the poultice, compresses, bandage and cupping until it is healed.
On excision of the coloured tunic.
Chapter 21.
When an injury to the coloured tunic results in a disfigurement that protrudes beyond the eyelid like a grain of millet and mars the appearance of the face, so that you wish to operate on it, this is how it should be done according to what I will tell you: insert the needle at the root of the eyeball from below upwards.
Then introduce another needle with doubled thread from the side towards the lacrimal sac and let it pierce through; leave the first needle in its place.
Then make an incision at the place of the doubled thread and use it to tie off the affected part of the eyeball around the needle; tighten it firmly.
Then withdraw the needle and place over the eye wool soaked in white of egg; leave it there until the thread drops off with the coloured tunic.
Then treat the eye with this remedy which soothes it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the eyeball should be tightly bandaged all round with a cloth until the eye protrudes considerably.
Then it should be pierced with a thin spatula which reaches the depths of the eye, and the white moisture flows out, and the eye drops down, then insert it immediately; afterwards press it until it is healed.
On the cure for alcoholism.
Chapter 22.
This disease called alcoholism is nothing but a collection of filth in the eyes, like water pouring down, and it is not itself.
And the procedure for this is to make the patient sit on a chair that has been prepared or a straight-back chair.
Then take their head in both hands and move it until you see the filth reach below your eyes. Then it is tied up so that nothing leaks out and the sight is restored; and the patient sees things as they used to see them: and if none of this leaked below, you know that it was water.
If however the leaking of filth is not prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a thin spatula and use it on the tough skin for a bit near the junction of the conjunctiva with the white part until filth comes out.
Once it comes out then pour into the eye warm water in which you mixed honey; or water in which you boiled fenugreek and honey; afterwards treat with the rest of the procedure until it is healed.
On treating water leakage from the eye or cataract.
Chapter 23.
I have mentioned the types of water already in my division, and what is suitable for puncturing when speaking declaratively and explaining it, then take that same thing according to health.
Therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands with a square in front of them, facing the light, close to the sun; and tie up their healthy eye, pulling it tightly shut; then, using your right hand, hold down the eyelid of their eye if it is the left one that has water in it; or use your left hand if it's their right eye.
Then take some almagd in your right hand if it is the left eye; or in your left hand if it's their right eye.
Place the end of the almagd near the edge of the bone around the eye where the tear duct is visible; then push the almagd with force and turn your hand along with it until you feel that it has penetrated the white part of the eye, and sense that the almagd has now reached a hollow.
The depth that the almagd needs to travel should be equal to the distance between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the eye's ring. You will see it in the pupil of the eye due to the brightness of the cornea.
Then push the almagd as far as the place where there is water. Press the almagd itself downwards with one squeeze after another.
If water comes out immediately then the patient will instantly see what they are looking at and also see the almagd in their eye.
Then you should rest for a short while. If water therefore drains away, then remove it again, except that almagd leaves.
When it is therefore inserted, and does not rise: then extract the almagd with ease; and you rotate your hand gradually.
Then dissolve some clear gemstone salt in water; and wash the eye with it within. Then place over the eye a whole swab or lint infused with rose oil and white of egg; and bind it to the healthy eye.
We however, and those who are of our time, place on it powdered antimony with white of egg.
If almagd does not obey you and enter the eye due to its hardness, since the person's eye is very hard; then you must take a spatula which is called 'Alberid', of this form.
Pierce therefore with it the conjunctiva only, and do not push your hand into the opening; and it is only necessary that you make a pathway to the eye for the almagd.
Then introduce the almagd as we have said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare for the patient a decently-made bedroom in which they sleep on their back in a dark room; and prevent them from all movements and coughing; and give them food that soothes their nature; and do not let them move their head to the right or left at all.
The ligament should remain in its original position until the third day.
Then you should undo it in that dark house and test his vision; make him see things. Then return the ligament to its position by the seventh day.
It is not necessary to do this during the treatment time or immediately after the incision; rather, it should be postponed because water quickly evaporates through intense heat.
However, if a hot abscess occurs then you should open the eye before the seventh day and adjust it as the abscess subsides until it is calm; then restore his vision completely and place over his face an ocular to regulate his sight for some days while he remains in that dark house.
Then he should leave the house gradually and return to his own home.
Also be aware that the student is not to be exempted from testing his vision several times; otherwise he will dare to perform the operation.
And now a certain one of them from Al-Ayraq has reached us who said that there was done in Al-Ayraq on a woman an operation where water is drained through a hole.
So therefore I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this; nor did I read about it in any of the old books; and it is possible that it might be something new.
And these are the shapes of spectacles for those who do not know how to make them.
They should be made of pure brass; and their ends with this same triangular shape, and the sharp end.
Chapter 24.
For treatment of flesh growing in the nose.
Sometimes different kinds of flesh grow in the nose, among which there is something that resembles a scorpion with many feet; and from it comes cancerous flesh, stony, of a dark colour; and from this is what is soft flesh, not of a dark colour.
In that which is soft and not fraudulent of these flesh types, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, and open their nostrils, then cast hooks into those flesh parts; next draw them outwards, and cut what you have taken from them with a thin sharp spatula on one side until you know all the flesh has been removed.
If any part remains which cannot be excised, then scrape it with one of the thin instruments gently until nothing of it is left behind. But if blood should master you or a hot abscess appear, then oppose it with that which is required; or this is of malignant abscesses, then quickly cauterise it until the blood has ceased and all flesh is gone.
Afterwards cast vinegar into the nose after cutting it, and water, or wine. But if the nose should open up, and moisture proceeds from it as far as the palate, then you know that they are now healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that flesh has grown within on the upper nasal bones to which the instrument did not reach with its cutting.
You should then introduce a linen thread of some thickness and make many knots on it; leave the size of a finger or less between each knot; and have the patient put one end of the thread in his nose with a needle or whatever is possible for him after making the string similar to an azer; pull until it comes out onto his throat.
And many times boys do the same thing in school; it's an easy task for whoever wants to.
Then take the two ends of the thread: one end that comes out on top of the nose and another that remained inside the nose. Then take the flesh clamp and attach it to the knots on the thread. Do this until you know that the meat is now attached to the thread's knots.
Then remove the thread and put into the nose a linen cloth soaked with Egyptian ointment after washing away any blood; do this for three days or more until all that remains of the meat is dissolved by the ointment.
Finally put into the nose a leaden tube for some days until it heals.
If however he needs an astringent cure, use this one instead.
For making the ointment container in which oils and other medicines are distilled for the nose, make it out of silver or bronze; this should be like a small lamp, open like a shell, with its passageway similar.
And if you want to make the tube closed like a pipe.
The small shell of the instrument is made for preparing the head dressing; it should be full and uncovered: at its end there is a handle by which you can hold it when heating oil or any juice or fluid in it.
Chapter 25.
Nasal polyp often occurs at the end of the nose; it grows bigger with time until its appearance becomes unsightly.
For this reason, you should cut it off at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then put on the spot either a caustic or a cauterizing medicine which stands in its place.
If you delay the incision until it has grown bigger, then examine whether it is stony hard, of dark colour and insensitive to touch; in that case do not touch it with the knife for it is a cancerous ulcer.
For I have often seen someone who incises such an ulcer and a great deal of harm comes to the person having it.
But if the ulcer is soft to touch, not of dark colour and you see that it can be entirely cut out then evacuate the pus and incise without fear or hesitation; treat the spot with what dries and contracts until it heals.
Chapter 26.
On stitching up nose, lip and ear.
Understand that when there is a break of continuity in any of these cartilages an operation on it rarely succeeds except with some persons.
Therefore, when something happens to someone from that, you must examine it; if it is a fresh wound with its blood: and then bring together the edges of the wound with stitches; then treat it until it heals.
And if the solution of continuity has already separated the edges and each part is made healthy; then you must scrape all parts from its skin until it bleeds. Then bring together the two edges with stitches and tighten them; sprinkle over it powdered dragon's blood and crushed frankincense; place on top a piece of fine cloth plaster and another one from hardened plasters; leave it bound for two or three days. Then remove it and change the dressing; leave it until the threads fall off by themselves. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The method of stitching is to bring together the solution of continuity either with needles as we described for stitching the abdomen; or by bringing together the edges with thread as I have made you know.
Chapter 27.
ยง On extracting lumps of lips.
Many people often have hard lumps similar to grass seeds inside their lips; some are smaller and others bigger.
Therefore, you must turn the lip outwards and cut over each lump, then lift it with a hook and cut it from every side.
Then pack the place after cutting with bruised egg white until the bleeding stops.
Then it should be cleaned with vinegar, and the place where there is a styptic quality should be treated with it until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
On incising flesh born over the gum.
Many times flesh grows over the gum which the Ancients call an abuluss.
Therefore you must hang it with a hook or hold it with forceps and cut it at its root and let the pus or blood run out.
Then put on the place some dried bruised zedoary or other styptic or drying powders.
If the flesh returns after healing as it often does then cut it a second time and cauterise it for it will not return after cauterisation.
Chapter 29.
On the management of teeth with an iron tool.
Sometimes rough, nasty barks gather on the surfaces of teeth from their inner and outer parts and between the gums which sometimes become discoloured and turn yellow or green until decay sets in from them to the gum and the teeth become ugly because of it.
You should therefore have the patient sit between your hands and his head in your lap and shave off with a rasp both tooth and gum where you see barks and things that look like grit: until nothing of them remains and do likewise for blackness, greenness, yellowness and other things until they are clean.
If therefore the cause is removed from them at the beginning that is good but if not then repeat the treatment on them another day and a second and third until you finally achieve what you want.
And know that the tooth requires razors of various forms and many shapes; according to how it is prepared for your operation; therefore, the razor with which the tooth is scraped from below is different than the one used between teeth, depending on other shapes.
And these forms of razors should be prepared for you as you see them.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of tooth pain.
You must treat the tooth's pain with all your skill and delay its extraction. For its adjacent tooth cannot replace it when it is extracted because it is a superior substance; until there is no excuse for not extracting it, then when the patient is forced to extract it, they must do so firmly and ensure that you are certain about which painful tooth should be extracted.
Indeed the pain often deceives a patient, leading them to believe it is from a healthy tooth and causing its extraction; then the pain does not go away until their unhealthy tooth is extracted.
We have already seen this from the operations of bloodletting physicians.
Once you have identified the painful tooth yourself, you must make an incision around it with a small spatula, which should contain something medicinal, until the gum is loosened from all sides; then move the tooth with your fingers or fine forceps gradually at first, until you shake it loose.
Then place large forceps into a good spot in the tooth and hold its head between your knees; firmly grasp what you have held so well that it does not move; then pull the tooth straight to avoid breaking it.
If it does not exit, then take one of those instruments and insert it beneath from all sides with ease, and attempt to move it as you did initially.
However, if the tooth is perforated or corroded, you must fill that hole with cloth and bind it tightly with a thin splint so that it does not break when you grip it with the forceps.
And be sure to thoroughly scarify all around the gums extensively.
And maintain your strength so that you do not break it and leave part of it behind which could cause even greater pain than before.
And beware of doing what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and boldness when extracting teeth other than the methods we have described here.
For many a time have they brought about severe injuries in people when they break teeth leaving the roots behind or some of them; or when extracting a tooth, they pull out part of the jawbone as well - something we have seen on multiple occasions.
After extraction it should be rinsed with wine or with vinegar and salt.
Should any bleeding occur from the socket (which often happens), then take some egg yolk and fill it with that; if you do not have access to an egg yolk, cauterize it instead.
The fine forceps used to move the tooth initially should be long-handled with short shafts and robust. As you can see, those with thick handles do not bind themselves together when they are clamped shut. The tips should be short and made of hardened iron or uneven steel, straight, and with teeth that engage each other upon closure in a firm but appropriate grip.
And sometimes they form points like the shape of a bird's mouth called a stork, and are strong in compression.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth, and extraction of broken jaw bones.
When anything remains after the removal of a broken tooth, then you should place on the site a poultice with butter for one or two days until the area softens; afterwards insert into it an algaze, or forceps: whose ends resemble the mouth of a bird called a stork. This is the form of the forceps.
Their ends should be made like a rasp inside; or like the claws of an eagle.
If it therefore does not yield to you at the exit with these forceps, then you must hollow out over the root and expose all of the flesh, and insert a tool called a small lever, whose form is this.
Its end should be short but thick; and not too deep, so as not to break.
If the root therefore comes out through it, that is good; and if not, you must assist with these other tools whose forms are as follows.
The form of the first is triangular-ended, in which there is some thickness.
The form of this one has a thin triangle end.
And also with other tools and instruments that have been mentioned previously regarding teeth.
Even if there is an animal whose foot resembles a large hook, with this instrument of the following shape, with a triangular twisted end, where there is something thick so that it does not break; and let it be unsoaked.
And you should know that there are many dental instruments; similarly, other instruments cannot be counted and a skilled craftsman, subtle in his art, devises an instrument for himself according to the operation required and the illnesses themselves.
Since there are thicknesses for which the ancients did not say an instrument because of the variety of their kinds.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth should break or decay: then probe it thoroughly at that place with what is suitable to him from the instruments and forceps which I mentioned in extracting roots, and assist with a lever whose form is this one.
Let it be somewhat thick at that place so that the bone is pulled and held with it, not sliding or slipping until the bone comes out; then treat the place with suitable medicines for it.
But if there is a small amount of decay in the bone, then scrape it free from its decay and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 32.
On the extraction of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth grow to prominence not according to their natural course, it is an ugly deformity; especially when it happens among women and girls, namely on the cheeks.
It must therefore be considered. If a tooth is born after another tooth and it does not get placed, or its enclosure is impossible, nor can it be filed: then remove the tooth; and if it adjoins another tooth, cut it with this instrument that has this form.
It resembles a small beak, and is made of hardened iron with a very sharp point.
And if the incision is long, as you cut it with this instrument on many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that none of the other teeth are moved.
If however it is exposed above its level then file it down with an iron file of this form.
It is entirely made of iron and its handle has very small dots like the one that needles are filed with: with which the tooth can be gradually filed over many days without it being shaken out or falling out; then soothe it, and finally smoothen it with some scrapers.
If it is a tooth that breaks and injures the tongue then you must file it as well until the sharpness of its fracture is removed and it is even; and smoothen it so that it does not injure the tongue nor ruin speech.
Chapter 33.
On resetting teeth with gold wire.
When the front teeth become loose due to a blow or an accident and the patient cannot bite on something so it does not fall out; and you have treated them with astringent medicines but that was of no avail: then they can be fastened with gold wire, as silver becomes green and rots after some days, while gold never changes.
And let the thread be average in fineness and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth.
And the form of this operation is such that you take a thread and insert twice its length between two healthy teeth; then weave it with both ends of the thread in the damaged teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving process until you reach where you started; and squeeze your hand with care and wisdom until it cannot be moved at all; and make sure that your tightening of the thread is around the roots of the teeth so that it does not come out.
Then cut off the superfluous ends of the thread with scissors; and bring them together and turn them over with your finger; and hide these under the healthy tooth and the damaged one so that they do not harm the tongue; then leave it tied tightly until healed.
But if it becomes untied or cut, tighten them with another thread, and it will stand thus for the whole time.
And this is the method for teeth; and so is the form of the operation for two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one or two teeth return after they have fallen out and are retained as we described; but this can only be done by a wise and experienced practitioner.
And sometimes some bone from the jaw is adapted; and it becomes like a tooth form and is placed where the tooth was anchored and tightened as we said; and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
And the procedure is to open the patient's mouth with your hand and raise their tongue; then cut through that sinewy ligament lengthwise until it releases the tongue from its restraint.
If there is any hardness and knotting within it, and if this is due to a healed wound: then thrust a hook into it and move the hook lengthwise until you cut through the ligament and release the knot.
And take care that there is no deep laceration in the flesh, lest you cut the artery there and cause bleeding.
Then let it be washed in the track of the incision with rosewater, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then put under the tongue a linen dressing, which the patient should wear every night; so that it does not heal over again.
But if bleeding occurs, then put bruised egg on the spot. But if the bleeding overcomes you, then cauterize the spot with a fig-wood cautery suitable for it; afterwards treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes there occurs under the tongue a swelling that resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and perhaps it grows so large as to fill the mouth.
And the operation is that you open the patient's mouth in front of the sun; then examine the swelling.
If you see it is of dark or black colour, hard, and the patient feels no pain; then do not touch it, for it is a cancer.
And if it has an incline towards whiteness, where there is moisture, then thrust a hook into it; cut it out with a very sharp knife and remove all of it. If bleeding defies you during your operation, then place over it bruised figwort until the blood ceases; then resume your operation until you have removed it along with its root.
Afterwards, it should be cleaned with vinegar and salt; then treat it with the appropriate remaining cure until it heals.
On the treatment of swelling of the two tonsils.
Chapter 36.
Sometimes there occur between the throat and chin, that is to say, at the glands which resemble a cotton wool pad and are found outside; these are called the two tonsils: when you treat them as we have said earlier in this chapter, but they do not heal; then consider them carefully.
If it is a hard swelling of dark colour with little sensation; then do not touch it with an iron instrument.
And if it is of a red colour and its root is thick; then do not touch it with an iron instrument for fear of blood loss, rather leave it until it ripens. And then either you will pierce it yourself; or it will break by itself.
And if it is white in colour, round, and its root is fine; then it must be cut.
And when operating on it, consider beforehand whether its abscess has quietened fully while remaining hot, or diminishes to some extent; then make the patient sit in front of the sun, with his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and have a servant take this instrument (of such-and-such form) between their hands, pressing his tongue downwards.
Let it be made of silver or brass, thin like a knife.
When you therefore press it against his tongue with the instrument and the abscess is revealed to you, and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook and fix it into the tonsil, extracting as much of it outwards as you can without tearing anything from the clothing.
Then cut it with an instrument of this form that follows. It is like a pair of scissors; however its tips are curved so that the aperture of each faces directly one another and is sharp: take care to have it made from iron or bronze well-soaked (in something).
But if this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatoula of this form. Let one side be sharp, the other not.
And when you have cut one tonsil, cut the other in like manner.
Then after cutting, have the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
If he has a nosebleed, have him gargle with water in which the bark of pomegranates has been boiled or myrtle leaves and similar astringents until the bleeding stops; then treat the wound until it is healed.
And sometimes other abscesses form in the throat besides the two tonsils. Make an incision accordingly, as I described for the incision of two tonsils, equally.
And I myself have treated a woman for an abscess that had developed between her throat and the area in front of the neck which was causing breathing difficulties, loss of sensation, and almost complete closure of the throat; she could only breathe through a small opening, and was unable to eat or drink water. She had reached the point of death if left untreated for one or two more days.
The abscess had grown so much that it sent out two branches until they emerged at the outer openings of both nostrils.
I hastened to prepare accordingly and inserted one hook into each. Then I pulled it out, extracting most of the pus.
Then I cut her nostrils where they were joined together.
I then treated the area around the other nostril in the same way.
I then opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue; after that I inserted a hook into the abscess, cut away part of it, and very little blood flowed from this area. The woman's throat was now healed, and she began to drink water immediately, followed by solid food.
I therefore did not cease to cut out that abscess many times over a long period; and an abscess would form in the place of the one I had cut out until it became too extensive along with the other one.
I therefore devised an idea and cauterized the abscess between the throat.
I therefore stood back from it; then I walked away on one side and did not know what God had done with him after me.
On the cutting out of an abscess on the lip.
Chapter 37.
When pus descends to the lip and an abscess forms on it that is long, then itself it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round in the lower part, then itself it is called a "ball".
When it is treated with what we have said above in division, and treatment does not take effect; and you see that the abscess has become quiet of its heat, and it has thinned out; then it is necessary to cut into it.
And if there is a round lump attached to it, and it has no length of its own; and it is bloody in appearance or the colour of pitch or black, and it lacks sensation; then you should direct your cut towards it. For there is fear in this for the patient.
Therefore when you see it according to the way I have described from its whiteness and length, then you should make the patient sit facing the sun; and press his tongue down with an instrument as previously described; then fix a hook into the lip, and draw it downwards; and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for cutting out two tonsils.
You must not cut away any part unless it is that which lies beyond the normal limit without extension.
If you cut more of it away, you will impair the voice and speech.
Then after the incision use what we described for the incision of two tonsils: and care for it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision: then you must use your skill to cauterize it without fear and trepidation.
The way to cauterize it is not with boiling water: rather you must place the patient's head in your lap. Then press their tongue with the instrument which we described. Then take some of the water which I told you about in the chapter on cauterizing and mix it with unslaked lime, making a paste neither thick nor thin, and fill this hollow instrument with it, which is shaped thus.
The end of the instrument that holds the medicine should be hollow like the scooped-out end of a spoon.
Place the instrument with its medicine on their throat itself: and have them lie on their side so that saliva from their mouth runs towards it from inside, without anything of it flowing down into their throat to harm them.
Then hold your hand with the medicine over it. And hold it over their throat for half an hour at first until you see its blackening and the ceasing of the medicine's biting sensation.
And if you wish to take cotton and roll it over the rounded end of a stick, then dip the cotton in its medicine and insert this stick with the cotton into the pipe until the cotton adheres against their throat.
Do it repeatedly until you achieve what you want regarding cauterization of veins. Then leave it; for in itself it dries up and falls off after three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it; and after cauterization clean around the vein with a cotton pad soaked in butter, and purify [the wound] with what is left of the medicine; and let it be dressed with cold water.
And dress [the wound] externally with compresses, and internally with mouthwashes until it is healed.
Therefore this kind of cure is healthier than cutting, and more distant from fear.
And sometimes a wound is healed even with something finer than cauterization and cutting; it is in fact cured with fumigation like this. Take galangal, hyssop, oregano, rue, seseli, chamomile, southernwood and similar herbs to them; and put all of them or some of them in a pot, submerge with vinegar and boil; and the pot should be sealed with decent clay; and there is an opening at its middle over which this hollow instrument is fitted.
It should be made of silver or brass; and the end that has a pomegranate on it is introduced into the mouth of the sick person until steam rises up to the wound through the tube until the wound darkens considerably.
Then repeat over it multiple times, until it dries.
And take care not to do this cure at the beginning of an abscess's appearance. For he often adds to the abscess: and it is not necessary that you do so unless at the decline of its warmth.
But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a reed and cover its end with sheep's skin so that the patient's mouth is not burned; for the sheep's skin prevents the vapor from burning the bone; and this is good cure with healing.
On extraction of thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Often there sticks in the throat a bone or fish spine or some other thing.
You should therefore extract what is visible of it from that which falls to the eye after you have pressed down the tongue with an instrument towards the sun and make clear to yourself what is in the throat.
And what is not visible to you but hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before it is digested by the stomach. For perhaps what was stuck will come out with the vomiting.
Or let the patient swallow a piece of turnip or lettuce root; or let them swallow a dry bread pellet, or take a piece of dried soft sea sponge and tie it in a string before swallowing. When these reach the place where the spines or bone is then it will be pulled out.
But if it does not come out with what we have said, then use a lead instrument of this shape.
Let it be thicker than a spoke by some measure and at its end let there be a curve which you insert into their throat with ease; and the patient should have their head elevated upwards.
And warn him to avoid touching his epiglottis, lest he get a cough, and push with it a bone or thorn, or insert it the physician by hand.
But if the patient should insert it himself, this is better; because of his knowledge of the place where the object is located: and he should push downwards or pull up his hand with the instrument, all according to the amount prepared for him, until it comes out.
ยง On the Extraction of Leeches.
Chapter 39.
When a leech is treated with what I said earlier in the section on treatment with medications and it does not work, then look at the patient's throat in front of the sun or near the sun after you press their tongue with the instrument I described to you.
If your gaze falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook or with thin tweezers appropriately.
But if it is not possible with these: then take a hollow tube, and insert it into the patient's throat close to their gullet; next, insert into the hollow of the tube a heated iron rod. Do this many times; and let the patient refrain from drinking water for that whole day.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water and open his mouth into it; and rinse his mouth with it, but do not swallow any of it; and move the water around every hour for another. For the leech immediately falls when it senses the water.
If however it does not come out with what we have described, then fumigate the patient with flea powder or with asa as with the instrument I described for fumigating a boil.
Do that several times, since it will fall out.
And the method of operation in fumigation is, that you take a pot, in which are living plums with fire: and let the pot be covered with a lid, on whose middle is a hole: and let the end of the instrument be fitted into it.
Then throw the fumigation, and let the patient put their mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For the leech will immediately fall off.
If it does not fall then repeat fumigation several times.
And let the patient endure thirst, eat salts, garlic, onions, but not drink water.
It is therefore necessary that it come out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which you extract the leech from the throat when it falls on it's back.
It is similar to forceps as you see: except that it has this curve which is inserted into the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of a bird called a stork, on which is a roughness like a file: when it grasps anything, it does not let go at all.
On the opening of abscesses, their incision, and treatment in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many types of abscesses, and they occur in numerous ways; I will here mention only one, which is dealt with in this book; there are different methods for opening them, and they are cut open in two ways.
One of which is an abscess that forms within itself, due to its own humors.
And the second method is because of the places where it occurs on the body.
Since an abscess on the head is different from one that occurs at the anus; and also an abscess in fleshy areas differs from one occurring over joints; each of these has its own specific treatment method.
Among abscesses are those which should not be opened unless after the pus inside them has matured and reached completion; while others need to be cut open when still raw, before their contents have fully developed.
Such as abscesses that occur near joints.
Because when an abscess happens close to a joint and extends itself further until what's inside it putrefies; the surrounding ligaments or nerves of that joint may be affected too - which is the cause for that limb to contract more easily.
Or it's an abscess near a limb; for if you delay opening it until it matures, this will harm either the limb itself or the main body part attached to it.
Or it's close to the anus - then you must open it when still immature; and do not open an abscess that is raw or incomplete, unless it's near the anus so as not to let what's inside it putrefy deep down reaching the interior of the anus, forming a fistula there, which does not heal.
You should know the time of the abscess's perforation, which has matured according to its fullness; and it is at the point of pain relief, fever reduction, redness, pulsation, and sharpness of the head of the abscess: and other signs.
And you must make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess, and where the swelling is more prominent; and let the incision go along the length of the body, if the abscesses are in parts of hands and feet, and places of arms, ribs, nerves, arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no curvature.
In those which curve, go with the incision according to that limb.
When however the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better that you leave its incision until its digestion hardens, as we said according to fullness.
Because if you make an incision in it beforehand, the course of its pus is prolonged, and there is much dirt and foulness, and perhaps its lips will harden, and its depth.
And some abscesses are incised across the width of the body when necessary; or according to that which the limb requires.
And you must make a small incision in the smaller abscesses, and a large one in the larger abscesses; or multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess.
And there are some abscesses where the skin must be scooped out; and it should be incised when it has already become like cloth, and reached its limit, which is now dead; as happens with many swellings, double ones, and buboes.
And among them are those that are cut with a three-cornered incision. And one of these is cut like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like an inguinal abscess.
And among them are those where a round incision or crescent-shaped one is administered; incisions similar to these.
But that which has no head, like soft surface abscesses, should be pierced with a shallow or flat probe only.
And when an abscess is large and has already gathered a lot of pus, and you pierce it, do not rush to extract all the pus at that moment; rather, draw out just some of it. Then cover the abscess until the next day. Then extract some more of the pus.
Do this many times in stages, until it discharges; especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old and feeble person: for often the vital spirit of one animal is weakened with that of another when pus escapes; and perhaps your patient will die, though you are unaware.
Therefore take great care in this chapter.
And after you have pierced these abscesses with this probe, it is necessary that you clean the wound; take note. If therefore the abscess wound is small or the incision flat, then apply a lint dressing of linen, or an old cotton one. If there is a large abscess and many perforations are present, you must then insert a licinia into each fissure until they meet one another.
And if you have cut away a portion of the skin in the abscess or have hollowed it out around its circumference, then you must fill it with old cotton, or as when one dresses a wound with cloth, or scrape linen wool without moisture and press it until the third day.
Then remove it, and treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
If there is a flow of blood during your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar after a cloth has been soaked in them; place it over the bleeding area several times.
If the bleeding persists, you must apply a regimen of treatment and powders that I have described in many places throughout this book and its sections.
If it is wintertime and the site of the abscess involves many nerves, then you must pour warm poultices mixed with wine and oil onto those areas.
And if it is summertime and the areas are fleshy, then you must apply poultices soaked in water and oil or with wine and oil, keeping everything cool. Until the third day, as I have said, you must then remove the abscess, clean it, and apply appropriate treatment until it heals.
Thus ends the general knowledge of abscess treatment.
According to the path of division, I have now spoken about every type of abscess; how one should treat each in a summary fashion.
Chapter 41.
On the draining of abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
Abscesses occur on the skin of the head that are small and are similar to the species wens which are contained by sacks (tunics), like chicken pox itself.
And there are many types of them.
Some are fatty; some contain moisture like mud; and others hold moisture resembling curds and whey; and there are those similar to them; and there are hard stony ones among them.
And when draining all of them and extracting them there is no fear so long as during their drainage the artery does not offer resistance.
And the procedure in draining them is that you should try it out with an instrument whose form comes after this, which is called "Intromissum", until you know what it contains.
For if it holds moisture then dry it with a shallow incision lengthwise like this shape.
And begin the incision from the line b to the line g. So when it is drained of moisture then scrape out the cyst which contains that moisture and do not leave anything behind in it.
For often it returns if something remains from it.
Then immerse the cloth in Egyptian ointment if it is available; and if not then in water and salt; and fill with that your wound and leave it until another day. For the cloth will eat away what remained from the cyst.
Then repeat the procedure with the second and third Egyptian [bandages], and if you need it, do so until you are confident that there is nothing left of the cyst; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If the abscess contains a fatty nodule, then cut it open like so, with an incision shaped as a cross, and insert hooks between the lips of the incision; scrape out its contents from all sides: and attempt to remove the capsule that contained it.
If an artery gives you trouble, then do what I shall describe to you next.
And do likewise for an abscess that is stony hard, by making the same kind of incision and treatment as we have described.
And the operation on a stony-hard abscess is easier because there is less blood and moisture. And sometimes there are abscesses of this sort on the head which contain no moisture whatsoever.
Which is to say that I once operated on an abscess in the head of a very old woman and found it as hard and solid as stone; rough and white; which could not be broken or crushed with a blow.
In other kinds of abscesses occurring on the head however (apart from those that occur on children's heads and at the roots of their ears), all such incisions should be made on a superficial plane.
Or make an opening at the lowest point of such swellings so as to allow the purulent discharge to drain downwards.
Then treat them with whatever is appropriate for their treatment.
The removal of goiters from the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses occur frequently on the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin area; sometimes they also appear elsewhere on the body.
And those that occur on the neck may be singular or multiple; they develop from each other and every goiter among them is contained within its own membrane as with lumps and abscesses of the head, as we have described.
There are many types of goiters. Indeed, some of these goiters contain stones; others contain fluids; still others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
For any goiter of good prognosis that you encounterโone which is close to the color of the skin, moves freely on all sides, and is not attached to the neck muscles or veinsโyou should remove it by making a shallow cut from top to bottom following the lines b-g; then scrape away the skin all around and stretch out the two edges with a hook or several hooks if necessary as we described for head abscesses, and gradually extract it.
And one must take care not to cut any veins or nerves.
The knife should not be too sharp; in this way you won't hurt your hand during the operation or upset the patient and make an unnecessary cut.
If you cut a vein or artery and it prevents you from continuing the operation, then place on the wound some ground-up fig or blood-clotting powders; bind up the wound tightly, and leave the patient to rest until the swelling has gone down and the injury softens; or it may begin to rot.
For blood is cut off by the tincle. Return therefore to your operation until you are finished.
Then check with your index finger if anything remains of the small strophulus; then cut them out and clean them.
But if there is a large vein in the root of the strophulus, then you must not cut out that strophulus from its root; rather, it is necessary to tie it with double strong thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without causing harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton, which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it.
If the entire strophulus is cut off, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and join them immediately after seeing that there remains no excess whatsoever.
But if you see that there is an excess left due to the size of the strophulus, then it is necessary to pay attention to cutting its root and pulling it out; and apply the suture we described.
And as for those strophulus that contain moisture, make a shallow hole in them so that the place of its ripening appears to you; and put the hole below what follows from the body, as we said.
Then apply dressings with ointment and similar substances after the hole to eat away what remains of the corruption until you see that the wound is now cleansed; then treat it with an ointment for generating flesh until it heals.
Chapter 43.
On the cutting of the epiglottis from an abscess occurring inside the throat:
The ancients called this incision 'in the epiglottis', and I have not seen anyone in our land perform it; these are the words of their writings.
For those with synanche, the incision in the epiglottis should be avoided; it is not beneficial due to the weakness of all the veins and the lung.
In those with a hot abscess in the mouth or throat, or on both tonsils when there is no illness in the trachea, an incision of the epiglottis should be made to avoid destruction caused by choking.
Therefore, when we wish to make such an incision, it should be made under the three or four circles of the epiglottis with a small transverse cut between two circles; this should be an incision in the siphon and not the cartilage: this is indeed the suitable place for the incision as there is no meat on it, and the blood vessels are far away.
If the surgeon is timid, they should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. They should then make an incision in the skin until they reach the trachea; avoiding any blood vessels that may be seen.
After making the incision in the siphon as described, an indication that the trachea has been properly cut is when phlegm emerges from it, along with what was inside and a loss of voice.
Leave the wound open for some time.
When the hour of danger from choking has passed, bring together the two lips of the skin wound and sew them solely without the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Albucasis says so. The full explanation of this discussion which we have related is not evident until they see that one of these abscesses has already choked the patient's throat; and the patient is lifted up towards death, and wishes to be cut in order to ease his breathing: they go on to cut open the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the wound in a certain way, and he will be saved from death. And for this reason, they have recommended leaving the wound open until the illness has run its course - and this takes about three days or thereabouts; then therefore they recommend closing up the wound and curing it until it is healed.
And what I myself have witnessed is that one woman took a knife and put it into her throat, and cut with it a part of the trachea.
And I was called to treat her, and I found that she was moaning like the moan of a dead person.
So I removed the knife from the wound, and found that there was only a small amount of blood coming out of the wound. Therefore I was confused because she had not cut the vein nor the windpipe, and air was coming out of the wound.
I therefore treated the wound and cured it until it was healthy; nothing happened to the woman apart from a hoarseness of voice, and she returned home after a few days having improved her condition.
Thus I say that there is no need to fear cutting open the epiglottis.
On the removal of a hernia in the throat.
Chapter Forty-Four
This abscess named hernia of the throat is a large one, resembling the colour of flesh, and it occurs frequently among women.
And it is in two forms: either natural or accidental.
Certainly, the natural one does not arise from any inherent tendency.
The accidental kind has two types, one of which resembles fatty swellings. And the other type is like an abscess that forms from arterial pulsations. And there is a risk involved; and it must not be presumed that an iron instrument should be applied to it unless the hernia is small. You must test it, and investigate it with your fingers. So if you find it resembles a fatty swelling and no vein is attached to it, then cut into it as swellings are excised; and extract what surrounds the hernia from the sac, if there is one, or else explore the entire area. Then treat the wound with whatever is needed for healing until it is cured.
Chapter Forty-Five
On excising swellings resembling fatty masses.
There are many types of swellings; and I have already described all their varieties earlier on. Now it is necessary to explain the distinction between a swelling and an exitura, as this causes uncertainty.
I say, therefore, that when there is a departure of warmth and fever, and violent pains until the boiling of superfluities subsides, and putrefaction is complete; then indeed fevers and heat are quieted.
When there is no warmth nor fever or pain and they contain them with a wound dressing, which is their own sack, and it matches the colour of the body; and its beginning is like chickpeas, and it becomes like batecha, and larger and smaller.
And they are of two types; either fatty or containing moisture. And the colours of the moisture are many, as I said in my classification.
You should therefore, when you come to the treatment of a nodule, test it first and examine it with an instrument called an intromittere as described in the chapter that follows.
The method of examining boils and all nodules is to take this instrument and insert it into the moistest place you find within the boil; and turn your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then extend your hand according to the measure of the size of the boil.
Then withdraw the intromittere and observe what comes out on its track.
If therefore moisture comes out flowing whatever its colour: then dry it with a shallow incision as I said for other boils.
And if moisture does not come out on the track of the intromittere then know that it is fatty; therefore make an incision in the shape of a cross over it as I taught you: and hang it with hooks and scrape off the skin all around easily: and keep the dressing, if you can, so that you remove the whole thing healthy along with the nodule.
If, however, the cyst is ruptured during surgery and it is not possible to remove it whole, as this often happens, then remove it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
If even a little bit is left behind, whether small or large, the lump returns for the most part.
But if it overpowers you and a small amount remains: then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders at the end of your procedure; bind up the wound, and place on it what sits on a warm poultice, and treat it with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
If therefore there is a large lump, then seize its two lips, and treat it with that which promotes flesh growth.
But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein opposes you, then hurry and fill the place with crushed egg, and leave it bound for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the blood boil ceases; then return to cut off what remains of the lump.
Chapter 46.
Regarding instruments from outside for cutting and piercing...
From these are the shapes of Introductors, and they are of three types.
For from them there is large, and from them there is medium, and from them there is small.
They shall be made of iron fulcrums with square off-centre ends so that they hurry entry into the abscess.
And these are the shapes of Probes, that is, piercers: and one of them is called a borer; and they are of three types.
There are large ones, medium ones, and small ones among them.
They agree to investigate those abscesses, discharge, fistulas, and swellings due to what is between them of the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and soft like large needles with which saddles are stuffed, namely, of leather or bronze, iron, or silver.
And the best among them are those made of leather.
Experience is also gained from black lead, which they agree to use to test fistulas with concave reflections so that they can be reflected gently along with those reflections.
And there are again three types. Because among them there are long ones, medium ones, and short ones, according to the size of the fistula's width and constriction.
The form of swabs, and there are many types.
Because among them there are simple ones, that is, those with one curve; and they are of three types as you see, large, medium, and small.
And among them there are blind swabs; and they are of three types.
And among them there are hooks with two curves and they are of three types; and among them there are hooks with three curves and they are also of three types; and all these are necessary in their place.
These are the forms of scalpels with which nodules and abscesses are cut and scraped; and they are of three types: for among them there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Their extremities, which are cut, are sharp, the other extremities are not sharp; and they are not placed like this unless with them a benefit is done to lessen the scarring of nodules through fear of incision into a vein or nerve: and so that the patient might be cured, and find some relief from the burning rather than finding it in the excoriation of an abscess.
They are made of brass, and they look like a radio, with which alcohol is made; and at the broad end is hidden a pointed instrument called a Spatula Millimetre: and in it runs to the inside and outside when you want, as you see.
The shape of the spatula millimetres that are hidden between fingers at the abscess piercing; and they go unnoticed by patients; and there are three kinds, large, medium, small.
The shapes of the windbags with which the flow of blood is cut; and they are three types, large, medium, small.
They are made of brass or quartz, round, slightly long as you see; and let them be thin.
And you must have these types of windbags large and small with you; so that you may cut blood swiftly in need, then when medicine is not available to you.
But you should not use them to cut blood in every place of the body; and only use them on fleshy areas such as the calf leg, hip, arm forearm, breast nipple, stomach, groin, and similar fleshy moist parts.
And sometimes small instruments are made from them similar to pistachio shells, according to their form; with which blood is cut off when it flows out of a place where venesection has been done, or at the incision of a vein or artery; and sometimes they are made round in this shape.
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of human teats that resemble women's breasts.
Sometimes the teats of some men swell up at the end of sleep (that is, when they begin to pollute in their sleep) until they resemble women's breasts: and they remain unsightly and disfigured.
Therefore, whoever is disgusted by this should cut above the teats with a lunar incision, according to this form: from line b to line g. Then scrape off all the fat. Afterwards fill the wound with incarnatio medicine. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
But if the teat droops downwards and softens because of its size, as happens with women: then it should be slit on its two upper sides by two similar lunar-shaped incisions, each of which is contained with the other at the end of either side, so that a larger containing line encloses a smaller enclosed one, according to this form: from line b to line g. Afterwards scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sutures and powders, which is necessary for treatment, until it is healed.
But if you do not complete the incision because of the patient's unease or due to a flow of blood: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with subcutaneous cautery and leave it until it has burnt away all the remaining fat. Treat him until he is healed.
On the perforation of an abscess which occurs under the armpit.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses which occur under the armpit are of a hard type with cysts and some have fluids inside them.
Those abscesses with fluids must be opened by making a crescent shaped incision from line b to g according to this pattern. When all the pus has been drained from it, fill the wound with old oil and leave until the next day.
Then remove the old oil and dress with an appropriate ointment until healed.
If the abscess is of the type with hard lumps then make an incision on top as we mentioned before for the treatment of boils.
If the wound extends so that it discharges pus then apply a hot iron to it as we mentioned before.
Chapter 49.
On the opening of an abscess which occurs next to a large artery or vein.
When an artery bursts and the skin above it heals over then this frequently causes abscesses to form; likewise when a vein is injured an abscess and swelling may occur there too.
The signs by which you can know that the abscess and swelling are next to a large artery or vein are as follows: if it is an abscess caused by an injured artery then it will be long, deep within the body; also when you press your fingers against such an abscess you feel a kind of hissing sound.
And what lies near the Vein is rounded on the surface of the body.
And an incision above this abscess is a mistake, especially if it is under the armpits, groins, neck, and other parts of the body; and it is extremely dangerous. It is therefore necessary to avoid treating it with an iron instrument, and what comes out from them must also be avoided, even if they are on the extremities or head.
For that which comes out from them as a result of an arterial hole becoming swollen, you should make an incision in the skin lengthwise. Then open the incision with hooks, afterwards the artery; and free it from its coverings until it is fully exposed.
Next, introduce a needle under it and make the needle penetrate to the other side; then tie the artery with double thread at two places, as I have instructed you when removing two arteries from the temples.
Then lance the place between the two ligaments with a scalpel until all of the blood that is in it comes out and the abscess is drained.
Then apply medication that promotes suppuration until the ligaments fall off; afterwards treat it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
If the abscess is due to an incision into a vein, then you must hold as much of it with your hand as possible along with some skin. Next introduce the needle under the place that you are holding with your hand and make it penetrate; have double thread on it so that when you withdraw it from the other side, the thread remains. Then bind it with a good ligament to the abscess; as I told you for binding a wound, on both sides with two ends of the thread.
However, if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with another thread underneath the abscess along the entire length of the needle's insertion; push and tighten your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in its middle until whatever is inside comes out; then cut away the excess skin and leave what has been bound from it.
Then put on it a poultice that you have soaked in wine and oil. Then administer the treatment which is done with linen cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On an abscess caused by nerve torsion.
Just as an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, similarly an abscess occurs in nerves; which happens to them is due to impact or excessive exertion, and the like; and it most often occurs in them at places of ligaments, or the heel bone, and in any place where joints move; and this abscess is serious.
Its colour is similar to the rest of the body, and it has multiple manifestations without pain; and when it is pressed vigorously, he feels in it a weakness like numbness.
And it is not an abscess that accumulates deep within the body; rather, it is under the skin and moves to every side; and does not extend forward towards the front or backward toward the back.
Therefore what occurs to them in joints should not be invaded with iron (surgery). Perhaps contraction may occur.
Remove the skin from those on the head or face with a spatula. If it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then lift it with a hook and scrape it; then remove it, and join the wound with stitches; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On the removal of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
Some people often have swellings in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies that are called "Fungalia", due to their resemblance to mushrooms.
The root of which is thin, its head is large, and its lips are turned inward. And there is one that is small among them; and there is one that grows to an extraordinary size.
And I myself have seen a man with two such swellings in his abdomen, which were more like mushrooms than other things: there was no difference between them, for they had thin roots, their lips turned inward, and they oozed moisture constantly.
So I cut them out and found that one weighed about 10 ounces, while the other was about 6. The procedure for cutting these out is to consider first whether the patient is moist-complexioned and the color of the swelling is white and its root thin; then cut it with a broad spatula and have cauteries ready in the fire nearby.
For often much blood is expelled when it is cut; therefore hasten if the blood defeats you, then cauterize it.
If you see him weak, fearful and afraid of the incision with the iron, then take a lead wire properly made, and tighten it with an athirl whose mode is as we said, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the lead tightening. Therefore do not stop tightening the lead every time it presses on the wound until it is cut off and falls by itself without effort.
But if the wound is of a large root, then there is something to fear and be afraid of in its cutting; especially that which is in the belly.
However it's possible to cut half of it. Then cauterize it so that it doesn't return.
Then treat it until the wound is healed.
And beware lest you presume to cut a wound that is dark in colour, with little feeling and of ugly appearance; for it is indeed a cancerous abscess: and I shall come with a reminder about cancer after this.
Chapter LII.
ยง On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia is formed from many causes. Or from a hernia sac or intestine protruding through a tear above the belly, as happens in other ruptures. The wound should be closed either with the blood flowing from the vein or with that from the artery, according to what has been stated before. Or by compression of the windiness within it.
But if it is due to a crack in the shaft and there is an exit for pus: then it has an abscess-like appearance similar to the colour of the body; and it is soft, painless: and the location appears diverse. And if it is due to the egress of the intestine, then its location is, as we have described, of a more violent diversity. When therefore you press it with your fingers, it is hidden; then it returns, and there may be a sound with it; and it increases greatly on entering the bath and with violent effort.
But if it is due to moisture, it is soft; then when you press it with your hand, it is not hidden nor constricted and nothing is added to it.
If it is due to blood, then an abscess appears with these signs towards blackness of the skin.
But if it is due to newly formed flesh, then the abscess is serious, large, hard and swells according to one quantity.
If it is due to windiness, then its touch is soft.
And the treatment of it is, as you should then consider, if the navel's prominence is due to arterial or venous blood or windiness; then you ought to be restrained from treating it. For there is fear and dread in it, as I taught you in the chapter where I said abscesses due to artery and vein.
If the swelling of the abdomen is due to a bowel or belly obstruction, then you should advise the patient to hold their breath and stand up straight. Then mark around the circumference of the abdomen with encaustic (hot wax). Next instruct him to lie face up between your hands on his back. Then encircle with a broad spatula around the abdomen, on the place that you marked with wax. Next extend the center of the abscess upwards, using a large hook. Then bind him tightly around the circumference with a strong thread or cord made of durable silk, and make sure to tie it off securely.
Next open up the extended center of the abscess above the binding. If you find that it has already been caught by the binding, then remove the binding and insert your index finger into it, pushing the bowel towards the interior of the abdomen; and if you find an obstruction, take it with the hook and cut away its excess.
If however you encounter an artery or vein that opposes you, then bind it tightly several times around. Then return to your procedure. Take two needles and thread them with two strong threads; insert the two needles into the circumference that you made around the abscess, in the form of a cross, making sure to pierce through.
Tighten the abscess at four places on top of the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles, leaving space until the swollen flesh rots away by itself; or cut it off when it is softened by putrefaction.
Then treat it with whatever ointment is necessary until it heals.
If there is an umbilical hernia made of flesh or fluid, it must be treated with a concave poultice as we have explained. And extract the blood or fluid that you find inside it.
Then treat it with whatever hardens the area.
Chapter 53.
On treating cancer.
We have already spoken about the types of cancer and how to treat them with medicines, as well as what precautions must be taken during treatment so it doesn't turn into an ulcer, and we've also mentioned that some cancers form in the womb and we spoke about their respective treatments too.
The ancients have said that sometimes cancer is found at a place where it can be eradicated entirely - like breast or thigh cancers and their likes among the limbs, especially if they are small in size when found.
When it is large and has become old, one should not get close to it.
I have never been able to heal anyone of it, nor did I see someone before me who managed to do so.
When it is located as we have described above, the treatment must be such that you precede and treat the patient for black bile several times. Then bleed them if they have an obvious fullness of blood.
Then prepare the patient for treatment with whatever preparation is necessary.
Then throw in hooks for crabs that suit it. Afterwards hollow out the whole thing from all sides with a knife according to your inspection until nothing of its roots remain: and let blood run and don't cut it quickly but squeeze the places and wipe thick blood with your hand or whatever is possible there among instruments.
But if a flow of thick blood opposes you from an incision of the artery or vein then cauterise the vein until blood is cut off. Then take care of it with remaining treatment until it heals.
ยง On the treatment of dropsy.
Chapter 54. We have already spoken about the classification of dropsy types and how water gathers; and signs of every type as well as treatment with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron is only ascites type; and it does not come close to tympanic type or hyposarcous type at all for the latter is fatal.
When you have already treated this tympanic type of dropsy with medicines and it did not yield to your treatment then consider. For if the patient is already weak or has another illness besides dropsy such as a cough or diarrhoea then beware of treating them with iron since it is dangerous.
But if you see a patient with exuberant strength and no illness besides dropsy alone nor is he young or old then the method of treatment in him is that you lift up the patient standing between your hands while an assistant behind him presses his belly with their hand pushing water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a sharp spine, in this shape. It is of two acute parts, long, with a sharp end like the spine. However, it should have some gradual shortness to it, so that you do not penetrate with it during the operation all the way into the intestine and injure it.
Then consider this. For if there is a swelling of the hydropsy caused by obstruction from within the intestines, then you should extend your cut three finger-widths below the navel to its lower end straight above the pubic bone.
But if the hydropsy is caused by disease of the liver, then make your cut to its left three finger-widths from the navel.
And if the swelling is caused by disease of the spleen, then make your cut on his right side; and do not also make a cut over the side he wishes to lie upon, so that superfluities may not run into this weak place.
Then pierce through with your instrument the whole skin. Then introduce your hand into the incision and raise it with the spine between the skin and subcutaneous layer as if you were scraping it; and let what is scraped off be about the quantity of a fingernail or thereabouts.
Then scrape until you come to the spine-like structure at the place of emptiness; and this is where water collects. Then extract it and introduce into the hole an instrument of this shape. It is like a small pipe; it is made of silver or brass or gold alloy, smooth and clean; at its lower end there is a small hole, while on its sides are three holes, two on one side and one on the other; and its tip is cut obliquely, as you see; at its upper end is fixed an armlet.
When the instrument reaches the water, it immediately descends onto the instrument; therefore, remove from the water within a medium amount of time.
If you remove [the patient] from it more than is appropriate, then perhaps the sick person dies within the hour due to a resolute animal spirit; or there occurs syncope which approaches death.
But remove [the patient] from it according to the amount of their strength, and according to what the sick person's dispositions indicate to you regarding the strength of their pulse, and their well-being.
Then extract the instrument and retain the water.
This is because it is immediately retained by the skin which retains the hole that is on the sifac; of which I narrated, so that you may perforate it in that manner.
Then reinsert the instrument on the second day, if you see that the sick person can tolerate it; also extract a small amount from the water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself against error; until nothing remains of the water except a small amount.
But if you fear for the sick person, and let out a great deal of water; then treat it with burial in warm sand, and profuse sweating in bath and sun, and look out for thirst; and treat it with drying medicines until they are cured: and cauterize over stomach, liver, and spleen after extraction of water, as I narrated earlier.
On the treatment of infants who are born with their urinary passages unperforated.
Chapter 55.
When a child emerges from their mother's womb and their lambdoid suture is not fully formed or has an abnormal opening, or is located in the wrong place.
We must therefore assist with its perforation immediately at birth using a very thin spatula, following this shape.
Then place a thin lead peg into the hole and tie it off; keep it there for three or four days.
When they want to urinate again, remove the peg and let them do so. Then put it back in afterwards.
And if you do not place the lead there already, it is possible that as urine passes over this area, it will prevent its closure.
But in the case of one whose opening is narrow, it should be treated with lead, as we have said, for many days until it widens.
Those whose opening is misplaced will suffer harm. This is because in those who are born like this, the opening is at the end of the shaft of their penis; therefore they cannot urinate forwards until they lift the shaft with their hand towards their body. Nor is it possible for them to have children as a result, since semen cannot reach the uterus in a straight line; and this is an extremely distressing condition.
And the method of surgery for it is that the patient should lie on their back. Then stretch the head of their penis with your left hand using a lot of force, and cut through the head of its glans from the side of the frenulum either with a lancet or a sharp spatula: like when you slit a reed, or as if you were cutting something radish-shaped so that its middle looks similar to the head of the penis; and so that the opening falls in the centre where it should.
And take care during your procedure to avoid blood loss. For it often happens that way. Therefore apply to him the same procedure as for cutting off blood flow, and treat the wound until it is healed.
On the complications which occur in the foreskin and glans penis such as inflammation, blackening, and adhesions.
Chapter 56.
These complications often occur on the penis and there is an accumulation of ugly flesh.
And some of this is malignant, while other parts are not malignant.
Therefore the non-malignant parts you should remove with a fine hook, cutting them away until you have cleaned it all out. Then place over it a cotton swab soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat the wound afterwards with dauphine ointment until it is healed.
But if the complication is malignant, discoloured, then you should apply a caustic to it after its excision and scraping.
However if the complication is on a captive foreskin of an uncircumcised person and there are parts of the complication inside the foreskin and others outside it; you should first remove the internal part of the complication until it heals over, then treat the external wound; for when you treat both at once, the foreskin will not heal without becoming perforated.
And these complications also occur on the testicles as blackening and inflammation of the foreskin. You must therefore hollow out completely whatever has already turned black and what is rotting or has already rotted.
Then pour over it after that some honey which has already been shaken with flour of pomegranate skins and crushed herbs which have been sifted.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
But if there should be an outflow of blood, then apply the lunar caustic according to this form.
For the caustic is helpful for two conditions at once, namely an outflow of blood and a wound when it has become putrid.
But if the head of the rod is eroded and it is destroyed completely within an hour: then you must insert into the orifice of the priapism a leaden pipe so that the patient urinates through it.
In the case of adherence of the foreskin to the head of the rod, and this kind of adherence does not occur except in someone whose foreskin is healthy and has not been circumcised: and sometimes there may be adhesion because of a wound or an abscess: you must therefore scrape it away with a blunt spatulum until the ligament is loosened and the head of the rod becomes free on all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish these with precision, then you must scrape away something from the head of the rod and also something from the foreskin. This is because when the foreskin is thin it may be perforated quickly on account of its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the rod with a piece of fine linen cloth which has already been moistened in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with astringent wine until it hardens.
Chapter 57.
On the cleansing of infants and the cure for any errors occurring to them.
Circumcision is not the solution to continence, like other wounds; however, since it is due to our action, with our will, and its use is proper among boys, we must mark this operation as improved, and lead a smoother path towards health.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
That is because I have found that most craftsmen and blood-letters use the cleansing method, performing circumcision with a razor and scissors, and using caustic agents and ligatures with thread, and incisions with a lancet.
And I have indeed tested all these methods, and have not found a better method of cleansing than with scissors and binding with thread.
Because in cleansing with a razor, the skin often escapes. Because the foreskin's skin has two layers; therefore, perhaps the upper layer is cut and the lower layer tears; thus it requires a second incision, causing pain. And with the cleansing done by caustic agents, which is a Digitalis plant that shoemakers use, the incision of the male member's tip is not secured because it might enter its hole.
In the cleansing done by a lancet, perhaps its iron is pushed in and ruins your operation; also, boys' skin is naturally short, and they often are born like this so that they don't need to be cleansed at all, and I've seen it myself.
The process of wound cleansing with scissors and the ligation with thread has proven to be a good experience for me: since the scissors are proportionate to the incision; therefore, the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. When you therefore place your hand with the above premises, the two sharp edges are proportioned and make an incision at one operation in a single time: and a compression of similar figure is made, containing the skin of the rod from every side, with which no mistake whatsoever can fall.
And the way of doing this operation is that you make it seem to a child, especially if he is one who understands somewhat, that you are not doing anything except tying the thread around his rod only: and you leave him until another day.
Then you make him rejoice and be merry in every way possible for you from the fact that he understands it himself. Then you make him stand between your prepared hands and not be seated: and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything of the instruments.
Then you insert your hand into his rod and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the rod comes out. Then you cleanse it from what collects on it of filth.
Then you tie the marked place with double thread. Afterwards, tie below it somewhat of another ligation. Then you hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligation with a good grip, and make an incision between the two ligatures. Then raise the skin upwards quickly, and extract the head of the needle. Then allow the blood to run slowly (for it is better) and place powder on top; and on the powder a cloth spread with the strained broth of a boiled kid, mixed with good fresh rose oil; and leave him on this until the next day: and treat it with the remaining cure, until it is healed.
This is the form of the scissors for cleaning.
There should be two sharp pointed ends, and they should meet; lest the branch of the nail slip out: and let the length of the two points be equal to the combined length of both handles.
A mistake that can occur during cleaning is when the inner skin may escape entirely or a part of it at the incision.
So you must pull it out with your fingernail at the right time before the place is cauterized: and cut it evenly.
If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with a hook, and cut it.
But if three days pass and what remains under the swollen rod becomes an abscess; then leave it until the abscess subsides to a warm spot, and scrape it away gently, and cut it according to how it presents itself to you: and beware of the head of the needle. It will not do him any harm.
So treat it with what heals wounds made from the powders we described in the chapter on powders; and if a wound is cut through the skin above measure and reaches upwards, this will not harm him either.
Take care of it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the extraction of retained urine in the bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction produced from a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or flesh and similar things among those we have said from the ways of treatment in the division.
And if the urine is not loosened and you see that its retention is due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it should be that the patient is bent over his knees. Then his feet should be arranged upon his back and he should stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back and the patient should draw in his breath as much as possible for him. He is thus forced with the neck of the bladder towards excretion of the stone at the back: wherefore the urine is discharged.
But if it is not loosened with what we have said and the matter is difficult for the patient: then it should be that you administer its extraction with an instrument which is called a syringe, of this form It should be made from silver, and should be fine, soft, curved like a bird's quill in fineness equal to that of a radius, long as one-and-a-half palms: to which there should be a fine nozzle at its head.
And the way of exit of urine through it is that you take a doubled thread and tie at its end wool or cotton with good binding: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe: and cut with scissors if anything superfluous remains from the wool, but introduce it into the nozzle firmly like a plug.
Then lubricate the syringe with oil, or with butter and egg white; and have the patient sit on a seat, and broach the fistula, and his member with moistened wool, olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the member with ease until you reach the root of the member.
Then double it above on the upper part of the navel.
Then push the syringe inside until you reach the bladder and the patient feels that he has reached an empty thing; and this does not happen according to this order unless because the passage into which it enters is one with a twist.
Then withdraw the thread along with some wool gradually. The worm will follow the wool.
Then extract it and make the worm run through the urine passage; and repeat with the syringe and do not cease doing this until the fistula is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
On the subject of the cleansing of the bladder with a syringe.
Chapter 59.
When there is an ulcer or a clot of blood in the bladder, or it contracts and pushes pus into it, and you wish to introduce water and medicines into it; then do so with the instrument that is called a syringe, and this is its form: [at this point, Albucasis inserts an illustration].
It is a closed nozzle. And on it there are three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
The hollow place where the object is pushed contains a quantity that fills it without addition until such time as something is drawn with it and moisture is attracted; and when it is forced along, what is expelled far away with it according to what does a clepsydra - which projects naphtha, or Greek fire in battles of Mars
Therefore if you want to throw moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clepsydra into the moisture and draw up with it what is being pushed upwards because moisture is drawn into the hollow part of the clepsydra.
Then insert its end into the tube as we described for the syringe. Then push the moisture with what pushes that moisture through to the bladder immediately so that the patient feels it.
Use a slender enema to give an enema of the bladder.
Make it of silver or latten, whose head is higher than a small alcam and under which is a hollow into which the catheter drops.
Then take a goat's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you want to give an enema of the bladder. Then tie it between the two hollows with a strong ligature of double thread and warm that moisture slightly over the fire.
Then insert the end of the enema into the tube and after that squeeze your hand over the bladder with a suitable tightness until the patient feels that the moisture has already reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder at hand then take a piece of parchment and make out of it a circle and pierce it with holes throughout all its roundness. Then introduce a thread firmly into those holes as they revolve. Then gather the circle as you would an egg yolk; after you place into it whatever you desire of moistures and oils and waters.
Then bind it into the instrument; and work with it as you did with the bladder from an expression by hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already spoken about the types of stones and their treatment with medicines; I mentioned the difference between a stone formed in the kidneys, bladder, and signs of it overall; I spoke of the stone operation that requires handwork and incision, which is a stone properly formed in the bladder; and one fixed on a rod. And here I am narrating it again with clear exposition and abridgement.
I say, therefore, that the stone formed in the bladder mostly happens to boys.
And from its signs is that the urine comes out of the bladder like water due to its subtle nature; and white sand appears in it, and the patient rubs his penis, labours with it, and often hangs down. Then the anus rises too and comes out with it in many of them.
And the healing is easy for boys until they reach fourteen years of age. And it is difficult in the elderly. However, for young men it is average; that which falls between the extremes: for those whose stone is larger, healing is easier; and if small, their cure is the opposite.
When we reach the stage of treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema that will extract all the feces from their intestines; for sometimes this very thing prevents finding the stone during the examination.
Then the patient should be taken by their feet and shaken, and moved towards the lower parts; so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder or jump out from a higher place several times.
Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his hips so that the bladder is fully sloped towards the lower parts.
Then feel him up and down, and touch him externally.
If you therefore feel the stone within reach, then proceed immediately with an incision over it.
If it does not fall within your reach at all, then you must wipe your left hand's index finger with oil and insert it into the anus of a child; or the middle finger for a full-grown youth; feel around until the stone lies beneath your finger, and gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on the stone with your finger and push it towards the exterior at the spot where you want to make an incision; tell one assistant to press the bladder with their hand, another to lift the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with the other hand to remove the skin which is below the testicles in a part away from the place of the section.
Then insert the scalpel, which is shaped like this: [description of the shape]. Make the incision at a spot that lies between the anus and testicles but not in the middle; rather to the left side of the buttocks: let your finger be inside the anus while the section is made over the stone itself, and make a transverse cut so that it opens widely on the outside and narrowly on the inside according to how large an exit for the stone seems possible.
Perhaps indeed the finger compresses a stone that is near the incision, and it exits without difficulty.
And you should know that the stone with angles and edges is of a kind from which results difficulty in its exit due to this.
And it is smooth, like a gland, and round; and its exit becomes easy.
Therefore for those with angles and edges, add it to the crack.
If it does not exit thus, then you should apply your skill to it: or bind over it with a stick whose end is like the moon, which binds over the stone and does not come out from it; or introduce beneath it a fine instrument of curved end.
But if you cannot succeed with this, then enlarge the opening slightly. If anything of blood defeats you, cut it away with the scissors.
But if there is more than one stone, then push first the larger towards the bladder's mouth. Then cut over it. Afterward push the smaller one after that; and do likewise if there are several in twos.
If it is very large, then it is ignorance to cut over it with a great incision. For it happens to the sick person that one of two things occurs, either he dies, or there befalls upon him constant dribbling of urine; on account of this, because the place is not at all healed.
But apply its removal until it exits; or apply your skill to its fracture with scissors until you extract it piecemeal.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, aloe, and dragon's blood; compress it, and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose-scented oil, and cold water: so that the hot abscess may be reduced.
Then turn the patient onto their front over their own neck, and do not remove the bandage until the third day. When you have unbound it, anoint the place with water and plenty of oil.
Then treat it with daiphino ointment and royal ointment until it is healed.
If an abscess is added to the wound, and it becomes corroded and similar afflictions occur; for instance if blood congeals in the bladder and prevents urine from passing, which can be recognised by the presence of blood with the urine. Insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood. For if any remains, it will lead to the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; oppose every form of it that is convenient for healing until it is healed.
And during the entire period of treatment, you ought to bind the two thighs together for medicinal purposes.
But if the stone is small and lodged within the urethra, pressing upon it, and obstructing urine's passage; then treat it with what I've described before you resort to cutting. You are often spared cutting by this treatment since I have already proved it.
And you should take a perforator made of iron, its form like this: triangular tip, sharp, fixed to wood.
Then take a thread and tie it with that rod under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the piercing iron into that rod easily until you reach the stone with the perforator; and turn the perforator with your hand on the stone little by little: and try its piercing so as to make it penetrate from the other side.
For urine is immediately discharged.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outside part of the rod. For it breaks up by itself, comes out with urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you due to something that prevents it; then tie a thread under the stone and another thread over the stone. Then cut above the stone on that rod between the two bindings. Then extract it. After that, loosen the binding, and clean frozen blood from the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone unless for fear that it should return into the bladder: and another binding over (it) lest when you loosen the thread after exit of the stone, skin will return to its place and cover wound; and for this reason it must be done by you at your tying of upper thread so as you lift up the skin upwards such that on completion of yours it returns and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
The removal of bladder stones in women.
Bladder stones are rarely formed in women.
If one of them has bladder stones, then the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited due to many reasons.
One of these is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who reveals herself to a doctor when she is chaste or from among married women.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this craft well, especially manual operations.
And the fourth is the distance from the stone's location, which requires deep incisions; there is fear in this.
If necessity calls for it, then you should take a female doctor who is well-versed; and she is rarely found.
If you lack her, then seek a chaste and skilled doctor and present an experienced female midwife or a woman who is knowledgeable in this craft; make her present and especially instruct her to do all that you tell her regarding the investigation of the stone.
First is to check if the woman is a virgin; then you must insert your finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If you find it, grasp it with your finger and then instruct the midwife to insert their finger into the weak vulva of the patient and investigate the stone after placing their left hand on her vagina and squeezing it tightly.
If he finds a stone, then he should gradually move it from the urethral opening towards the lower part with all his strength until he reaches the hip joint with it.
Then he should cut over it at the midpoint of the inguinal region near the hip joint on whichever side is prepared for him and where he feels the stone; and his finger must not be removed from the stone, pressing under it; and let the first incision be small. Then he should insert his finger into that incision.
Then he should insert his finger into that incision. If he feels the stone, then he should make an additional incision of a size proportional to how much the stone is coming out from it.
And you must know that there are many types of stones. Of these, some are small or large, smooth or rough, elongated, and round with branches.
Therefore you must know its type so that it may be indicated to you by this over what you wish.
If blood overcomes you, then add some crushed ginger to the place for an hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out; and make sure that you have with you all of the instruments which I mentioned for extracting stones from men so as to assist yourself during the procedure.
If a flow of blood overpowers you and you know that it is arterial bleeding from the incision; then apply powder to the place and compress it with suitable swabs: do not change them but let the stone fall out on its own without extracting it. Perhaps the sick woman will die. Then treat the wounds.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood is stilled after a day, and the place has become rotten, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
Regarding cutting over for a watery hernia.
A watery ram is not anything but a collection of moisture in the white part that is under the skin containing the egg and this is called sifac.
And sometimes it is in its own bag which nature prepared for it on the part of the egg until it is supposed to be; and this is another egg and it is a skin of the testicle between the white sifac that we mentioned; but this does not happen except rarely.
And the generation of these watery rams is indeed from a weakness that happens to the testicles; because this substance pours out on them. And sometimes it happens due to a blow on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colours. Or the colour of it tends to yellow, or it is bloody red, or dirty black, or watery white; and this last one is more common.
And the signs by which we understand where the collection of water is, are these: For if it is in the white part that we mentioned, then the abscess is round and somewhat longer like an egg figure; and there will be no visible testicle because moisture contains it from every side.
And if there is moisture on its own cloth, then the abscess is round with an egg-like part, and because of this a man estimates it to be another [egg].
And if moisture is between the skin of the testes and white scrotum, then it falls under sense.
When therefore you wish for knowledge of the colour of moisture, then try the colour of the moisture on the abscess with an inserted square, whose shape precedes [it]. According to that which emerges on the trace of the inserted [square], judge about what is between it.
When therefore we come to treatment with iron, then you ought to prescribe for the sick person that they be bled if possible for them, and see their body full [of blood].
Then he should lie on his back on something slightly raised, and place under it many cloths.
Then sit to his left, and direct an attendant to sit at his right side, who will stretch out his penis towards one of the two sides of the skin of the testes and towards the navel.
Then take a very wide spatula and cut the skin of the testes from the middle lengthwise towards the pubic bone: and let the incision be made according to an equally distant straight line that divides the skin of the testes, until it reaches the white scrotum; and scrape [the skin] and watch, or avoid this by cutting it off: and let your scraping with which you scrape it be from the part that hangs lower with the egg: and carefully examine with the scraping according to as much as is possible for you.
Then pierce the water-filled scrotum with a wide puncture, and extract all of the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the scrotum upwards, but do not touch the skin covering the testicles; then cut the scrotum as best you can, either all at once or in pieces, especially its thin side. If you do not carefully examine it, there will be no safety in the incision unless water returns.
But if the egg comes out of its skin during your operation: then when you have finished the scrotal incision, push it back in. Then bring together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with stitches.
Then care for it like other wounds until they heal.
If you find the egg blackened and rotten, then it is necessary to tie up the vessels that are its suspension, lest there be a hemorrhage.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspension and extract the egg; afterwards treat it as we have said.
If water has collected in two places then know that there are two branches; so cut the other side as you have done to the first equally.
And if it should fall to you to do one operation then proceed as follows: afterwards wash the blood away. And insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or rose-oil; and place outside other wool that you have steeped in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and navel; and put doubled cloths on top of them, which are compresses; and tie these on top with a bandage having six folds thus arranged.
Two cloths should be taken and soaked, then filled with powdered pomegranate rind prepared according to this formula: the ends that are compressed should be made of cotton or damp wool; they will be bound together with a bandage around the upper arms; one end reaches from above the anus up to the back, while the other goes toward the breast region; the two further ends go over the two thighs below, and the two remaining ends pass over both groins. The whole is then bound tight with a bandage round the upper arms.
Sometimes this abscess is treated artificially with the cautery instead of cutting it open with an iron instrument; and you should take a fine lancet-shaped cautery and cut the skin covering the testicles with it; and let it be heated as we have described until white pus containing water appears; then take the cautery in this shape.
This phrase is written in medieval Latin. The translation of 'assimilar' is to assimilate or resemble, however, the whole sentence does not make sense grammatically nor semantically when translated into English. There seems to be a part missing at the end of this sentence that would give it more context and meaning.
Then bore this with the cautery until white pus containing water comes out; and let it be heated as we have described until all moisture has been discharged.
Then open this abscess with hooks, scrape it with a fine heated cautery and cut into it as far as possible until you remove all of the matter inside.
Take care that fire does not come in contact with the egg.
And you should be aware that this procedure is safer, less prone to causing blood flow and better than cutting open the wound.
But if during the cutting or cauterization process you encounter any complications such as hot abscesses, blood flow, or something else; then you must treat this complication with the appropriate therapy described above.
If, however, the patient is timid and does not expect to survive this operation due to its horrific nature: then perform the perforation as I have described it, and that will be sufficient.
When you have confirmed for yourself, as we described regarding the indications, that the limb is waterlogged: then it is necessary to make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Next, perforate the abscess in its lower part with a spatula that is one finger-width wide: and make the perforation according to the length of the body, leaving it open until all the water has drained out.
Then place a poultice on the spot and bind it in place, leaving it so that any remaining water can drain out: then treat the wound until it is fully healed.
If however there is an impediment to the water draining at the time when you perforate it: and this happens because the white membrane impedes progress through the wound's opening, preventing the water from exiting: then you should insert a feather into the wound, or else a tool for extracting hydroptic fluid that has already been used previously: or else add something to the operation of the wound itself.
And be aware that water will return and accumulate after around six months have passed. Once it has therefore accumulated, then it should be perforated in the same way again, allowing the patient to pass their days accordingly.
Chapter 63.
On treating fleshy excrescences:
Be aware that in this excision of the fleshy growth, fear leads many to their death. Therefore, it appears to me that his dismissal is a means to preserve [the patient's] health.
And I recall performing an operation on it, and the type of abscess.
I say, then, that many abscesses occur in the body, from which testicles are formed; and this happens for many reasons, to wit.
Or from an acute excess, or an acrid one, which is discharged into the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the colour of the abscess is like that of the body, and no pain is felt; and the abscess is severe.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, of a dark colour, and no sensation is felt [with it].
And sometimes it happens from the knotting of arteries, and their swelling; as has already been recalled above; or from the swelling of veins.
That which is from these [abscesses] from the swelling of arteries is recognized by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers. And one must not touch it directly [to examine it].
That which happens from the swelling of veins does not discharge anything upon compression with the fingers.
And now it is possible that an incision may be made over this type [of abscess], and over the remaining flesh; and it must be done by cutting through the skin of the testicles. Then extend the egg upwards, and extract it with a white cloth; and free the spermatic cord from the testicles, and tie the testicles; and cut the spermatic cord after you free it from every part of the egg.
If the egg is consolidated with those newborn meats, then you must draw out the egg and cut it.
And if there is adhesion between something from the siphon or that which is between the vases, then you must free all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If, however, there is a birth of meat in the place of adhesion which is behind, then you must cut all of it and extract the egg as we have said.
Once your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 64.
On treating piles which is with leeches... (Translation incomplete as text was truncated)
A grape is an abscess wrapped in a certain wrapping, like a boil, with softening of the testicles; and it becomes difficult for the patient to move, exercise, or walk.
And in the treatment of this illness there is fear, because of that which preceded its remembrance.
Indeed we must say the procedure for it as the first ones did.
I say, therefore, that you must make the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then push the supporter of the testicles to the bottom. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with vases which are near the rod; and let another assistant hold it, and stretch it with a violent stretching.
Then make an incision with a sharp, two-span wide spatula with a transverse cut across the straight vessels until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape off all the skin as we have previously instructed you when removing arteries from the temples.
Afterwards fasten to these a needle which has twice the length of thread and tie it on the first spot where they happen upon vines; then tie it again at their last end. Then cut it open at the middle crosswise along its length and extract what has coagulated out of foul humors.
Then treat the wound with the treatment for other wounds that you wish to produce pus so that the vessels which nourish one of the testicles may fall out. It is not an evil for this reason.
But if the vine happens to all vessels then it is necessary that for this reason the testicles be removed with their vessels so that they are not deprived of egg nourishment because of an incision and shrivel up or dry out and cannot produce offspring with them.
Head 65.
On the treatment of intestine roots.
The cause of these roots is from an incision that happens in the sifach extended over the abdomen in the groin area below mirach stomach.
Why do the intestines come down from that rupture to one of the testicles? And this rupture is either from the sifach or its extension.
These two types happen for many reasons such as a blow or jumping or shouting or lifting something heavy and the like.
And a sign is when there is an extension of the sifach. It is what happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; it is an equal abscess towards the deep part because the sifach compresses the intestine.
And its sign is when there is a cutting of the sifach because it causes severe pain to happen suddenly at first; and it is an abscess that faces inwards, appearing under the skin nearby: and this is due to the exit of the intestine, and its course towards the outer parts of the sifach.
And sometimes it leaves with the intestine the bag; and this is called 'Ramex intestinalis', and a hernia; and sometimes it happens with wind.
And sometimes feces run into the intestine and are retained there; and it is harmful to the patient because it causes severe pain, especially when pressed upon.
And, with regard to the cure of this disease by means of the knife, there is fear; therefore one must guard against accidents therein.
And the way of operating is to order the patient, if he obeys returning, to reduce the intestine with his hand into the interior of his hollow. Then let him lie prone on his neck between your hands; and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows onto the upper skin, and cut all the scrotal skin lengthwise. Then fix hooks in the two lips of the incision according to what you need for opening the incision with them; and let the incision be made as wide as possible so that an egg can come out through it.
Scrape the scrotum and what is under the skin of the testes until you uncover a white, hard sifach from all sides; then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, into that which is between the white sifach underneath the skin, and the second sifach, and absolutely with it, the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the scrotum.
Then move with your right hand towards the interior of the testicle's skin and as you do so, stretch the white sifach upwards with your left hand; raise the testicle together with the sifach to the side of the incision and ask an assistant to stretch the testicle upwards while you release the adhesion that is behind it once this process is complete.
Use your fingers to check there is nothing from the intestine wrapped around the white, hard sifach. However, if you find anything from it, push this to the lower abdomen.
Next, take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads of linen and insert it in the last sifach, that is, the skin covering the testes which follows the incision; then cut the protruding ends of the thread until you are left with four threads. Compose some of these threads over the others in a cross-like figure and tie them with this alsifach, which we have mentioned as being under the skin of the testes by the strong ligament; do so until neither vessel can send anything to nourish it for fear of causing a hot abscess. Place another ligament on top of the first one, outside of it, at least two fingers away from it. After these two ligaments have been placed, remove from the sifach under the skin of the testes an amount equivalent to a finger's length; then cut away all the remainder around it in a circular fashion and take out the testicle.
Then cut off the lower part of the scrotal skin with a surgical instrument, from which blood and pus flow, as we described earlier.
Next, apply wool soaked in oil to the wound: and use the ligature as described. And sometimes the white cautery we mentioned is used, after its incision to stop the flow of blood. For this often happens. And leave the ligature in place until it falls off by itself.
If however its falling off is delayed, then it should be soaked with warm water: and the item we mentioned should be placed on it until it falls away.
Next treat the wound with the remaining standard treatments for wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter 61.
Regarding Ramice spongiosa (cancellous bone).
In this type of spongy bone I have not seen anyone who has dared to operate on it with a knife.
And those who first discovered this said that it happens as we described for spongy bone accompanied by periosteum. That is, you should bind strips of cloth to the bones after its incision with ease below; then cut it in the middle, and treat it finally using what opens it, until the strips fall away: and treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter 62.
Regarding ruptures which occur in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we mentioned, and the site protrudes, and not any part of the intestines descends to the testicles: but if it does descend, that is little, and it returns every hour: truly if time passes with this, a fissure is added to the scrotum until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And it happens due to an extension of the scrotum, which is located in the groin, as we mentioned. That is, because the scrotum extends; then it softens, the site becomes abscessed, and it protrudes.
And its treatment is with cauterization, as the previous account has stated.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, in this manner: that is, for the patient to lie on their back between your hands. Then cut the abscessed and protruding site of the rupture with an incision across its width, according to the length of three fingers.
Then grasp the alifac and that which is beneath the skin until it has been pulled out; when the white scrotum underneath the skin following it is detected.
Then take an iron rod and place it on the protruding site of the scrotum, pushing it down deep into the abdomen.
Then sew the two protruding sites at the end of the iron rod from the scrotum, attaching one to the other with a suture; then extract the end of the iron rod.
And do not make an incision at all into the scrotum, nor stretch the testicles or anything else, as I have made you aware of previously regarding treatment for hernia of the intestines.
Then treat it with a cure for wounds. When you cut the thread, clean it, and restore the wound until it is healed.
For sisach contracts, and does not add to the prominence of rupture.
And a caustic is better in this place, for it is nearer to the cure.
Chapter 68.
On softening the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles softens often in certain men, which causes the flesh between them to soften and disfigure their appearance.
So it is necessary for him who seeks its cure to make the patient lie face down on his back and cut away all of the skin which has softened onto their natural skin.
Then gather the two lips together with a suture; and if you wish, sew the superfluity of softened skin first with three or four sutures, then secure the wound.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat any remaining wounds until they heal and the stitches fall out.
Chapter 69.
On castration.
Know that castration is forbidden by our law; and for this reason it might be permissible for me not to recall it in my book at all; yet its recollection proves necessary in two ways.
One of these is so that the physician may possess knowledge when asked about it; and to know its cure for one who has undergone such a thing.
One other method is that we often require the castration of certain animals for our use as livestock, such as rams, goats, and cats, and similar among animals.
I say therefore that castration is performed in two ways. Either by scraping or cutting off the testicles. Or by making an incision and then dividing [the testes].
In the procedure that is done by scraping or cutting off the testicles, the way of operating is as follows: have the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and relax and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and are no longer apparent to touch.
In the procedure that is done by making an incision and then dividing [the testes], you must hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligament and cut above each egg with one incision until two eggs appear; then make an incision in them after you have scraped away the tunics of both, without allowing anything to come out except for a thin film over the vas deferens.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by scraping or cutting off the testes because abrasion may leave something from the testicles so that the animal still has desire for intercourse.
Then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On caring for an hermaphrodite, there are two methods.
An hermaphrodite comes from men in two ways. One of them is because it appears on what follows the space or on the skin of the testicles, between the two testicles, a shape like a woman's vulva, with hair; and sometimes urine runs from what is on the skin of the testicles.
There is one type in women, and it is the woman's vulva like a man's small testicles entirely prominent to the outside; of which one is like Priapus [an ithyphallic deity], and two are like two testicles.
And the cure for three types [of this condition], two from men and one type from women, is: because you must cut away the added flesh until the impression of them has disappeared. Then treat it with the cure for other wounds.
For the second type of men from which urine comes out, that is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation and nor is there any cure for it at all.
Chapter 71.
On incising warts and raised flesh on the vulva of women.
A wart is perhaps added on top of the natural [part], until it becomes ugly and its appearance becomes unsightly; and sometimes it grows in some women so much that it becomes enlarged like in men and reaches up to the point of sexual intercourse.
So you must hold the superfluity of the wart with your hand or a hook and cut it; and do not hesitate to make the incision, especially at the root that is deep down; so that heavy bleeding does not occur.
Then treat it with the cure for wounds until it has healed.
Flesh that grows at the opening of the womb is flesh that develops until it fills up said space; and perhaps extends to the outside in a form resembling a tail, and for this reason some of the ancients called the disease 'tailed'. We should therefore cut it out like we do with warts, and treat it until it is healed.
On the treatment of alratic ulceration, which is a woman's unpierced wound.
Chapter 72.
Alratic ulceration is when there is an unpierced wound on a woman or a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental alratic ulceration is due to an illness that has occurred beforehand, and it itself arises either from additional flesh born of the womb's lining or its membrane, and happens either deep within the uterus or in its sides, top, or bottom; and prevents intercourse as well as impregnation, childbirth, and perhaps even menstruation.
Its diagnosis is made through the observation of midwives if the obstruction is apparent nearby.
But if it's not visible, then search for it with your fingers or a rod.
However, if the obstruction is due to a thin membrane and it's near the two lips of the vagina, then quickly rupture it.
And this is done by placing swabs over the two lips.
Then place both your index fingers together; the woman should be on her back with her legs spread. Then extend the two lips with strength until the sifach is torn open and the blockage is revealed.
After that, take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the site; the woman should repeat this daily so that another scar does not form.
But if the sifach is thick and dense, then it must be cut out with a spatula that is two spans wide, similar to the leaf of a myrtle tree.
However, if the blockage is made of flesh, then lift it with hooks and cut it; have on hand medicines that will stop blood flow without stinging, such as gum arabic, dragon's blood, and oil mixed with egg white.
Then insert a lead pipe of sufficient size so that the wound does not heal quickly; leave it in place for several days and apply a linen poultice before treating with other medicines until healing is complete.
And when birth defects of other flesh arise, they must be cut out in this way: for as long as the abscess is not a cancerous one (for with a cancerous abscess that is in the womb, iron must on no account be used).
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of haemorrhoids, athehelil, and red botches on women's vulvas.
Haemorrhoids indeed are the opening of the veins until much blood flows out persistently.
When haemorrhoids are dried up they become athehelil; and I have already spoken of the different kinds and their symptoms in another section, and here will say which of them can be treated and which cannot.
I say, therefore, that haemorrhoids which are present in the opening of the womb and not apparent to the senses cannot be treated with iron.
Those among them which are present in the opening of the womb on which there is an impact from a sense [i.e., that can be perceived], those can be cured.
It is necessary, therefore, to put the woman into a cold house. Then pull out the haemorrhoids with forceps or an abrasive cloth, cutting them from their roots.
Then sprinkle on them near the flow of blood one powder from the cut up ingredients without mixing: such as acacia [gum arabic], dragon's blood [red resin], frankincense oil and similar things.
Then push her feet to the wall for one hour. Afterwards place her into cold water.
But if the bleeding persists then make her sit in a decoction of sumac [a flowering plant], pomegranate rinds, galls and similar things.
Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar to make a plaster from it on her back.
If the blood stops with it then that's good; if not, attach cupping glasses to her back and breasts without scarifying [i.e., making incisions in her skin].
Then take wool and soak it in the juice of thapsia [a toxic plant], or the juice of a stingray, or the juice of the branches of the oleander (i.e., dogbane), Pontic wine, and attach it with leather.
When the abscess quiets down, then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Barth, however, is red like the heads of garlic, and it has a rough appearance.
It is necessary, therefore, that you cut out what appears from it, as I said before regarding the equal edges; and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of the cervix which occurs in the womb.
There are many types of abscesses that occur in the womb, such as cancer, stony abscess, ulcer, scrofula, eczema, haemorrhoids, fistulas, anal fissure, and hot abscess.
And I have indeed already described all these diseases and their types, as well as their signs and treatments, in the relevant sections; it is necessary for me to speak in this treatise about hot abscess which occurs in the womb from among the types of abscesses that discharge pus, and you wish to know how its incision with an iron instrument takes place.
It is necessary, therefore, for you to pay attention. Then if the abscess pain in its initial stage is sharp with its throbbing, and burning sensation, and fever; and you see it becoming red; if the sense of feeling falls upon it, then do not hurry with its incision; and treat it with what assists over maturation until such time as the severity of symptoms quiets down.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a seat washed with two seats, and reclines, or be propped up over her back, and she gathers her feet to the lower part of her belly; and her hips are spread out, and places both arms under her knees, and binds them with two appropriate ligaments to it.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and use the tool to open the maternal orifice.
And when you want to use this tool, it is necessary that you insert the rod deep into the woman's womb, so as not to let what enters from the instrument go further than the depth of the womb and injure the patient.
However, if the tool is longer than that depth, then you must place pegs on the cover of the womb's depth to prevent the tool from entering fully into the womb's depth and injuring the patient. It is necessary for the assistant to place the handle which runs in the tool above [or outside] and hold the tool while the assistant rotates the handle until the opening of the womb's depth.
Once the emerging part is visible, can be touched by hand and feels soft and gentle, it must then be cut at its head with a wide spatula.
When the blood is evacuated, it must be treated with linen soaked in rose oil or green [resin] oil that has a certain styptic property; apply the linen and extract the piece from deep within the womb.
And place externally over the womb and on top of the pubic hair clean wool soaked in warm water containing apples.
Then it should be treated after two days with the ointment suitable for that until healing occurs.
And when the womb and wound are washed, such that they are cleansed with an enema of water and honey; then with water boiled with lily root or long aristolochia; before returning to ointment.
If a wound is hidden internally within the womb, then one must refrain from treating it with iron instruments; rather, treat it with what we mentioned earlier in the section on [wounds of] division.
Chapter 70.
Treatise on Obstetrics: How to treat live embryos that emerge with an unnatural shape.
It is necessary for midwives to recognize the form of normal birth first.
Thus, the signs of this are as follows: when you see a woman pressing down with her lower body, and wanting to sniff the air, and what is above her relaxes, and she hastens the birth of the embryo: then know that this is natural childbirth, and it is an exit over its head, and the second stage is together with it; either suspended or hanging by the navel.
When you see these signs, then one ought to compress her abdomen so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends over its head, the second stage descends with it, and is cleaned of those superfluities by a good cleansing.
Any birth other than this is unnatural, to be deplored.
Sometimes a fetus emerges on its feet, and its body comes out before its head, with one or both of its feet and hands; or its head and hands come out; or the breech presents itself; and perhaps it turns over onto its neck, along with similar unnatural forms.
It is thus necessary for midwives to be prudent and subtle in all these matters, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every form among them, and how it behaves within this, and what it signifies by that, and how one should sit on top of it [i.e., deliver the baby].
When the fetus emerges on its own head and this causes great strain on the woman, making childbirth difficult for her, and you see her strength already weakened: then have her sit on a chair, or have other women hold her; and apply vapor of wool with fenugreek decoction and moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert a small spatula between her fingers and tear the perineum with it, cutting it with her nail until all of its moisture runs out; and she should press on the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then the woman must be given an enema of fenugreek mucus with sesame oil.
Then tell her to press herself together after the enema; make her sneeze with ground cumin, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour at a time. The fetus will come out immediately.
If the fetus's two hands come out first, you must join them together gently and slowly. If it does not comply upon entry, then have the woman sit on a chair and raise her feet up; shake the chair onto the ground; and make sure the woman is held so she doesn't fall during the shaking.
If the hands still do not come out and the fetus dies, then cut them and extract the rest of the fetus; tie its hand with a cloth and draw it out gently; for it shall emerge.
The exitus of an embryo whose feet come first. When a fetus comes out on its feet, then it should be pushed upward; the midwife should slowly turn it around and draw it forth equally.
Then he should take one of his feet and stretch it slowly.
When they therefore come out as far as the thighs, then bid him be compressed, and make him sneeze with force; for it will come out, if God pleases.
And if it does not come out as we have described, then bring back the fetus little by little until you place it in its natural position. For itself will then come out with an easy exit.
But if it is hindered by all that we have described, then take from the mucilage of the Althaea plant, and oil of Sesamum, and dissolved gum; and beat all these things well in a mortar: then with this, anoint the woman's woolen apron and her lower belly. Then make her sit in warm water until she feels it in the hypochondrium.
When therefore you see that her lower parts are now heated, then make a suppository of myrrh for her: and place it inside. When therefore she has held the suppository for one hour, then make her sit upon a seat. Then make her sneeze, and hold her mouth and nose shut; then press the lower part of her belly with a gentle pressure. For the fetus will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus should be onto the knees and hands. When it comes out in this manner, then you should deliver by gradually inserting your hands. Then the woman should lie down on her neck, and let her feet hang towards the floor; she should be lying on a bed, with her hands folded. Then press gradually upon her abdomen. Then remove what is beneath her feet from the mattresses, until she is prepared in the lower part (of the bed). If the fetus does not exit, then take her feet and move them with a violent motion. Then press gradually on what is above the hypocondrium, until the fetus ascends towards the upper part (of the abdomen). Then introduce your hands and equalize the fetus gradually; tell the woman to push down until the fetus exits (the birth canal).
The fetus exits hanging horizontally from the hands. Her hand should be gently manipulated when being brought back down (to its normal position). If you cannot bring her hand back down, then lift the woman up and make her walk (around).
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed; shake her legs with a violent shaking motion.
Then apply the ointment you have prepared from the mucilages (linseed).
If she has taken hold of the newborn, then make her sit on a chair (to recover). Then strive to bring her hand back down and equalize the fetus according to its natural form; make the woman sneeze and tell her to push until it exits (the birth canal).
The fetus's exit over its own neck, with hands spread out, and his face is toward his mother's back. The midwife must hold the fetus's hand; then she should gradually rotate it and equalize it with ease.
When it is equalized, then place on its head what we described earlier from oil and mucilages.
Then order him to move gradually. When you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and order her to lean to the right side. Then order her to be compressed; and make her sneeze with pressure.
The fetus's exit prepared on its side. When it descends to the uterine orifice with the afterbirth in this way, then cut the afterbirth with your nail until it is evacuated of moisture.
If it is suspended over the fetus's face and its neck, then cut it from the navel; so that it is not retained, and dies.
Then push the fetus into the depths until you place it where it should be; and order the woman to compress herself several times; for it will indeed exit by a light passage.
The exit of twins or of many fetuses. Know that twins are often born; and sometimes three, or even four, are born. However, this is extraordinary, and rarely happens.
There are five things that are beyond nature and do not truly live; though they increase in number, one caul contains them all, and the navel string separates each from its neighbour.
And sometimes they are born as a single fetus through the natural and easy exit; or they may be born through the other unmentionable exit, as we have described.
If some of them are difficult at birth and come to that which we have mentioned as an unnatural presentation, then treat them as we have described; let there be a skilled midwife, who will act with skill and caution, and the child must be delivered according to every form with what is prepared for it in order to ensure its safety.
A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos, some of which may be aborted.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, or two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more - ten; I have already witnessed a woman who aborted seven fully-formed embryos, while another had aborted as many as fifteen.
This was ascertained by the measurement of an illustrious sage.
All this, therefore, ought to be within the knowledge of any obstetrician. Perhaps it may happen to them in a similar way; so they should oppose this with what is necessary.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus as I have described regarding its extraction and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manual manipulation, then you must be mindful of the following.
If the woman is of sound virtue and is not afflicted by any of the conditions that pose a risk to her life, then she should lie on her back on a bed with her head tilted downwards and her legs elevated; an assistant should hold her from both sides or she should be tied to the bed so that her body is not dislodged during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with marshmallow, fenugreek, and linseed.
The midwife should then anoint her hand with these oils and mixes; she can then easily insert it into the womb. She should then seek with her for the place where she can hook the fetus' limbs and suitable places to do so.
Therefore consider, if the fetus is ready to be delivered head-first: hook it by its eyes or neck, mouth, palate, under its chin, armpits, sides or below its ribs.
If, however, it is descending by its feet then hook it by the comb of its head or middle of its back.
She should hold the hook with her right hand and place its curve between the fingers of her left; she can then easily insert her hand and secure the hook to one of those places mentioned until she reaches an empty space.
Then she should hook another or even third if needed to ensure equal contraction and prevent any tilt towards one side.
Then it should be extracted with equal traction and not just straight but rather moved to all sides so as to ease its exit; in the same way that a tooth is removed.
And it must be softened where there is an interval between them to extend it. If a part of it is retained, then the midwife must anoint certain fingers with oil and insert them from that side so she can turn with them what has been retained.
So if part of the fetus exits, then switch the hooks to another place that is higher: do this until the entire fetus exits.
If one hand exits before the other, and it's not possible to draw it back because of its contraction, then it must be wrapped with a cloth. Then draw it out until it exits completely; cut it either at the ankle or elbow joint: and so you must do this with the other hand and both feet.
But if the fetus's head is large or it gets stuck during exit, or there's a build-up of water in its head, then one must insert between the fingers a spine-shaped spatula and cut open its head with it to draw out the water; or tear it apart using an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
Similarly, if the fetus is of a large-headed nature, then one must cut it with an instrument called 'algengematu': or draw it out with a misdach, as we've said. Then you must draw the bones out with forceps.
If the head exits and gets stuck at the bifurcation, then it must be cut open until the moisture within the chest is emptied.
If it does not form a knot and fails to follow the path out, then cut open the head in pieces as best you can.
If there is an abscess in the lower abdomen or it is swollen with fluid, then you must pierce it until moisture flows out of it.
If the fetus is positioned with its feet first, then it is easy to pull out and guide it towards the mother's pelvis.
If the obstruction is at the abdomen or chest, then you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; rip open the abdomen or chest until their contents flow out.
If the rest of its body is removed and only the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the mother's pelvis is open, then the midwife should insert her hand deep inside and search for the head with her fingers, drawing it towards the mouth of the pelvis; next she must insert a hook or two hooks and pull it out with these.
If the mother's pelvis is constricted by a hot abscess, then you should not work on it but instead drain off moist and fatty substances; apply poultices and sit in softening and moisturizing waters.
If the fetus is on its side, then it may be brought straight; next do what we said for a live baby.
If this is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
And you must make sure that nothing of the afterbirth remains inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then apply what we said earlier for hot swellings that occur on the womb.
If there should be any bleeding, then apply styptic waters, and continue with the rest of the treatment.
And I myself have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus; afterwards she became pregnant again on top of it, later the other fetus also died. So it happened to her after a long time that there was a swelling on her navel and it became swollen until it opened up and started discharging pus.
I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
I placed on it some of the strongest drawing plasters; and a bone came out from that place. Then after some days another bone came out too. So I wondered about it because there is no bone inside the belly.
I thought therefore that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
So I examined the wound and extracted many bones while the woman was in better condition; she has now lived like this for a long time, and only discharges very little pus from that place.
And I did not record this here as something strange except that there is knowledge and help for the skilled physician who applies treatment with their hand.
Chapter 77.
On the shapes of instruments necessary for extracting a fetus.
The form of the roller that opens the frame.
Here is the form of the bookbinding tool by which books are squared up; it has two vertical rollers at either end of two pieces of wood that are equal in length. However, this vertical roller should be finer than that of the bookbinding tool, and for this purpose it can be made either of ebony or boxwood.
The width of each piece of wood should be approximately two fingers; the edge of either end is one finger and the length of each is a palm and a half. In between the two pieces of wood are two smaller additions made from the same material whose length is a half-palm plus just a little more, and their width is about two fingers or slightly larger.
These two smaller additions are inserted into the jaw of the frame so that it opens with them when you turn the two vertical rollers.
Another form similar to this one, but finer and lighter.
It should be made of ebony or boxwood in the likeness of a pair of pincers. However, at its end there are two additions as you see above, and the length of each addition is about a palm; their width is approximately two fingers.
When you wish to open the frame with this tool, then have the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging down and what is between her legs exposed. Insert the two connected additions into the frame, holding the end of the tool between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with scissors, evenly according to the size of the opening of the womb's mouth, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another vertigo which they said was the same as that of something pushing, by which the fetus is pushed.
The form of the Almisdac by which the large head is crushed: and it resembles a pair of forceps with teeth at the end, as you can see.
And sometimes it is made oblong, like forceps of this shape, as you can see, with teeth like a saw's, by which the head is cut and crushed.
The form of the 'Vuncus' with one spine.
The form of the 'Vuncus' with two spines.
The form of the 'Spatumilus' with two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two wide 'Spatumili'.
All these instruments are used and the more their types multiply and are prepared by the artisan, the faster they are for his procedure and the higher in esteem among people because of their quantity.
Therefore, do not despise any of these instruments that is not prepared for you. Indeed the need for them is undeniable.
Chapter 78.
On the extraction of the secundine (amniotic sac).
When secundine is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the woman to hold her breath. Then make her sneeze with powder; press your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If it therefore comes out by this means, that is good.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole in its lid; put into it herbs that open the womb's mouth, such as calament, rue, dill, chamomile, sage, woody cassia, and centaury: take all these herbs or some of them and immerse them with water, then place them over fire.
Then place a reed stick over the hole of the pot's lid and the other end into the womb's mouth; let her hold it until the steam reaches the womb's cavity.
Then make her sneeze as we said before. Indeed, the secundine will come out easily.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not come out, then instruct the midwife to immerse her hand in oil of turpentine or marshmallow mucilage. Then she should insert her hand into the vulva and search for the secundine with it. When she finds it, she should grasp it and gradually extend it.
If however it is attached deep inside the womb, then she should insert her hand as we described until finding the secundine and extract it slowly along its length so that the womb does not fall from a strong pull; rather, it needs to be turned gently to right and left sides: afterwards apply an amount of traction. Indeed, it then obeys, and is preserved, and comes away from adhesions.
If the womb is contracted, as we have already explained: treat it with sneezing and with a medicated pot of herbs.
But if it does not come out with everything we have mentioned, then take care not to tire yourself out over it in the process of extracting it.
But whatever comes out at the womb's opening from it, you should tie to the woman's thigh. Then give her an enema with the ointment tetrapharmacon. For it will indeed cause her to go bad after days, and be dissolved, and come out.
But when it goes bad, an unpleasant smell is raised from it to the belly and head, which harms the sick woman. Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be administered to it.
Some of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of watercress, and dried figs.
The shape of an instrument by which the woman is fumigated in the case of a retained afterbirth, and of menstruation.
It should be made of a glass bottle similar to an alcama or out of zere: and the broad end is placed over the fire: and let the fumigation be set upon coals: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and repeat another one.
Chapter 79.
On the cure of anus which is not perforated.
Many boys are born with their anuses not perforated, which has already been skillfully plugged by a membrane. Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife perforate this membrane with her finger; and if not, she must do so using a sharp spade; taking care of the testicles, lest they be touched.
Then place upon it wool soaked in wine and oil. After that, treat it with ointment until it is healed.
However, if you fear that it will become blocked again, then place a leaden tube in the hole for many days and remove it when the boy can defecate without difficulty.
And now an anal blockage also happens due to the scarring of wounds or from pus. Therefore it is necessary that this scar be cut open; then it must be treated in the same way as we have described for the treatment and lead.
Chapter 80.
On the cure of fistulas that occur in the lower part [of the body].
The fistulas that occur below are nodules and swellings which arise near the anus on the outside; or they happen in the space of a single area; and there is one fistula, or several.
When this nodule has aged it is opened up; and from it runs a whitish watery fluid or thin pus.
And sometimes there arise penetrating fistulas from these. Penetrating fistulas are recognised by what comes out during defecation and flatulence, when the patient is suffering from diarrhoea; and perhaps worms come out of them.
And there are among them fistulas that penetrate into the space reaching up to the bladder and up to the urethra of the penis. And there are among them penetrating ones reaching up to the hip joint and up to the tailbone.
From that by which a penetrating fistula up to the anus is recognized, there is also one that does not penetrate; you should insert your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula when it is not tortuous.
If there is a tortuosity in it, then insert into it a thin lead probe or a horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it penetrate fully and nothing comes out of the orifice in terms of discharge nor is there any windiness or worms as I said, then know that it does not penetrate; therefore, hasten to its cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or the urethra of the penis, its sign is that urine will come out from it and it being prevented from this so that the place might be consolidated with medicines.
If it is penetrating up to the hip joint or the bone of the hip, then its sign is that a probe reaches there if there is no tortuosity in it all the way to the bone; and finding pain around that part, and pus always coming out from it: and that medicine does not hold in it nor can it be consolidated with ointment.
And for all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all; and their cure is difficult and vain for the foolish doctors on whom they form.
In non-penetrating wounds that are not old, healing is expected with a knife; as I tell you and have already proven; the patient lies on their back between your hands; elevate their legs up to above the hips and bend the hips towards their belly. Then introduce a lead or brass probe until you know where the fistula ends.
If however the patient feels it around the anus then you must introduce your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel the probe has penetrated and gone through what was detected, beyond what you feel between your finger and the fistula wall or flesh then you know for certain it is a penetrating wound; do not labor over it as there is no healing for it as we said.
They say that flesh can heal and be of benefit to some men from medication; make a fine hot iron according to the size of the fistula as previously described and introduce it into the fistula until it reaches near the anus. Then repeat this twice or three times until you know that all those added filtered flesh parts which are like a bird's quill have been cauterized.
Then dress it with linen bandages steeped in butter until those cauterized flesh parts come out; then treat it with flesh-generating and consolidating ointments.
If therefore it heals then that is good.
And if not, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
And if the probe comes out at another spot and does not reach your finger that is inside the anus; there being between it and the place of issue a thick covering of flesh or a sifac: and you see a fistula in what follows along the surface of the skin, then cut away the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and proceed cutting with the probe that is in the fistula until the cutting reaches where the end of the probe comes to; and the probe is freed and falls out.
Then cleanse those pieces of flesh which resemble the tube of a bird's quill so that nothing remains of them.
But if blood should overcome you and force a separation between yourself and your operation so that you have to desist from cutting those pieces of flesh; it is then better done and more quickly healing if you cauterize it with fire or with a caustic medicine.
For a red-hot iron combines the good qualities of contracting the tissues it burns, checking the blood, and drying up the humors.
Then dress it with lint wrapped in butter, or leaves that have been bruised until the place gives out pus and the burnt pieces of flesh come away into the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments that produce tough flesh; and these are medicines which have both an astringent and desiccating effect.
For when they are restored, then already it is healed; and you need not fear repetition [of the dressing].
But if the fistula has already reached deep inside the anus and is drawn out by the redundancy of the body; then insert your finger into the anus, and probe with it.
If you feel that there is a membrane or flesh between yourself and the patient, which is close to being penetrated, then an operation should not be performed unless it is along the path of trust and hope.
It is because one of three methods should be administered on it: either you cauterize it as we have said; or cut it away until you reach its concave shape so that it becomes possible for you to introduce the licinia and nearby cure. And do not proceed with the cutting too much so that you may not cut into the muscle containing the anus and it happens on the weak excretion of waste without consent. Then cure it with what we have said.
Perhaps it will be cured; or you may stretch the membrane and clean it after you cut it close to the anus as we said either with a probe or another sharp instrument. Then clean those flesh fragments which are exposed by the cut until you can with scrutiny.
Then attempt the restoration of the whole wound with cutting and superior opening where it hardens; and there remains a fistula open on the inside part of the anus, and will be lighter on the weak.
And sometimes a fistula follows in this way; that is when you introduce the probe into the fistula; and it is on the side of the anus about the surface of the body with skin and edge of the anus; then take the perforated end which is like a needle, namely preparing leather, according to this shape. And introduce into it a thread rolled up of five threads, and about the same. Then introduce the probe with a thread into the fistula until it reaches its concavity.
If it is penetrating the margin of the anus internally close by, then extract the thread from that hole so that you insert your finger into the anus and withdraw the end of the thread and gather both ends together: and pull on each one, and leave it for a day or two days: and as much as the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well until those parts of the flesh which are between the two ends of the thread drop off: then treat the wound until it heals.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating then make it penetrate by whatever means prepares itself for you unless it be very deep. For it does not lie in your power to make that happen so that you do not cut into it.
Then treat the wound as we have said until it heals.
Make a spatula with thorns which divides the fistula, whose curvature is very acute and one part of it is not acute so that it does not cut into what need not be, as you see.
Head 81.
On the sewing up of haemorrhoids from which blood flows out due to their cutting: and on treating fissures.
Haemorrhoids occur in two ways. Or they occur inside the anus resembling bags of charcoal or plums or else like actual grains of wheat. And they come small or large: and blood flows from them always either one alone or many. There are some outside the anus and at its extreme ends.
However, those that are outside the anus are mostly of little moisture, from which runs yellow water or a persistent flow of blood; and they correspond in colour to the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to advise the patient to go and have a bowel movement; and it shall be expressed until it comes out of the anus, and you should see what appears to you. Therefore also hang them with hooks; or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
But if they do not hold in the hooks because of their moisture and softening; then take them with a rough cloth or with a cotton swab made from double-weave woollen material, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them again, and sprinkle over them after cutting some hot powders, so that they remain in place as a caustic. Or cauterise them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterisation. Then cure them with the remaining treatment until they heal.
But if the anus does not comply with exiting, then give the patient an enema of a small dose of medicine, so that it washes away what is inside the anus, and complies quickly with exit when the patient evacuates.
If however they are extrinsic from the anus, then their case is light and easy; and it shall be that you take them with your nail or take them with a hook and cut them. Treat them with what we have described until they are healed.
And for those who dread the cutting with an iron blade, you must administer stitches to them in this manner. Take some wound thread, and insert it into the needle. Then draw the needle towards you, and make it penetrate with its point from the other side; and wind two turns of thread around the lower part of the needle to be crossed laterally; then tie the needle firmly with a strong ligature. Then knot the thread, and draw out the needle.
Do this with all the ligatures, leaving one of them; do not tie it too tightly so that excess blood may flow from it.
Then place over the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or caarob syrup, and put it on the wound; and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave it there until it falls off.
When the ligatures have fallen off, treat them with ointments and the rest of their treatment until they are healed.
On the treatment of fissures. Indeed they often happen due to drying out of the faeces and constriction of nature.
When they are thus hardened and medicine is of no avail, you must scrape them with the point of a spatula or your nail until they become moist, and remove from them the upper layer which prevents their healing. Then treat them until they heal as required.
If they do not heal, treat them again with greater force than the first time, until they bleed a lot and then dress them until they are healed.
The treatment of inverted and not-inverted piles, and drying them with alum or ants.
Chapter 82.
You should know that a pile is only a round knot, the same colour as the body, resembling the head of a nail; it can occur anywhere on the body, particularly in the lower parts of the feet and toes; they cause pain when walking.
It is therefore necessary to cut what surrounds the head of the nail and hold it with forceps or a hook, then root out its base.
Then treat it; if you wish, cauterise it according to what was prescribed in its own chapter.
A dry pile is a small, rough elevation, like a grain, raised above the surface of the body. They often occur on children's hands.
To treat it, you should stretch the pile and cut it; or bind it with silk thread, or with a hair until it falls off. If you wish, cauterise it with fire or a caustic substance as has been mentioned; now invert the pile and remove both inverted and normal piles with the instrument I shall name.
An ant is also a small grain raised above the surface of the body and going deep down; when it meets cold, one feels in it something like an ant bite; it occurs all over the body but mostly on the hands.
The cure for this is to take a small tube made from a goose quill, or a strong vulture's feather; place the tube over an ant until it fills the circle of the tube with its body parts. Then turn your hand with the tube until you cut what is around the ant; place it deep into the flesh and root out the ant from its foundation.
And if you wish, do this with an air or iron tube in this shape.
Let the top of the tube be made to a pointed edge that is rolled inward so as to ease its grip on his finger and its own rotation.
And if you wish to cauterize the ant, as has been mentioned previously about cauterizing Atheli's wound in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter 83.
On the shapes of instruments that are applied to enemas for ailments of the anus, bowel movements, and colic.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, brass, cast or wrought bronze.
And sometimes it is made of these small or large instruments, depending on those into which they are administered.
So that which is administered for the cure of little children should be small; and those whose anuses are weak or painful, their enemas will also be so.
Large enema.
Its tube, that is the upper part into which a bag is tied, should be wide in this way; and it should have markings so you can tie its bag as you see fit, and let its lower end which is inserted into the anus be blunt, that is closed, very soft, tapering to a fine point: and on one of its sides are two holes, and on its other side one hole.
The diameter of the hole should be according to the thickness of the needles and not too thick; they are inserted into a vessel made from an animal's bladder or from thin goat skin, which is shaped like a small asophras with one palm-sized root.
And it should be pierced with many holes like an egg-turning instrument; there should be the space between each hole equal to the thickness of a finger. Then insert into these holes a strong raw thread made of ten or so threads and attach to it an oval-shaped bag like that of the asophras. When this vessel is put on, it should be tied at the head of the enema syringe between its two knobs with a strong binding. Then administer an enema with this device.
This is the shape of the circular vessel depicted here, as well as its holes.
The quality of administering an enema with this device is such that you fill the bag or bladder with medicine that has been heated according to the patient's tolerance; be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should lie on their back and raise their legs; place under them an inthan (leather) or a linen cloth.
Next lubricate the tip of the enema syringe with oil or with white of egg, or with fenugreek mucus, or with similar substances. Then insert it into the anus gently. The attendant should then take the bag with both hands and squeeze it forcefully until everything inside the syringe has been emptied into the intestines.
Then extract the clister, and raise the invalid's legs against the wall.
If medicine thinks he is coming to an end, then hold on as long as you can. And if he sleeps with it all night long, it is more likely to be of help.
However, if you give him an enema in the sickness of his stomach, and he hurries to his end: then repeat the enema until he is healed.
If there are haemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let it be a very fine, gentle enema, with the kind of enemas children are given.
And let this be the form of a gentle enema for when the skin is tight.
Chapter 84.
I have already said in the division of cures for wounds that it suited this book, and I will say here the cure of them with the hand, and with medicines according to what is needed.
I say then, that wounds are differentiated according to the way in which they are made, and according to the place on which the wound falls.
The things by which wounds are made are often like the throwing of a stone: or the incision of a sword, or a knife: or being struck with a spear, or wood, or an arrow: and many other similar objects.
Wounds that are made according to the place on the body are like a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the flank: and similar of those members.
I am describing cures for certain wounds so that I may apply this reasoning and rule to other injuries.
And I shall begin with simple head wounds, since the discussion of compound injuries will come at the beginning of chapter three.
I say therefore. When there occurs in the head a simple wound and no bone fracture: consider then if it be from a blow of a stone or similar, and has already broken only the skin; and is an extensive wound, and you fear that its outcome will be unfavourable, inflamed swelling: then proceed at once with a cephalic phlebotomy, without delay; and extract from him blood according to the degree of his strength: if nothing prevents it from performing a phlebotomy on him, especially if the blood which comes out of the wound is scanty. And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And caution the patient against over-eating, wine, and coarse food.
But if something prevents him from having soft food, then let his diet be reduced in quantity, and let him not approach meat or wine.
And apply to the wound, if an inflamed swelling occurs there, a poultice steeped in rose oil alone, or with wine that has some styptic power.
But if you are confident that there is no danger of inflamed swelling, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh and contains its own blood, and has not been exposed to air, some powder which I shall describe shortly: And if already it has changed due to exposure to air, then apply over it certain ointments until it heals.
If the wound is large or caused by an incision from a sword and similar injuries: if its lips do not join together with poultices, then bring them together yourself using sutures, as I will describe for abdominal wounds and their suturing.
If the wound has already detached from the bone and is hanging loose with no retention except a small sling, then cut it out. Then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard flesh to it where skin should be, and instruct the patient to nourish themselves with foods that are heavy or substantial in nature, such as heads of cabbage, cooked wheat until it is like porridge, and similar things.
If you find putrefaction in the skin and it is not adhering to the bone, then cut away all of the putrid flesh and cast it forth; afterwards treat the wound.
If there is an artery or a vein from which blood is flowing in these wounds and it cannot be stanched by medicine, then sew up over the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then sever it with scissors or ligate it. If the need arises when what we have said cannot be brought to bear, then cauterise it until the blood is stanched.
If these wounds are small and simple then their treatment is easy and light: so sprinkle this powder over them because it will set the wounds before the air changes them.
Recipe for flesh-coloured powder. Take one part frankincense, two parts dragon's blood and three parts unslaked lime; grind everything up a great deal and sift it; then fill the wound with it and bind it tightly so that it adheres well over it and coagulates with the blood.
Then squeeze it from above with pledgets and let it remain, not removing it until such time as the wound will not open up. Make sure that medicine is not removed from him unless he gets healed.
And sometimes chalk alone does that when you do not have frankincense at hand; and blood of the dragon also performs the same operation in many large wounds where it is appropriate to put it on them and squeeze them, being fresh wounds with their own blood which has not been altered by air.
But if they have already been altered by air in some way, especially when it is summer time, then this powder will not be of use; so treat them with what we mentioned before, making sure to put digestive ointments on them or apply poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until they start discharging pus. Then treat them with other remedies until they heal.
If there is a small fracture with the wound, then extract it using forceps; and I will tell you about treatment of fractures of the skull later on.
On wounds to the neck.
But if there is a wound on the neck, then there is no difference between it and any other simple head injury regarding treatment.
But if the nerve of the neck has already been cut then there is no hope; unless it is an artery, in which case treat it with something that causes extreme constriction such as zinebr and zegia along with similar substances. Since they harm nerves and contract them.
And do not place anything cold on the wound at all: since the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most vital part; and let it be cured by medicines that are soft, such as lime washed with water that has been infused several times with oil, or with rose oil and tutia when it is also washed with sweet water: and the other mineral stones, in this way, and moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then apply stitches; or draw together its lips with thread. Then treat it until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep, or a cavity has formed in its lower part where pus has already gathered, then pierce it at the lowest point of that cavity.
If an artery has already been cut in the wound and its flow of blood is lost, then tie it off or burn it; and if need be, cauterize it.
But if the windpipe has already been split or completely severed and the cartilages have been preserved, then bring together the lips of the skin with a stitch over the windpipe, without touching it; but rather, level it off, and restore its natural shape. Then bind it with a suitable bandage and leave it for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have styptic and drying properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has left an impression in a bone, then probe it; and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove them all or as many as you can; but leave any that cannot be removed until the wound is rotten, and its discharge has separated from the bone and abated.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder I described. If there appears to be bone in the wound, and a fistula forms, then treat it with what was described in its own chapter.
Regarding wounds on spades.
If it is a stab wound from a spear or knife, and you see its depth, then consider the following. If breath escapes from the wound when the patient gasps, then you know that the injury is fatal.
If it is not deep and is recent with its blood still there, then do not apply powder or bind it tightly at first so that blood is not held back in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart and kills the patient; instead, place on it an attracting ointment and loosen it twice a day.
If you do not have the ointment available, then place on the wound opening an old piece of cloth to absorb what comes out of it due to humidity; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what collects there runs off.
If three or more days have passed since the injury, and the patient has not had any convulsions, nor a bad heart tremor, nor tightness in their gasping breaths, and you see that his other symptoms are good, then know that the wound is healed. Treat it with dressings and the rest of the treatment until it is cured.
If its healing is neglected, and it always opens up again, then know that a fistula has formed there. Treat her therefore from her own chapter.
And if the wound is from an incision of a sword or knife and it's simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what preceded for stitching if it's large; or with powder if it's small.
If however it has already made an impression on the bone and chipped off a piece from it: then examine the wound, and hurry to remove those pieces if they are separated. If however they are not separated, then leave them until the wound decays, for their extraction will be eased.
The judgement of the other accidental wounds in the remaining members as regards treatment is that same judgement we have said before.
ยง On wounds of the belly, and the exit of the intestine, and their exitus.
The rupture which happens to the belly is great, or middle-sized, or small.
Therefore from the great one sometimes an intestine exits, or a number of intestines exit.
Why this happens is that their introduction and stitching is more violent and difficult.
And the small rupture also becomes difficult in another way. It follows therefore that their reduction is more difficult if you don't hurry with introducing them to their place immediately: for it swells up, opens and becomes enlarged: which makes its entrance difficult.
For this reason therefore the medium rupture is better than that of the disruptions: for with it the reduction of the intestine isn't difficult as it is in these two types.
You know that sewing veins can be done in four ways.
Two common stitches are suitable for sewing the belly and all other bodily wounds; two other stitches are specifically used for other wounds. However, they are more specific for sewing the belly; I will tell you about each with an explanation and clarification.
I say, therefore, that when a wound is small and something protrudes from the intestine, making it difficult to restore, then this is one of two methods. Or because of the smallness of the tear, as I said; or because there is an inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When this is the case, you should warm it by submerging a sponge or damp cloth in lukewarm water alone. Or you could boil it in water with mallow, rushes, wheat spikes, and embrocation until the inflation subsides.
Sometimes, wine with astringent properties will do this; it is better than water alone at resolving the inflation.
Once you see the inflation has resolved, moisten the intestine with water in which marshmallow or mallow has been boiled. For by this means its entry is eased with something small.
If however its entry is blocked after this treatment, then find the small tear with the instrument they use to cut haemorrhoids.
The first cure is better when prepared than cutting; there is no need to force the cutting once you have lost the tool.
One part of it is curved, sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and its pointed end should not be as fine as a spatula, rather it should be slightly blunter; and that is what resembles lime, as you see.
Thus when the wound is enlarged and it enters the intestine, then one ought to reduce it back into its own place according to its natural form if that is possible over it; for this is better.
But when the rupture is wide in the lower part of the belly: then you ought to have the sick person lie on their back and place their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place their head and chest higher than their lower parts.
And similarly if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your attention and consideration always on this: that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And thus you ought to administer this for large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
For small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then ensure that there is present a pious attendant between your hands who holds the entire rupture with their hand and draws its lips together. Then have someone who follows the suture clean off something after something from it: and this is the way of a single common suture.
And it happens that you take a needle or the number of needles according to the size of the wound's width. Then remove from the end of the wound a quantity equal to the ring finger, that is, [the length of] the physician's [ring] finger; and fix the needle with one end inside it, in such a way as you introduce into it the thread at both ends of the skin along with both ends of the sifac that lies underneath the skin, until you make it penetrate from the other side: and you have now brought together the two ends of the skin and the two ends of the sifac; and there are four orders [of stitching].
Then bind with double thread around the needle several times from both sides at once, until the two lips of the wound are joined together decorously.
Then remove the thickness of another finger as well, and fix into these [wounds] another needle; afterwards straighten it with thread, just as you did with the first needle. Therefore you do not stop doing this with as many needles as are needed, until you have completed the binding of the whole wound.
And [the needles] should be of medium thickness between thick and thin; for thin needles very quickly cut the flesh, and thick ones are difficult to introduce into the skin. Because of this, it is necessary that they have a medium thickness and thinness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed at both ends of the skin close by: so that flesh is not cut quickly and the wound opened up before its healing, nor are they stretched with the stitching until the wound is prevented from healing.
Then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not harm the patient in their sleep; and put on them small pads made from cloth on every side, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave [the pads] until you know that the wound has now healed.
This particular type of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds. Because one needle or two, or about that number of them is sufficient for the suturing of these.
The second type of suture is common, such that you bring together with the suture four ends; two ends of skin and two ends of fascia in place of one, with a needle on which there is thread wound evenly in fineness and thickness.
Then when you have pierced with the needle these four ends, bring back the needle from that side where you began them, so that the drawn thread may fall on the upper part of the wound; and let the suture be like the stitch used in sewing cloths together, putting a thickness equal to the little finger between every suture.
This suture is known to men.
And with this suture I myself sutured the wound of a man who had been wounded with a knife in his belly; there was a gash over one palm's width and about two palms' length of intestine had come out from the middle of the gut, and there was a disruption in the center of the abdomen.
I therefore brought it back after his gut had lain outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound therefore healed within about fifteen days; and I treated him, and he was cured: and he lived after that for many years, conducting his affairs.
And the physicians had judged that it would not heal.
And by a miracle it was, that I did not treat him with any ointment. Because I was in a place where no ointment or anything medicinal could be found. I therefore dressed the wound twice a day with an old poultice, and I attended to its washing with honey water until it was healed.
I will speak of two types of stitches that are particularly suited for this, following the description in the text.
This means that you should start with an acute stitch by inserting the needle from the outside to the inside.
When the needle has penetrated through the skin and is entering the flesh according to the length and width of the entire body: let one end come out on the side from which you inserted the needle, and make the other end penetrate from the inside towards the outside at the other end at merach.
Once you have made it penetrate, then make the other end of this stitch penetrate from the outside to the inside at this same merach end; and let the sifac end that is on this side go through, and make the needle go into the other end from the inside towards the outside: and make your penetration as you do with the one going into the sifac merach end until it has penetrated right through.
Then start again from this same side and pick up the thread with the end that is at sifac on the other side, then draw out the needle from the skin through which it has passed.
Then bring it back to that skin and pick up the thread with the sifac end which is on the other side along with this mirach end; then draw out the needle from the skin through which it came, doing so once after another: and do so alternately until you have done all of them in an alternating fashion according to this pattern.
The essence of this stitch is that you should do your stitches like those used for tanning hides or pelts so that they are sewn with one end of the thread coming out alternately on one side and then the other side of the skin's edge: and leave it in an alternating fashion from each side until you have completed them all.
The second type of stitch, as described by Galen.
His speech is narrated as if he were comparing it to the way some doctors do it, so that they bring together every part of the wound according to its corresponding natural shape: and they attach one end of sifac to another end, and one end of mirach to another. And it is done as I tell you.
You must pierce the needle into the end of mirach nearest you from the outer side, and make it pass through to the inner one on its own; and leave the two ends of sifac free. Then turn the needle around, and make it pass from the outer side to the inner one through the two ends of sifac, that is on either side.
Then turn both around, and make them pass through from the inner to the outer side into the other two ends of mirach, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common simple stitch, and it is the stitch whose description has just been given.
This then is Galen's teaching also.
And some have said... The belly is stitched with two needles. That is to pass the same thread through both of them; and beginning with the insertion of the needle from that which is nearest you, make it go right through to the other side according to the stitches on those who have equal hides.
And you must know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly; then its stitch is more difficult than those of other parts of the belly.
The judgment of a wound's treatment is the judgment of other wounds.
Which is, because when you acquire a fresh wound with its blood, before it is altered by the air; and you cleanse, dry and prepare it; then place it over incarnant powder.
If the air has already altered the wound, then apply over it some ointments that are at hand to you until they form pus; and the filaments fall out, scabs form, and healing occurs. Then treat it like the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
However, if you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply over it immediately an old piece of cloth once it begins to discharge pus; and change it twice a day as I taught you until it is healed.
For you do not require another medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may affect the major limbs by its injury, then you should immerse soft wool in tepid warm oil or in rose oil; and place it around the places between the groins and under the armpits.
If the patient feels pain or colic, or putrefaction of the intestines (for this often happens), then you should administer an enema to them with astringent wine, black and tepid; especially if putrefaction has already reached the intestine and is about to break through into his abdomen.
And note that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal; and what comes from the delicate parts is more difficult to treat.
The part of the intestine known as the jejunum does not heal at all from a wound that occurs in it; this is because of its plethora of veins and their large size, as well as the fineness of its tissue and its proximity to nerve fibers.
If the hernia that proceeds from the wound is fresh and you pursue it, bring it back according to your method of reduction as you would reduce intestines uniformly.
However, if time has passed and it already has turned green or black, then you must tie it with thread above the spot where it has darkened so that no blood flows from it. There are veins and arteries in a hernia.
Next make an incision in what is beyond that ligament and leave the two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it; this will alleviate the drawing upon yourself when extracting the hernia and remove its chance to discharge puss from the wound.
ยง A reminder of the wound that occurs in the intestine.
When there is a rupture of the intestine and it is small, then it can be restored in some people; for I have seen one who was wounded in his belly by being struck with a lance, and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and an old wound: and it became a fistula, and there came out from him evacuations and wind.
So I applied a remedy until I had no confidence in its healing; nor did I cease probing it until it was healed and the spot consolidated.
After I saw the spot now consolidated, I feared over the patient that there would happen to him an evil accident in his belly; and this evil event did not befall him. He remained in good health, eating and drinking, having sex, going to the bathhouse, and exercising regularly.
And some experimental surgeons have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be sutured in this manner. And you must take large-headed ants. Then bring together the two lips of the wound and place one ant with its mouth open on top of the two lips of the wound. When it bites down on them and clamps its mouth shut, cut off its head because it sticks and will not release.
Then place another ant next to the first one, and keep doing this with an ant after every ant according to the size of the entire wound.
Then stitch it up yourself, and let the wound heal. For the ant heads remain attached to the intestine until it is healed, and there is no harm done whatsoever to the patient.
And it is now possible to suture the intestine with a fine thread as well; this has been cleaned from the gut of an animal and attached to the needle once it has been inserted.
And you must take one end of this thread from the gut, and strip off all its flesh. Then bind to its end a fine linen thread that has been wound around it. Then insert this thread into the needle, and use it to suture the intestine. Then bring it yourself back to the rupture.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is only according to the way of trust and hope.
You know, a wound that is large, wide, especially if it is on one of the thinner intestines: then there is no skill but precision, and its healing is absolutely not possible.
Regarding the cure for Zuchemen and fistulas.
You know that any wound or abscess when it becomes old and ancient, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal, and emits pus constantly, and is not separated: then universally it is called a fistula on whichever limb it may be found, and we call it Zuchemen.
A fistula is truly a filtered knot, hard, white; with which there is no pain, it has the shape of a bird's feather: and on account of that some call it Risati, that is, feather.
And at certain times it is moist, which emits pus. And perhaps the moisture gets separated during some hours. And sometimes this moisture is large in quantity and small; it is thick and thin.
And I already mentioned in the division when I said wounds that any ulcer which does not heal and flesh is not born on it, it is only because of one of nine causes.
Of which one is either due to a lack of blood in the body; or because of its malignancy; or because there is hard flesh between it and its lips, preventing the birth of flesh; or because it has too much dirt and impurity; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used for treating it is unsuitable; or because the corruption falling in the region is a type of pestilence, or due to some property of the region, as happens at Caesaraugusta: where diseases are difficult to digest, and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone in it, or a number of bones.
And now I have shown you all these causes and signs of the conditions, and their treatments along with medicines in each division; and here it is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment of fistulas and zukens, which are done by way of operative procedure with the hand.
You should be aware that fistulas occur in all body parts. For among them are fistulas that reach major veins and arteries or nerves or sinuses; or to the intestine, bladder, ribs, or some of the spinal vertebrae, or to a complex joint such as those found in the hand or foot; and from these are fistulae that lead close to an important organ and its surroundings.
Thus, of these fistulas there is one that is difficult to heal and does not take treatment; working with it is labour and ignorance.
But if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places that I mentioned and you hope and trust in its treatment and wish to learn it, then take a probe made of brass or iron, if the fistula runs straight, and explore with it.
However, if there is curvature to the fistula, then investigate it with a fine lead probe. Since the soft body of lead adapts and curves around bends.
If the fistula has multiple openings, it is not possible for you to trace over it with a probe. Therefore, wash out one of the openings from among its openings.
For the moisture with which you wash it will run towards other openings and flow from them.
Next, carefully inquire as to how you can determine if there is a bone or nerve and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or near; or if it is a single fistula with many openings that covers all of this area, using your utmost strength: by questioning the patient, feeling for pain at the site when compressed by your hand, and similar signs and causes from the symptoms.
When you have thus stood at the true station, then proceed to treatment with confidence: and consider then, if the fistula is a nearby one that is apparent or in a safe place far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places I mentioned to you: then cut the fistula as previously described in my account, remove what is in it of filtrate and corrupted flesh, which arises at its opening from flesh, membrane, or similar things: and treat it until it heals.
But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, you must cut it as deeply as possible. Then cleanse it from all its corrupted flesh.
After that, apply bandages wrapped in sharp medicines: and introduce them to the fistula's cavity which you grasped with your iron tool several times until the sharp medicine erodes all that remains in the fistula's cavity from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.
If it does not heal with that treatment, then cauterize it as we described.
If the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you ascertain this, then question it and cut it as I told you: if nothing prevents you from a vein, nerve or main limb as we said.
If you detect a bone and there is any sign of decay or blackening within it, then scrape it until all the decay is removed. Then treat it with something that embodies it, until it is healed.
But if it does not heal and emits pus as before, then know that you have not reached the total eradication of decay.
Detect it again over the same place, and make its removal perfect, and cleanse it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, then that is good; but if not, know that the decay lies deep within the body where you have not reached it. It is therefore beyond your skill unless you let nature take its course.
If the decayed bone is small and it is possible for you to do so, extract it with fine forceps that are suited to it.
But if there are many bones, then make your extraction of them all perfect, and do not leave any behind with your strength.
If anything from the humours opposes you, and there is no fear or mistake in opening them up: then open up those humours and flesh if they are present there, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then place on the wound something that will cause them to decay; and leave it until what is around those bones of flesh and humours has decayed away.
And guard the wound so it does not heal. And bind tightly the incision you have made during your procedure. In my opinion, place on top of it, if you fear it, a poultice of sulphur pounded with oil and soaked; or a poultice steeped in Egyptian ointment, or any of the violet-based ointments.
For when those moistures rot, and the bones are separated from them, the removal of theirs will be soothed, and theirs drawn in.
But if it is one large bone, like the leg or hip bone, and what has become of it is a large part; then scrape it with your knife until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
But if what has become of it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached into the marrow of the bone, then it must be sawn through and cut all the way to where the corruption has reached; then treat it until it heals.
And I tell you this case which happened to a man in his leg; that you may place it as an example and help for your procedure.
There was a young man aged about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from something which happened inside him; until the matter came to his leg and it became ulcerated with a large ulcer; and there was no external cause for this.
So time passed with him in error of the doctors until the ulcer opened up and many matters came out with it. The treatment was postponed until the leg had developed a fistula and multiple openings formed on it, all of which discharged pus and bodily fluids.
For about two years a multitude of physicians treated him but there was no expert in the art of surgery among them until I was called upon and saw his leg as well as the discharge flowing out from those openings: moreover, by now the whole body of that man had wasted away and his complexion was yellowish.
So I inserted a probe into one of the openings and it reached right down to the bone.
Then I examined all the openings and found that they communicated with each other on every side of the leg.
Therefore I made an incision and cut away the tissue around one of those openings until I exposed a piece of bone which I found was destroyed: it had been corroded, discolored, turned rotten, and perforated right through to the marrow.
I accordingly sawed off that piece of bone which had been exposed to me and prepared it from the rotten bone.
And I judged that there was nothing wrong with the bone other than that part which had been damaged by my cutting away and sawing off. And now I have already removed it (that is, the diseased bone).
Then I applied healing medicines to the wound for a long time until it was healed. And yet still it has not been healed (that is, the wound).
Then I probed again and found some more bone over the place where my first probe had exposed the bone; that too was diseased, so I cut it away as well.
Then I attempted his restoration. And it was not restored.
I therefore tried again on it, and I did not cease cutting the bone in particular places, and attempting to restore it; and it was still not restored until I had cut out about a span of the bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I healed it with medicines, and it consolidated quickly, and was cured; and this repetition of the operation and incision would not have been necessary, except due to the condition of the patient's weakness, and his lack of endurance, and my fear over him regarding death: for he suffered in all hours from excess evacuation bad fainting.
He was therefore cured completely; and hard flesh was born in the place of the bone, and good order was made in his body, and his strength returned to him; and he resumed his usual condition: and no damage whatsoever was done to him by walking.
But if a protruding bone in the body has already been broken; then it is necessary that you saw it, in this way: and that is, take a ligament, and bind it to the end of the protruding bone; and instruct someone who will stretch it upwards; and place another woollen ligament on top of the first. Then bind it on top of the flesh that is above the bone; and extend its end so you can pull the flesh downwards; and you cover the flesh over the place which you wish to saw, so as not to harm the flesh with the saw.
Place some wood or board under the lower bone somewhat off-centre; for when you do this, it is not prevented from cutting the diseased flesh.
And it is necessary that a lock be placed over the affected area for some time, so as to prevent the corruption of the bone cavity; and not appear on its own accord by sensation, and thus force another to use their lock instead.
If the bone is corrupted and not protruding, but instead continues its part with another part; and the corruption is either within or around it; then remove all flesh from every one of these parts. Then place the lower wooden block.
Afterward, saw it from the first part where there is corruption until it continues onto the other side; and let the lock be of length slightly beyond the extent of the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is at a joint, cut that corrupted join, and saw the bone where it continues onto another part.
But if the corruption is within two joins continuing onto each other, then there is no remedy for it but to scrape.
If the corruption is within the palm of the hand or sole of the foot, then this case is very difficult. But it is necessary that you enquire as to the nature of the corruption as it presents itself. And you must scrape it and clean the wound to any extent possible for you; with whatever remedy is available to you; provided that there be no contraindication from Vein or Nerve.
And be aware that there are many saws and knives to cut these bones; according to their position in the body and the preparation required of them; as well as their thickness and thinness, length and smallness, hardness and rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare every kind of surgical instrument suitable for that operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the type of instrument required, which you need when you have a lengthy study period. And knowledge of the methods of this art is a witness to your understanding of illnesses; for then you will find by yourself that which suits him from among the instruments for every illness.
And I am establishing for you at the end of this chapter a list of instruments which you set as examples over those on which you operate and as a test by which to experiment with others.
Form of another saw.
Form of the scissors for uniting [tissues]. Let the head of these scissors be formed according to the shape of a star-headed nail; and its tips be shaped like those of the *elischetfeg*.
And it is not suitable unless the tips of the scissors are sharpened with it when they become dull or a large bone needs to be cut.
Form of the larger scissors.
The form of the broad snare.
Form of a concave snare.
The form of the other slender snare.
Form of the other curved snare with pointed ends.
The form of the paired snares, slender at the handles.
This resembles a saw; its end is like the teeth of a saw; it appears in many places on account of bones.
The form of the snare that is suitable for breaking through perforated bone.
Its end is triangular; it has sharp points.
It is made of Indian steel. And likewise it is necessary that all of the things we have described be made from snares (rasoria), and knives (incisorium) and saws (serra).
On the cutting off of limbs, and trepanning bones.
Limbs putrefy either from an external or internal cause.
Therefore when you have treated that corruption with medicinal cure and it does not respond to the treatment; and you see the corruption spreading into the limb in such manner that it is not repelled by anything: then it is necessary that you amputate that limb up until where the spread of the corruption follows, so that the patient may escape death or some more serious malady through loss of the limb.
The sign that this has occurred is when the limb turns black and is considered burnt by fire or undergoes putrefaction after turning black; until that rot is cut away as far as the bone which follows that limb, and spreads throughout the entire body.
Therefore, the treatment should be with an incision of it, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the stings or bites of certain venomous creatures such as the marine scorpion, viper, rutella, and similar animals.
If therefore the corruption or sting is at the tip of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not give any space to the corruption, so that it does not spread further into the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it occurs in the hand, then cut it off from the wrist and do not give any space to the corruption until it reaches the elbow of the arm.
And if it invades further, then cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
But if the corruption passes through and you see it around the elbow, then for that patient there is death. And apart from that in terms of treatment, it's the amount of strength which matters.
And similarly do the same with the foot when corruption invades a toe; then cut it off at one of its joints. And if it reaches the instep of the foot, then amputate the entire foot. But if it climbs up to the knee, then cut off the leg at the joint of the knee.
If however the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill left other than to give up and leave the patient to die.
The method for cutting a limb or sealing it is to tighten the ligament below where you want to cut; and then tighten another ligament above that spot. And the attendant should stretch one ligament downwards; and the attendant should stretch another ligament upwards, towards the top. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a broad knife, until all the flesh is exposed. Then it may be cut or sealed.
You should place a piece of linen cloth on all sides so that the knife does not touch the healthy area; otherwise, an additional injury may occur in the weakened spot and pus will form.
If there is internal bleeding as you operate, then quickly cauterize the spot; or place some blood-stanching powders on it. Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligament, and take care of it until it is healed.
And I tell you that this same accident happened to a man on his foot.
Which was because his foot turned black with a burn that looked like it had been set alight by fire; and the corruption first started on his toe before spreading to his entire foot.
The man therefore treated himself after he saw the corruption take hold of his limb with great pain and burning; it started at the join and he healed up.
After a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred to him on his index finger of his hand.
He came to me, and I tried to treat the excess with what I had placed on his hand from medicines after cleansing his body; however, the excess was not reabsorbed and began to spread to another finger until decay set in on his hand.
He thus called for me to amputate his hand; I refused, hoping that it would be reabsorbed and fearing death for him even if I were to perform the amputation on his hand. Because the strength of the man was above the injury.
After he lost hope in me, he returned to his land; and by the time it reached me that he had hurried there and cut off his entire hand, I found him healed.
I have not presented this account except to offer help for those who suffer from this kind of illness; and also as a sign by which it may be recognized, so that one can proceed accordingly.
On the treatment of worms, and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When a pus-filled swelling occurs on certain fleshy parts of the body and the swelling continues to spread until it collects some pus; then it bursts or is pierced, and whatever was inside leaks out, leaving behind an empty space like that of a pot, while the skin above remains like cloth that has been worn thin: if this does not reach its last stage in decay nor cause damage to bone, nerve or ligament, it merits being called a Worm; but not a Fistula. However, when the process continues until the corruption penetrates one of these parts, then it is properly called either a Fistula or zuken.
The cure for it is to cut the entire skin as it peels off and especially when it becomes thin like cloth; you can be confident that it will not stick back into place because of its degeneration.
However, if you expect the skin to adhere and it doesn't lead to that ultimate deterioration; and if there is a thickening of flesh in the skin, then treat this with an enema and consider the sinus.
If it is large and the pus that comes out of it has a foul odor, then enema it with Egyptian medicine, which consists equally of vinegar, oil, and ziniar, combined in a vase; boil over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey.
Take as much of it as you need; dissolve it with water and honey and enema the sinus with this solution, then close off the opening and leave the medicine inside for about two hours.
Then extract it with pressure; do this for as many days as needed until the sinus is cleansed and the stench removed.
Sometimes it can be enema'd with ash water if this medicine is not available; in that case use the ashes of grape-wood or oak-wood and sprinkle them over the water. Then mix it and enema with it until you're confident that the sinus has been cleaned out.
If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then enema them with just water and honey, to which you should also add some powdered ziniar. Or apply the enema itself mixed with honey and wine since it is a property of honey to cleanse and wash away, and the wine makes the bowel adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you have done this a few times, and are confident that the bowel's corruption has been removed, then apply an enema with what makes flesh grow there.
And you may take some of the dyafinicon plaster; dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or apply an enema with certain medicines and other ointments whose properties I have written about in my treatise on ointments.
But if the bowel's orifice is narrow and cannot admit the enema pipe, then dilate it slightly with an iron instrument; or apply to it a linen cloth wrapped around an Egyptian ointment, or a royal ointment, until it has been enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then draw together its lips with a suture; and leave such an extent of it as will admit an enema without extension.
And similarly if its orifice from which the pus flows is elevated upwards, then cut it lower down where the pus oozes out so that it will flow downwards; for when pus is confined deep within a bowel, it prevents flesh from forming there.
But if you cannot cut the bowel as low down around it as you wish, then try to prepare the member in such a way that the pus may flow from it with ease as is prepared for you. Try to ensure that no pus remains in it at all; and take consolidating medicines which are applied to a wound, suitable for what you wish. And extend them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it covers the entire breast. Then cut with scissors along a straight line from the nipple hole, slightly larger than the breast opening. Then spread a soft ointment on another cloth, according to the size of the hole; and place it over itself in a distant position from the breast opening, so as to alleviate the discharge of pus from it: and do not remove the large cloth unless after some days at once.
Now the one which is over the breast opening, that is the one you remove every hour, so as to drain what accumulates in it of pus: and so that you may know if that which flows from it matter is abundant or scarce; thick or thin.
And with this again consider the place of the breast itself, if its owner feels pain there, or not; and whether there is inflammation, or no inflammation.
When therefore your treatment is prolonged like this, and you see the matter which comes out over the breast opening, then you know that the breast has already adhered, or approaches adhesion: then therefore release it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you release the wound, then change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
But if a thin matter comes out of the breast after a long time, then do not despair about its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since there are men who delay flesh production in their wounds, and among them are those who act contrary to it.
But if unabsorbed pus comes out of the breast after many days, then you know that the breast does not adhere.
If the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its condition prolonged, then add to the drying medicines, but let the physicians ensure that the medicines are moist in their substance and dry in their virtue, such as dyaphinicon ointment when an excess of zegi is added to it.
And for the final treatment, take some dyaphinicon ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, then rub it on old wine equal in quantity to the substance of the ointment.
Then mix the two together and use them.
And you may do something similar to this procedure when dyaphinicon ointment is not available; instead use honey, which you should boil until it thickens, and then use it. Or take myrrh, aloe, and olibanum; pound all three together, then powder them over honey while it is still on the fire. Then spread a cloth over it and bind it to the sinus; spread over this the honey that you boiled until thick, and powder spices over it before placing another cloth on top and binding them together.
At times, long aristolochia, roots of celestial lily (that is, saffron), comfrey root flour and centaurea may also be administered. Use these ingredients either individually or combined; pound them together and sieve before powdering over the honey I previously described, then use it.
If the condition of the sinus persists and does not heal with this treatment, then know that there is some deep-seated corruption; or it may have already affected bones, other hard tissues, or ligaments; in such cases treat it according to the fistula treatments I outlined previously.
The treatment for panaritium and an abraded nail involves incision or amputation of the finger.
A panaritium is an abscess that forms under the nail of the thumb or big toe, although it may also appear on other digits.
When left untreated and neglected for too long, the abscess can become inflamed with heat or become infected, discharging pus until it erodes the nail root; it may destroy the entire nail bed entirely, spreading to the bone, causing foul odours; the digit's extremity becomes swollen and discoloured.
Therefore, when your treatment does not help as described above, it is necessary to cut away with a knife all that remains of the nail. Afterwards, cauterise the wound. Indeed, hot-iron cauterisation is very beneficial.
However, if the bone is sound and both nail and nail bed are healthy but empty nail appendages now push flesh towards the interior and begin to pierce it, causing harm; then you must place a slender probe beneath that nail corner which pricks the flesh and push back on it; cut away this flesh with ease and put on what remains of corrosive cauterising salves until all is removed. Afterwards treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the infection has already reached the bone, it is necessary to cut away and remove this bone; for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains.
If you see decay and deterioration spreading into the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints, according to what has been previously mentioned. Then treat the wound until it is healed.
If the nail is damaged by scraping or knocking, and there is severe pain in it, then you should first bleed the patient with a lancet. Then cut away the nail with a sharp spatulum, cutting it transversely from top to bottom.
And be careful not to cut through into the flesh that lies underneath the nail, for you will cause a severe pain to happen to the patient, and it will lead to an addition of flesh growing there.
Then treat the place with something that soothes pain.
However, the added finger that grows on some people's hands may be all flesh; and there may be bones in it sometimes, or a nail may grow with it; and some of them are born at the root of the joint, while others start growing from one of the knuckles of the finger. The one which grows from the knuckle of a finger does not move; and the one that is born at the root of the joint may or may not be able to move it.
The one which is all flesh among them is easy to cut off. This means you should cut it at its root with a broad spatulum.
The treatment of the one whose growth is at the root of the joint is difficult. Refrain from making an incision on it.
However, if one is born with it on the tip of the finger near the last joint, then you should first cut its flesh with a round incision until you reach the bone. Then saw through the bone using one of those saws suitable for this purpose. After that, take care of it until it heals.
However, the condition which occurs in fingers due to being close together happens often either from birth, i.e., they are born like that, or from healing of a wound, or burning by fire and similar things.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut away the joining flesh until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place between them linen cloths or pieces of cloth soaked in rose oil so that they do not join together quickly and separate the fingers; or place a thin sheet of lead between them until the affected area has healed as it should.
And similarly if such a condition occurs in some fingers with the palm of the hand then cut away the joined flesh according to what is prepared and suits the shape of the limb.
On the surgical correction of deformity.
There are twisted veins filled with a lot of melancholic waste which appear in many body parts and their end point is often the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk long distances or do heavy labour.
It is therefore necessary that one administers strong beating of the body to expel the black bile several times.
Then the leech should take care of the patient's basilica.
The treatment of these with iron, however, is according to two methods. One of them is that they should be cut open, and black blood extracted. And the other method is that the vein should be raised up, and removed in its entirety.
Its incision is according to this method. Scrape the leg first with warm water until the thick, dirty blood is loosened. Then bind the patient's leg from the upper part of their hip to the lower part of the knee with a cloth. Then cut the vein at one place or two, or three places, with a wide incision.
Then raise it up, that is to say extract the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and you must have the patient's leech at first. Then cut the nail down to below: until you see a quantity of blood exiting that is sufficient and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
Afterwards bind this up; and order him to abstain from foods which produce black bile; and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full of it, as long as it does not harm the patient.
Its elevation is according to this method. Scrape the patient's leg if there is much hair on it. Then immerse him in a bath; or scrape it with your hand on the patient's leg with warm water until he turns red and the veins fill up; or make him exercise vigorously if there is no bath present for him, until his limb becomes warm.
Then make an incision through the skin along the length of the vein: either at its lowest point near the knee or on its lower part near the heel.
Then lift the skin with hooks and scrape out the vein from all sides until it appears to the senses; when you see that it is red and darkening. When it has receded from the skin, you will see that it is white like a string.
Then introduce a rod under it until when you lift it up, it comes out of the skin; hang it with a blunt hook gently.
Then make another incision near that incision, three fingers away. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then lift it up with rods as you did before, and hang it with another hook just as you did initially.
Then make another incision or several incisions if required. Then lift it up, and make an incision at the last part near the heel.
Then extract it to the incision above it.
And do this until you extract it from the upper incision or all higher incisions when it comes out completely; then cut it open.
But if it does not obey you and rise up for extraction; then introduce a needle with strong thread twice through, and tie it before extracting or put a rod under it again; roll your hand in all directions until it comes out. And beware, lest it be cut. For if it is cut, it becomes difficult for you to raise it greatly, and it enters the patient from that harm.
So when you have extracted it all: then place over the wound a piece of wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil; and treat it until it is healed.
But if the artery is twisted, having a turn to the sides, and it is not as we have said straight: then you must cut over it on every side of its twist, and the places of its turn.
Then lift it with hooks until you have raised it all; and beware near your cut over it that you do not cut the vein or wound it; for it will be difficult for you to raise or extract it. Therefore, preserve your prudence.
The incident in which the artery is healed.
The form of a blind wound.
It does not have a curvature like other wounds, nor is it of sharp point so as not to wound the vein; and it has a thick bend, gentle: for if it were thin, it would cut the vein with its thinness; rather let there be superfluous thickness to it, as we said.
On the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, such as Alizegi, and the land of the Arabs; and in dry, hot lands of little tenderness, that is, where neither grass nor tree are born.
And perhaps it generates in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Indeed its generation is from the putrefaction which happens beneath the skin, just as it happens inside the bodies of snakes and roundworms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
A sign of the beginning of this condition is a severe inflammation that occurs in the leg. Then cauterize the area. Then the vein begins to exit from that place of cauterization, like it is a root of a plant or an animal.
When its end appears, you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing from one to two drachmas, and tie that in place; then leave the lead hanging from the leg.
Whenever anything emerges from it to the outside, wrap that in lead and tie it. But if it extends for too long, cut off that part and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it away entirely until all of it has emerged. For if you cut it away too soon, it will contract and reenter the flesh; this can cause an abscess, or even decay of the flesh around that place to a nasty ulcer.
Therefore it should be handled gently and extracted gradually until all of its length is out; in some men, this vein may measure as much as five to ten palms. He has now reached a point where he exited the man through twenty palms.
But if it happens to you during your treatment time: then insert a rod into its hole and perforate it with a long hollow needle until all the material inside is evacuated; and apply decay-causing medicines for several days. Then treat it with the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle joint or on the foot itself; and it happens to have multiple openings, with a branch exiting from each opening.
Therefore treat it as we have said in the section above, and along with what has been mentioned before.
On cutting open on worms generated under the skin, which is called asinine disease.
This disease is called asinine disease in our country; therefore, because it often happens to donkeys and there is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it enters the entire body, going up and down; and it is felt by the person when it moves from limb to limb until it bursts wherever it bursts through the skin, and exits.
Its generation is from the decay of certain fluids. As happens with worms and snakes, that is, earthworms, and pinworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its harmfulness. When he goes into the body and is lifted up to the head, and reaches a certain place, then perhaps he opens it up, comes out, and destroys the eye; this happens many times.
Thus when you want to treat him and take it out, this does not happen unless during his walking around and the appearance of its symptoms to [your] senses.
Therefore you must bind what is above him and what is beneath with a strong ligamentary constriction. Then cut just above it and extract it.
But if [the stone] is buried within the flesh and you do not find it, then place a hot iron on that spot until [the patient] dies.
And the greater danger to be feared is its corruption, by which it destroys the eye, as we have said.
But if you see that it has already reached the head near to the eye, then bind underneath it a good strap across the eyebrow. Then cut just above it and extract it.
And the patient must use cleansing of his body with medicines that dissolve evil foul humors.
And he should avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
On the cutting [treatment] of Nakir's illness.
This illness is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members; then it shifts from one member to another.
And I myself have indeed seen it, just as I am telling you. I was called to an ailing woman in certain villages. And I found that her arm was swollen, and I saw a small enlargement in the vein of the biceps.
And after I remained for an hour, I saw one swelling advance with its feelers, moving like a worm, climbing to her shoulder faster than can be believed: so that it was like live silver, when it runs from place to place.
So the pain receded from that spot, and became fixed in her shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and it ran into the rest of her body until it reached her other arm.
Then she told me that it was revolving throughout her entire body, just as I had seen.
So I marveled at the speed of its transformation from limb to limb. And I myself had never before seen this illness with my own eyes in such a way. However, I have seen many whose pain shifts from limb to limb; and I had not witnessed it with my eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think it to be anything other than what it is because the woman was one of those from dry villages whose veins are easily detected; thus that shift in sensation appears windy.
And it is necessary that this reasoning does not appear to apply to those who are lush and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
When you wish to cure it and the patient feels that pain: then if it is apparent to your eye as we said before, then compress above and below it quickly: and cut above it until the trapped wind escapes: and cauterize the area.
If however you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with body shaking, and with what expels wind, and causes it to belch foul smelling pills, and pills made of serapin, and similar.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows differ according to their type, and the locations within the body where they fall.
Their differences are as follows: for among them there are those with large heads and small ones: concave and convex. And some have three edges. And among them, there are those with barbs. And some have feathers.
Those according to the limbs within which they fall are of two kinds. For the limbs are either among those that are concave members such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder and similar. When it falls into any of these limbs and you see the signs of death I describe below, then you must avoid extracting that arrow from them, for death will follow that person in whom it is in many cases. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it and treat the wound.
For when an arrow strikes the brain and penetrates the bone, and emerges from the soft part that is above the brain, these are the signs: severe headaches occur, and also scotomata, vertigo, redness of eyes, swelling, reddening of tongue, spasms, confusion, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood emerges from the nostrils or ears. And perhaps speech is impaired, and the voice becomes hoarse. From the place of the wound, white moisture like pus emerges. And there is an exit from it similar to the moistness of flesh.
If these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it has not emerged.
The signs of an arrow having struck the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and he feels with it as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in an empty one. And perhaps the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse; and black blood runs out from the wound. After that follows extreme coldness, and cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore you should know that death is undoubtedly near.
The signs of an arrow having struck the lung are that blood emerges from the wound in a frothy manner; and the veins which follow around the neck become inflamed, and the colour of the patient changes. He expires with a great, deep breath and seeks to draw in cold air.
If the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the chest, then it is near the small ribs; and there will be great panting with severe pain, accompanied by a sigh; and all the limbs of the shoulders will move.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then perhaps some undigested food will exit from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes the belly and pierces it, then perhaps some feces will exit from the wound, or a fragment of the bowl, or an intestine that is already ruptured. There is therefore no hope for its cure nor for extracting the arrow.
If the arrow strikes the bladder and urine exits from it, and something from within proceeds to the exterior, and the pain is more severe in the lower region, then know that this is mortal.
The remaining body parts, such as the face, neck, throat, jawbone, aid, spine, shoulder blade, hip, leg, and similar members, are healed according to many procedures when the arrow has not struck an artery or nerve, and the arrow is not poisoned.
And I tell you that I have seen these very arrows so that you may know by them regarding your treatment.
That is to say, an arrow struck a man's tear duct at the root of his nose. So I extracted it myself from the other side, below the ear fat; and he was healed, and there was no harm done to his eye.
I extracted another arrow from the eye of a Jew; it had fallen into the fat under his lower eyelid and was already obscured. I only found its tiny tip, which adhered to its wooden shaft, and this was a large arrow used by Turkish archers with a blunt iron head without any barbs.
The Jew was healed so no evil accident befell his eye.
I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arab arrow with barbs. So I cut open the throat from both sides and the arrow was already submerged there. I handled it carefully until I extracted it; the Christian was healed.
I extracted another arrow from the belly of a man which had fallen there; we thought he would die because of it.
After thirty days had passed without his condition changing in any way, I cut over the arrow and contrived a plan to remove it; he was healed and no evil accident befell him.
I saw a man whose back had been wounded by an arrow; the wound had healed over it. Seven years later, the arrow emerged from his hip joint.
I saw a woman who had an arrow in her belly; the wound had healed over it and the arrow remained inside her body without changing anything about her condition. The woman did not find any harm to herself through her normal bodily functions.
I saw another man who had an arrow shot into his face; the wound had healed but remained, causing him little pain; there were many similar cases to these.
And I extracted an arrow from the nose of a man who was one of the king's lords; it had gone into his nose and had started to turn towards the right side somewhat; the whole arrow was hidden.
I was called to treat him three days after he got hit with the arrow. Thus, I found the wound of the arrow to be very tight-fitting.
I therefore examined it with a thin probe, and did not feel the arrow; for he himself found the point of entry and pain under his right ear. I therefore hoped that this was caused by the end of the arrow.
So I plastered the place with a plaster possessing both drawing and digesting powers, trusting that the spot would form an abscess so that I could cut over it; but this did not occur to indicate whether or no the arrow had gone into the skull.
I kept plastering him for many days; but nothing happened and the wound had healed in the meantime; so he remained weak from the extraction to this day because of that event until one day he felt an arrow inside his nose. And he told me about it.
And he told me about it. Therefore I placed a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for many days until it opened; and when I probed with a probe, I felt an extremely thin end of the arrow which was stuck to some wood.
Then I added the sharp medicine to open up the wound until we visibly saw the tip of the arrow; and it took about four months with him for this to happen.
Then after the wound was enlarged and it was possible to insert the forceps into it, and move them without yielding an exit: I did not cease from applying a scalpel and devising methods with instruments until one day I began on it with forceps that were suitably made, according to which their form will come at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed doctors judge that cartilage of the nose is not restorable. Therefore I restored it, and the wound was consolidated and he healed with complete health: nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the nature of extracting certain arrows: so that you may have this as a rule and sign over what I did not say.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not covered with the narration: nor does the book cover it, and a prudent craftsman compares little to much: and what is present to what is absent: and finds new methods, and new instruments from foreign matters of this art when they occur.
I say then, that arrows do not exit from the limbs in which they are fixed except by two methods. Or by attraction out of the place where it entered. Or by contraries of the other parts.
And that which exits from where it entered is either an arrow proceeding through fleshy tissue; and it is drawn out, and exits.
If it does not yield to removal from the time when it strikes; then you should leave it alone for several days until the flesh surrounding it becomes putrid; and its drawing out and exit will be eased.
And likewise if it lodges in bone and does not yield to your removal attempts; then leave it alone for several days as well; and repeat the drawing out and movement each day until it exits.
If it still does not yield to your removal attempts after those days then you must bore around the arrow on all sides within the bone itself with a fine trepan until the arrows are enlarged. Then draw it out, and extract it.
If, however, the arrow is already hidden within the body and concealed from detection by the senses, you must then seek it out with a probe. If you sense it, then draw it out with certain instruments suitable for the extraction.
If you cannot proceed with the extraction due to the narrowing of the wound and the arrow's depth, and if there is no bone or nerve present near it, then wait until its extraction becomes possible by enlarging the wound.
If there are barbs attached to it that can be grasped, then free the flesh stuck around them from all sides with any tool available for the purpose; and if you cannot achieve their release due to embeddedness of the flesh in the barbs or contortion of the barbs, wait until the wound becomes enlarged enough for its extraction.
As you proceed with the arrow's extraction from any location it is in, use hand contortion and forceps to pull on all sides until its emergence; do so with utmost care lest the arrow be broken or its extraction made more difficult for you.
If you cannot proceed with its extraction within one hour, then abandon it for a few days until the flesh around it becomes rotten. Then repeat the extraction process; for it becomes easier by then due to rotting of the flesh around it. If you face difficulty with blood flow during this process, apply the method described in its dedicated chapter earlier on in this book. And be mindful of your skills so as not to damage veins or nerves or tendons in the body.
Apply any method possible to achieve its extraction; and let it be done with ease and calmness or slowness and firmness as I described earlier to you.
You must make sure that when you remove the arrow, the patient is positioned according to the figure, just as they were at the time of impact by the arrow itself. Since it is more beneficial. If you cannot do that, then use one of the figures which is possible for you.
An arrow that emerges from the opposite side of the other part, or has already penetrated somewhat outwards: if the tip of the arrow causes a swelling on the upper surface of the skin nearby and you see it protruding, cut over it; let your incision be according to the length which will permit forceps to grasp its end.
Then pull it out, for by then the arrow is easily removed.
But if it is retained inside the bone, then turn your hand according to its curvature until you feel the arrow pushing against the bone and enlarging itself; afterwards pull it out.
And if not, leave it alone for several days; afterwards try again until you remove it.
If there is any wooden part of the arrow still inside it, then push that forward with it as well.
But if the wooden part has broken off and you wish to administer a push using an instrument, then insert into it a concave tool so that its cavity fits over the tail of the arrow; afterwards push with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then use an instrument to push against it as it enters inside it. Indeed the arrow will be eased by that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then you should scoop out all the concave flesh where the poison is; if this is possible for you to do. Then treat it with what suits it best.
If the arrow has fallen into the chest, or belly, or bladder, or side: and it is close enough that you can reach it with a hook, and it's possible for you to cut above it; then cut, and take care to avoid veins or nerves while extracting it.
Then stitch the wound if you see fit, and treat it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the forceps with which arrows are extracted.
The ends should be like the beak of a bird, which are made to look like iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not release it.
And there are many types of them made, large and small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow, its slenderness, and the width or narrowness of the wound.
The shape of an impelling concave.
And the form of a deafening impeller.
This is the end of a deafener that looks like a spoke so as to smoothen its entrance into the concave arrow, and impel it with this.
On the cutting of veins.
There are thirty veins that have become accustomed to being bled.
Out of which there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins that lie behind the ears and are known as "the two herbs"; and two arteries visible at the two temples; and two veins lying at the two tear ducts of the two eyes, called 'the lookers'; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which lies at the extremity of the nose. And two Guidegis, which lie in the neck. And two veins that are located on the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that lie on the lower lip. And these are veins called 'Algecherich'. And two veins that lie beneath the tongue.
However, there are five veins that may be bled on each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic vein, and it lies on the side of the arm; and the people call this the head vein. And there's another one called the 'Fusca'. There is also the Median vein, which is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalic; and the people call this one 'the body vein'. There is also the Basilica which lies on the inside of the arm; it's called the 'Titillicaris' as well. And the people call this one 'the belly vein'. The tendon of the biceps is placed on top of the operating table and it is where venesection takes place; it becomes visible over the thumb as an obvious protrusion.
The cephalic vein, which is between the ring finger and little finger, has two branches.
There are three veins in the calf and foot. One of them is the one that runs beneath the curve of the thumb on the side closest to the forearm. The second is the saphenous vein, which is located at the heel on the inner side of the foot. The nerve vein is situated at the heel on the outer side of the foot.
There are also three similar veins in the other leg.
On venesection of two veins behind the ears.
Venesection of the two veins behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, headache, eye problems, and long-standing head ulcers.
The procedure of venesection should be as I describe it. The patient's head should be shaved, and their occipital region rubbed at the site of the two veins with a coarse cloth using vigorous friction. Then the patient should tightly tie their neck with a cord until the two veins become visible. The sites of these veins are behind the ears, in the two hollows of the head. Feel for them with your finger and wherever you feel their pulse beneath your finger, mark that spot with a cautery iron.
Then take the surgical knife, which is called 'the cutter'. Then introduce the blade beneath the vein on the skin until you reach the surgical knife's edge. Next lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut through the vein and skin with a single cutting motion. Let the length of the cut be equivalent to two joined fingers, or around that amount; and make as much blood exit as you wish.
Then press it with pads, and leave it until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of this book I mentioned how to make such an incision, and its cauterization.
The benefit of double arterial venesection on the two pulse points is for old headaches; and for those with bad sores, and continual eye discharge from excess moisture.
And the way of performing this venesection is as I tell you. The patient should press their neck very hard until two veins appear clearly to the eye; and their pulse is shown beneath your finger. Then mark these with an iron cautery.
Next lift the skin above the vein upwards with your index finger; introduce a 'cutter' surgical knife underneath it, and raise the vein upwards. And cut it as you did with the two other veins; and make as much blood flow out as your need requires.
Then loosen the patient's constriction and place your finger on the vein for an hour. Afterward, place cotton and poultices on it, tightly bind it from above with a strong bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
And now I have recalled those [things] beforehand, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of this book.
The indication for bleeding the frontal vein is after bleeding from the cephalic [vein], for old facial diseases: and for a headache, and redness, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of its bleeding is as I tell you. The patient should tighten their neck with a cord until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called a fossa.
Place the protruding tip, which is at the head of the fossa, on the vein and strike it with a comb or something else of its kind; let the blood run out according to how much you want. Then loosen the patient's wound and bind it until it is healed.
And sometimes [it] is opened with a broad lancet. However it should not be sharp-pointed like the other lancets but rather broad at its tip. And make the incision across [the vein] because its wall is nearby, and perhaps the lancet will break within it when it is thin.
The use of the two veins which are in the two lachrymals of both eyes is for eye complaints and inflammation; and swelling in the eye, as well as facial diseases.
And the manner of bloodletting from them is for the sick person to tighten their neck with a cloth. Then proceed with bloodletting from them, while you stand over his head.
And bloodletting should be done transversely for a short length with a small lancet that is slightly wide because there is little flesh at this spot. For if the point of the lancet is very fine it may break off.
Then let as much blood flow out as you need to. And place a bandage over them, tighten it for one night, then remove it.
The bloodletting of the veins of the nose is relevant to high fevers and severe inflammation, as well as facial diseases such as headaches and rashes that occur on the face, especially if they are long-standing.
And the manner of bloodletting is for the sick person to tighten their neck with a cloth. Then hold his nose with your left hand and take a fine, long lancet; fix it into the middle of the septum that divides the nostrils along their length. Since the vein is not apparent to the sense there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And you should hold your hand with the fleam for a short while: and make it draw blood according to necessity. Then bind that one at night. For it heals quickly.
Indeed, the two fleams are beneficial for compression of shortness of breath and onset of leprosy, and melancholy diseases, and impetigo and bad ulcers, and corrosive diseases, that is, warts.
And the quality of those fleams is to bind the patient under both at his neck with a bandage: and let the artisan stand over the patient's head, and have the patient seated on a chair.
Then use an ample fleam of length to make a short incision with the fleam. Then extract an even amount of blood, or according to what you see as the need for that patient. Then do likewise with the other vein.
After that, untie the bandage, and bind both veins with a medium tightness: so as not to choke the patient. And let it remain until morning. The wound heals.
Chapter on the fleam of veins, according to Al-Zahrฤwฤซ. The veins of Algeberich benefit from bloodletting because it brings relief to the throat and prevents gum inflammation, as well as ulcers, lip cracks, and similar sores that can develop around the nose.
And when performing bloodletting on these veins, you should have the patient sit in front of you and tighten their neck with a cloth. Next, turn the patient's lip inside out and look for two veins; one on the right side of their lip and another on the left. You can identify them by the blackness they exhibit. And this is true because these veins are surrounded by smaller black ones. Make an oblique incision on each of them.
If you're unsure which one is which and cannot distinguish them, focus your attention on the larger of the two veins; it will be more prominent.
Perform the same procedure on the two veins of the upper lip, which are frequently treated this way. Also make an incision on each vein located on the lower lip.
After bloodletting from the cephalic vein, proceed with the bleeding of the vein located under the tongue. The benefit of bloodletting from the two veins under the tongue is that it provides relief for throat inflammations and soreness of the uvula and mouth.
When bloodletting these two veins, have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun. Lift their tongue and look beneath for one vein on each side of their mouth; both will appear dark in colour.
Therefore, prick both veins; and take care not to harm your hand while drawing blood from them. For beneath these [veins] lie arteries, and perhaps there will be bleeding from those arteries.
Now the three veins which one usually draws blood from at the elbow are present in all men.
And bleeding of these is performed according to two methods. Either by pricking with a wide rose myrtle thorn; or by lancing to a slight degree; or by cutting with the lancet, and this is known as Alnesil. And this is its shape.
And from these are the wide types, and fine ones according to the width of the veins and their narrowness The shape of a rose-myrtle thorn is wide as you can see. And it is suitable for opening concave veins, full ones, protruding ones, visible ones, thick ones, and those that contain thick, cloudy blood.
And this lancet is of lesser width, and finer at the tip.
And it is suitable for bleeding of fine veins which contain thin yellow blood.
Now, the basilica is one of these three veins for bleeding from. Because it draws out the blood from ailments that are below the throat and neck, what follows in the chest, and the abdomen: and it is appropriate for the surgeon, when performing a phlebotomy, to beware of this, and be above all fear because beneath it lies an artery. If therefore he errs, and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will strike that artery, and there will be a flux of blood. Therefore it is appropriate that he does not phlebotomize it with a sharp phlebotomy tool; rather, let him cut it with an alnesil.
But if the basilica does not appear with a manifest appearance, then it is appropriate that you take away from it, and shift to another, or search for one of its branches; or phlebotomize in its place the tendon of the arm. For it is manifest indeed, and cut it with an alnesil phlebotomy tool, as we have said.
But if you wish for the phlebotomy of that same [vein], then it is appropriate that before the constriction of the arm, you touch the place until you recognize the pulse's location. Then mark the place with an encaustic [medium], afterward the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision using an alnesil, as we have said. And beware lest the strike fall through from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tie the ligament, an inflation in the place that you marked with encaustic, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery; therefore avoid it.
But if you see the blood rise at the phlebotomy, like a child's urine, and it is thin, red blood; then know that it is from arterial blood. Then quickly do so, and place your finger on it over that long space, then remove your finger. If the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then bind the arm and let him go; and the patient should avoid moving his arm; and be above fearing for it.
And he must not move it for several days until it is healed.
But if the blood is not cut off and it troubles you; and you do not have medicine at hand to help you then, cut the artery if it seems right to you. For its ends draw together and the blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of a pistachio and crush it; take half of it, and bind it on over the place where the vein is appropriately tightened, with a bandage and little plugs until the next day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if it is not cut off, then treat it with what came before from the place of recollection where the blood flow was severed; and his blood letting will not be difficult in most situations due to the smallness of the wound site, and the possibility of a bandage from an arm.
Now as to the bloodletting of the Dark Vein; it is helpful because it draws out blood from above the head and below the body; for this reason, since, as we said, it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalic.
It is appropriate for the bloodletter to be above any fear resulting from his venesection, as beneath it lies a nerve. If therefore he adds to the venesection wound and discovers a nerve, it happens that he falls into a trance, and his healing becomes difficult, and perhaps will never heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. But if it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not shown, then you must place your venesection where you wish to make the incision with alnesil, and divert the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then separate the vein lengthwise.
On the cephalic vein. The venesection of the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and helps with eye ailments.
In this vein especially, if you wish to venesect it, do so by puncturing with an olive-wood lancet or a myrtle-wood lancet: since it is safer than all other veins because there is neither an artery nor nerve beneath.
However, it behooves you during venesection to divert the elbow's head slightly with a lancet and seek out a softer spot; and if it is not found on the first strike, it does no harm to repeat the incision several times upon it.
However perhaps in some people an abscess forms when it is not venesected on the first strike, but this abscess does no harm to them at all.
The usefulness of phlebotomy and the precautions to be observed therein. The quality of phlebotomy and its complications arise from the patient's condition which you must consider for correction.
First of all, you should know that phlebotomy is not administered unless it is for the preservation of health and to maintain wellness as a precaution against sickness.
And for the phlebotomy to be done on one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely the cephalic, the median (antebrachial), and the basilic vein. And for the phlebotomy to be done at the beginning of spring while fasting; and in summer, autumn and winter after a meal when signs of fullness are evident.
And for the phlebotomy to be done on either day one or three after at least 3 hours have passed since eating a meal.
However, phlebotomy administered during illness does not have a set time; rather it is done when circumstances and need call for it, be it day or night, at any hour and any time.
And it is not advisable to subject boys to phlebotomy until they reach the age of 14 years. Nor should a pregnant woman be subjected to phlebotomy unless between the 4th and 7th month of her pregnancy. Nor should elderly people who have passed the age of 60 be subjected to phlebotomy.
So when anyone wishes to be subjected to phlebotomy for whatever reason, they should cleanse their bowels before the procedure with a mild enema if there is retained faeces; lest the veins become drawn from the intestines by noxious putrid superfluities that harm vital organs during the phlebotomy.
The patient should not undergo bloodletting if they are suffering from a feeling of repletion and nausea; nor when they are drunk or recovering from drunkenness until these conditions have been removed. The patient should not undergo bloodletting if suffering from dropsy.
Bloodletting should be avoided after a bout of colic, vomiting, flux of the belly, sexual intercourse, and in cases of hard labour, exercise, vigil, fasting or any other thing that weakens the body's physical or animal strength.
Consider the state of the patient's bodily fluids before bloodletting - if their blood is thick due to food and drink or medication - it should be done with care.
The patient should take a bath beforehand if this is not contraindicated for them; or else engage in some exercise to thin out the blood.
Bloodletting should be carried out around the third hour of the day as we have said; and try to ensure that their chest is free from any adverse emotions such as tightness, anger or fear on that day, along with physical conditions like exertion, pain, excessive sexual intercourse and so forth.
The patient should have at hand things whose use people are accustomed to for their pleasant aroma and taste - such as aromatics, perfume or sweetmeats - in whatever quantity is possible.
The bloodletter should sit on a pillow that is higher than the patient's; then they should extend their arm and rub it two or three times with their hand. Then the bloodletter should tighten the ligature using a strap, rolling it up twice.
The incision should be moderate and even, for when it is uneven or excessive in depth, then it hinders the flow of blood; similarly with softening, it also impedes the flow of blood.
Then after the incision it is necessary that the person bleeding themselves should rub their hands together until the veins fill and become apparent to touch.
Then the person bleeding another should wipe the bleeding point with a little oil that is old and proper for this purpose.
Then they should place the forefinger of their left hand on the vein below where the bleeding is to take place, gently; so that the vein does not escape and the percussion [of the blood] is not stopped. For there are veins which you will find to be like a fleeing rope during bleeding; and among them is one that is full of air; when the scalpel is placed on it, it contracts under the blade and deceives the person using the scalpel, nor does it open the vein for him; if it opens [the vein], then it is tight because of this. It is necessary therefore that he who uses the scalpel should be firm in character, and attentive to all these things.
Then put down the scalpel. So if the vein opens on its own, then it is good. And if not, then try again in another place below that spot by a little, or above it quickly; unless the area has swollen up.
If the area has swollen up or if the patient becomes weak, then leave him [alone] for a day or two days; and do not bind his wound too tightly. For perhaps the heat of the swelling will be drawn out [by binding it]. One should not enter the bath.
Then she should repeat the bloodletting procedure if she wishes.
But if the opening is small or the blood flows slowly and you fear that not enough blood will come out: then repeat the bloodletting procedure on the same hole following its direction and add a little to the operation.
And do this quickly before the site becomes blocked because blockage of the site has occurred in many people during minor operations.
So if you see that the site is already blocked then do not repeat at all on this same site because nothing will be of use to you. And put something made from feces or oil on the site because this eases the flow of blood. And it is better here than plain oil or other oils.
And similarly apply the feces of oil in all your bloodletting procedures where you let blood from veins at points that block its flow and do this with either tyrian alum or sagene when put on one of these.
For the blood becomes thin and is resolved when it is thick.
But if a large blockage should occur at the bloodletting site - as often happens especially to those who have not been bled before or whose vein has a small opening then act quickly and put on the site a sponge soaked in warm water and salt, heated slightly: press this for one hour because it is dissolved.
And you should do this after the blood has stopped flowing from that vein itself or from another.
If there remains in the wound after a few days some blackness or greenness, it does not matter; and if you wish, put on top of it some dissolved aloe or myrrh: or something from the juice of menthe, that is, calament, or similar to this.
And very often indeed there occur abscesses and swellings at the site of bloodletting in the basilica.
Place therefore your hand on it; then if you find softness under your pressure upon it, then that swelling is bad. Make sure therefore, to place on it something from what we have said. For perhaps blood will flow out of it from an artery.
But make for it a plaster with something that has astringency, so as to harden the site. Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
And you ought to remove from every man blood according to the quantity of his strength. And that which appears on top of the blood in terms of colour.
For if the blood is black, then allow it to exit until it becomes red; and similarly if you see that it is thick, then let it out until it thins; and likewise if it is sharp, let its sharpness be taken away.
And it is necessary that for the one who is full and strong but requires bloodletting he should have a larger vein selected and the site of venesection made wide; while for him who is weak this must be done contrarily.
And it is necessary to extract it through the ducts and ensure that there is a narrow opening; furthermore, what is administered in venesection is better when the incision is transverse rather than a puncture.
And this method of venesection is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage; it is also more commendable and safer than the other form of venesection which occurs along both length and width.
And for one who is used to fainting during venesection, it is necessary that they eat before the procedure by consuming a small amount of bread soaked in pomegranate juice; or secanihabin if heated; and you should remove some blood from them through three or four ducts.
And if one is of a cold constitution, then they should take bread soaked in mu juice syrup, or aromatic honey syrup spiced with spices, or scented aromatic syrup before the venesection.
If fainting should occur during venesection and this is caused by excessive blood loss, then one must take a drink of meat broth with refined scented syrup; they should use aromatic algalia and anoint their chest with it; the other methods we outlined in the section on syncope under evacuation should also be used.
However, for someone who wishes to drain their arm and whose blood is being evacuated due to its weakness but possesses limited strength, they should remove the blood gradually according to the amount of strength that can be mustered over consecutive days.
But for someone who wishes to drain their arm and whose blood is being evacuated but possesses great strength, then they should do so seven or nine hours after the first venesection.
He who wishes to draw blood from his body towards the opposite side to which it inclines must undergo this procedure on the second or third day.
In a body where there is much heated and inflamed blood, causing fever, it is necessary that blood be taken from it once every hour and removed in large quantities; the opening must be enlarged until syncope occurs. After observing all conditions of phlebotomy and as you place your hand on his pulse at the point where the blood flows so that death does not occur in place of syncope. For it often happens that this occurs when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligence falls.
And when you wish to release the arm and stop blood flow a second time after the vein opening has already been closed making it difficult for blood to come out, it is not necessary to press on it with force and quickly stretch it in a curved way. For this is very bad, indeed leave it be until the second phlebotomy.
Or remove with the point of the lancet from the vein opening that which has coagulated from blood and place over it some salt dissolved in water. And place over it some of the ointment alfaroch or sagzenea and apply gentle pressure until blood comes out.
But if the vein has already become inflamed then leave it be and do not lance it until the inflammation subsides.
If however the need arises to take blood a second time and there is no other way, then either lance it over that place or in another arm in another vein.
The rope-like vein on the arm is ligated at the site of the Cubital fossa, and the Basilic Vein, if they are not found, and remain hidden, since it is composed of them.
And the quality of its ligation is such that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the armpit turns red and the vein appears clearly.
Then it should be tied above with a ligament of moderate tightness. Ligate it transversely bit by bit, not laterally nor longitudinally; and let your incision be wide, and make your ligation where you have ligated the joint of the hand a little way above.
If the flow of blood is impeded, then immerse your hand again into warm water and let the blood run out into the water until you have achieved what you need.
If however it is summer days, then you will be exempt from repeating the immersion of your hand into warm water. The running out of blood into warm water is indeed most appropriate in the time of winter.
This vein's ligation is safer than all other veins, because there are neither pulsating arteries nor nerves beneath it.
Ligation of the Salvatella Vein of the right hand is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of its ligation is such that you should tie the back of the hand with a ligament or by hand after you immerse it into warm water until the vein fills and becomes very apparent to touch. Then ligate it transversally. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm him at all.
Keep conserving, do not end with your hand with the lancet. Under it indeed are nerves of the fingers stripped bare of flesh.
Then return your hand to warm water, and let the blood run into it. For if you do not return it to warm water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein and prevent its flow.
When you have extracted the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt over the vein: so that it does not clot quickly.
And likewise you should do with every narrow vessel.
The benefit of his bloodletting from the left hand is that it relates to diseases of the spleen; and do likewise in its bloodletting, as you did in the second [vein], equally.
However, the benefit of the saphenous bloodletting is for diseases which are in the lower part of the body, such as womb ailments and menstrual retention, kidney complaints, old hip and leg ulcers, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of this bloodletting is that the patient introduces their foot into warm water and rubs it until the veins stand out; then bind above the ankle with a strap. Indeed the location of these veins is at the heel, appearing towards the thumb; and they branch out from it on the sole of the foot with many branches.
The incision should therefore be made on a wider part of it or near the heel in its cluster; for this is better and safer.
If you make the incision on the sole of the foot, then be careful to avoid the nerves that are beneath it and above the surface of the foot.
Place your scalpel on the part where you are going to make the incision from a side angle as if you wanted to cut it; and let the blade of the lancet be sharp.
But if the flow of blood is hindered, then immerse the foot again in warm water; and let the blood run into it until it is emptied out.
If the lancet misses the vein at first, then repeat with the lancet somewhat higher up, for it is a safe place; and do not fear any harm from this, when you avoid the nerves as we have said.
And similarly with the other foot's saphena vein in like manner.
The place of the sciatic veins is near the heel on the hollow side as we have said.
And the benefit of its incision is relief for hip pain when it occurs because of hot blood.
And the quality of its incision is such that the invalid can enter the bath and hurry; and bind his legs on the side of the hip right up to above the heel with a thin cord four fingers broad, for it does not appear except for this.
When it appears, then make its incision in any way that seems best to you or with a side cut; and this is better, or make an incision, or cut it off by division. The location is safer and its presence is often very hidden in many people.
The location is safer and its presence is often very hidden in many people. If you cannot find it and it does not appear at all to the senses: then take the phlebotomist's tool to some branch of it, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot, and towards the ears; and avoid the nerves, and let it drain as much blood as you wish.
Then loosen the binding, and place skin over the spot of bloodletting, and bind up the spot. It heals quickly.
On Cupping, and the quality of its use.
Cupping glasses are made from horns, brass, and glass.
Cupping is done in two ways. It involves scarifying the skin to let blood out, or cupping without scarifying.
This type of cupping that does not involve scarifying is also done in two ways. One way involves the use of fire. The other does not involve fire.
There are fourteen spots on the body where cupping that involves scarifying and letting blood is performed. The first is the armpit cup, at the end of the head; another is behind the neck on the nape; others are under both ears; another is below the jawbone and under the lower lip; there are two cups that cover both blades of the shoulders; one is over the tip of the coccyx; there are two cups placed in the middle of both arms; and finally, there are two cups on the two shins.
And cupping does not extract blood for you from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore their power does not diminish as it happens with phlebotomy. Nor is it necessary to administer cupping with fire or without fire for any disease caused by fullness until the entire body is evacuated.
If necessity calls for cupping due to illness or custom, we perform it at any hour, at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle.
This is because there are people who when blood multiplies within them and they need its extraction through cupping, find heaviness in their head and sodahan.
And among them are those who find fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. And among them are those who find itching on their face and forehead, darkness, and dimness in their eyes.
And among them are those who scar the site of their cupping. And among them are those whose laughter increases. And among them are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth or a boil forms on their tongue and they spit out blood. And among them are those whose sleep increases. And among them are those who see blood and redness, killings, wounds, and things similar to these in their sleep.
When therefore we see any of these things, and especially if it is on the thirteenth day of the month, we order cupping to be performed after two or three hours have passed from that time.
The advantage of wind-suction on the nape is that it brings relief to heaviness in the head and a clearing out for the eyes. However, it is necessary that this should be done after the evacuation of the entire body.
And indeed these cups serve as a substitute for bloodletting in the head.
And it is not permitted for those of a cold constitution or with catarrh to use this treatment. For it brings them great harm.
And for this reason it is not appropriate for the elderly or those with cold ailments of the head to use them.
But for whoever is diligent in its practice oblivion is generated over them.
And for this reason you should instruct the cupper to lower their hand with the cup briefly towards the floor, in order to avoid the generation of oblivion.
Wind-suction or Alkehel is a substitute for dark bloodletting and venesection, and it brings relief to asthma, chest constriction, shortness of breath, coughing, and fullness.
And it is necessary to stimulate the Alkehel cup briefly, for if it is left too long it produces weakness in the heart and stomach.
Wind-suction with the alhagdahim cup brings relief to head injuries, ophthalmia, migraine, and toothache, and is a substitute for venesection.
And you should instruct the cupper not to press their hand with scarring; so as not to cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
Windpipe incisions, however, beneath the chin collect alcohol into the mouth, and gum decay, and similar conditions that are found in the mouth; and substitute for the bloodletting of the two lips elsewhere.
Windpipe incisions of the spoons bring together reflection and warmth.
Windpipe incisions of the interior parts of two nostrils bring help to the bloodletting of three veins, Basilica, Fusca, and Cephalica: since it draws blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh; and those small veins draw from other larger ones until the drawing reaches the three veins.
And you must instruct the windpipe incisor not to proceed much with the scarification: since it is a place that has been stripped of flesh, and underneath are nerves and arteries.
The windpipe incisor which is used on the anus brings help to haemorrhoids of the Anus and lower ulcers.
And you must instruct the windpipe incisor to use a large cup and one made of copper: since the place needs strong suction, and perhaps delicate cups will break; and it should be scarified with deep scarification.
Windpipe incisions of the legs diminish noticeably: since they draw blood from the entire body and bring help to old pains in kidneys, wombs, and bladder; provoke menstruation, and bring help to gout and sciatica; and substitute for the bloodletting of two saphena veins and alhorcobeni.
However they weaken the body greatly, and cause many people to faint.
And the Ventosarum pack saddle is akin to the two-legged animal pack saddle of Ventosa.
The quality of the Ventosarum's position is such that you should place the cup on an empty bladder first and suck with moderate suction; do not prolong the application but rather apply them quickly and remove them quickly so that the fluids arrive at a location in equal numbers; and do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area reddening and swelling, and there is a redness of blood: then therefore make an incision and repeat the suction gradually. Next consider the arrangement of bodies.
For those of tender flesh who are few in pores, you should make one incision only; no more than that so as not to ulcerate the area.
And instruct the Ventosarum user to deepen the incision and lessen its breadth; moderate the sucking force regarding ease, speed, and gentle movement.
But if there is blood coarseness, you should make two incisions. Indeed, the first liquid opens a way for subtle blood removal and its watering; and as for the second investigation it is an exquisite exploration of the extraction of coarse blood.
But if the blood is very fecal, then make a third incision so as to achieve the ultimate outcome.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood gradually or a little at a time, one incision suffices for us. But if we wish to extract much blood then we should make many incisions.
If we measure that the blood is thick, then it must be scarified with a deep scarification; and an equal limit in scarification is the depth of the skin.
What should be administered from the oils at the placement of leeches, and what leech therapy cautions against.
In the case of one whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary that the leech sites be anointed with open, softening, resolving oils; if it is in the summertime, such as alkei oil, or violated oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from squash seed.
And if it is in the wintertime, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or sebesten oil; and similar to those.
If, however, the superfluity is thick and cold; then let it be myrobalan oil, or balm oil, or white popinjay oil, or dill oil; and similar to those.
If the leeching is of one with large pores and soft flesh; then it ought to be prohibited from oil, and it must be that these wash the leech sites thereof after leeching with rosewater, or with cold water, or with solatree water, or with squash water, or with purslane water; and similar to those.
He whose blood is of much moisture, let him wash the leeches with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumac; and similar to those.
Whose superfluities are thick, let him wash his leeches with old wine, or with lilac water, or with a dill decoction, or chamomile; and similar to those.
You must take care to avoid exposure to wind when exiting the bath or steam room; it is advisable to remain indoors for at least an hour or two after bathing.
One should not sleep immediately after exposure to wind.
What is the procedure for regulating Wind Exposure or Bloodletting prior to exposure?
After the procedure, one should consider first that if the patient who has undergone Wind Exposure or Bloodletting is of a choleric nature and their blood is marked by sharpness and inflammation then they must take cooling substances such as pomegranate molasses; also celery with vinegar and lettuce, and rocket: and things of this kind.
And remove all poultry, eggs, spices, and pickled foods from their diet; and things of this kind.
If their complexion is cold, they should drink syrup of honey or alum water and rocket seed; they must take light wine which is neither old nor new: they are to be advised on small meals. And remove all poultry, lamb; sparrows, that is to say small birds: and young pigeons they must not eat.
On the day of wind exposure and bloodletting, drinks should be taken in preference to food; some people are to be given a drink at fixed hours of alfaroch theriac or medicine made with musk (i.e. nutmeg) or alesselithe before wind exposure: either prior to or after bloodletting to strengthen the main organs and refine the blood. They should not take these drinks hot.
On flatulence without incision. Flask-shaped foments which are without incision are used for flatulence which are placed over the liver, spleen, gout, and over the belly, navel, loins, hip bone: since these members do not bear an incision upon them.
And they are not sought after, unless it be for drawing blood from a member to another member; as we place the flask-shaped foment over the nipples in the sickness of nosebleeds. And we use them to remove cold, viscous flatulence from the member and transfer it into another; as we place the flask-shaped foment over the belly and navel. For it rarefies the member, warms it up, and removes pain because it has resolved that flatulence.
It is also placed over the kidneys when an obstruction or stone occurs in them. By the virtue of its attracting force it perhaps opens up an obstruction or removes a stone from its place.
And it acts similarly when placed over the liver and spleen for removing flatulence from both.
And these flask-shaped foments are used empty with incision only. And sometimes they are used with fire.
And sometimes they are used full of warm water in cases of pleurisy; and that is to fill the flask-shaped foments, large ones, with hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The procedure for administering cupping with fire.
If the size of its opening is that of two open fingers as we have made it; and if its depth be half a palm's length; and on one side in about the middle there is a small hole of such a size to admit a needle: let it be made of copper or brass, of thick plates, smooth, equal, clean; so that when placed upon the body it may not injure the flesh; and within its centre, a transverse bar either of copper or iron whereon a candle with fire is placed.
And now this cup is made large; larger than the one we described and a little smaller than that according to the sicknesses and age of him who uses it.
For cupping for children, and people with frail bodies are other kinds than the cups used by men or strong persons.
The manner of placing this cup with fire on the body is as follows: first light a small wick made of coarse linen, or a little wax candle; and place it over the centre bar which is in the middle of the cup; so that when the fire is lighted, its flame does not reach to the lower part of the cup lest the patient's flesh be burnt.
Then place it on the body; and let your finger be over that hole of which I have spoken until you hold the cup firm: when you wish to remove it take off your finger from the orifice then steam will issue forth by this hole, and the cup will come away immediately.
Then light the wick again in its proper way and repeat the process if necessary.
In the case of a cup used in pleurisy with water, there is no transverse bar or hole; and it is not applied except by filling up with water and placing upon the body only.
And this is its form.
And the larger the cupping scarifier is, the more water it holds, the better it is.
On suspending the bloodletting cups.
Leeches are not applied to many places unless it is impossible to position the cups on those limbs because of their thinness, such as lips, gums, and similar. Or on a member stripped of flesh, such as a finger or nose, and similar.
And the quality of using them is this: you should get leeches from sweet waters, clean of rot.
Then they should be left for a day and night in sweet water until they are hungry and nothing remains in their bellies. Then the body is evacuated first with bloodletting and then with cupping. Then clean the member of the sick person until it is red. Afterward, they should be placed on top of it.
When they are full and fall off, and the site can be sucked with a cupping glass, then it is best; if not, wash the site with vinegar. Then with much water, rub, and express (the blood).
But if the course of blood continues after the leeches have fallen off and it drips, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and put it on top until the dripping ceases.
If blood multiplies, then pulverize on it zegi that has been ground or gallnuts, and things similar to these from the astringents, until the bleeding stops.
Or place halves of peeled broad beans on the site [of bleeding], and leave them until the beans stick to the wound, for the blood will cease.
And it is necessary if repetition of leeches is needed, when possible, to change them.
If, however, leeches are prevented from hanging [on], then clean the site with fresh blood. Or fix a needle in place until something comes out of the [wound] in blood. Then place them, for they themselves when they sense something of the blood, immediately adhere.
When therefore you wish them to fall off, sprinkle over them something of ground Aloe, or salt, or ashes; and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary for the art of medicine and deals with the restoration of fractures and accidents involving dislocations in bones.
Know this, sons: fools of doctors and ignoramuses boast about this chapter, who have never inspected an ancient book nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason it happens that this method is deprived of the sciences in our land. And I never encountered in it any good whatsoever, and I did not achieve from it what I have achieved except due to the length of reading ancient books, and study upon understanding them until I extracted that science from them.
Then I adhered to experiment and study throughout my life's length.
And now I have described for you from it within this Chapter all that my science contains: and about what has passed of my experiment after I abridged it for you, and relieved it of the busyness of elongation, and abbreviated it with final brevity, and showed it through final declination: and formed in it many shapes from the shapes of instruments which are administered within it when it is added to declination, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter 2.
It is necessary that we say within the prologue of this Chapter the summary statements and chapter sections which must first be understood by the practitioner to stand over their truth: namely so that you and those who are ready know or learn this noble craft, and others from you.
I say therefore that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or fall occurs to someone then you must first hasten to bleed them and loosen them, or do both simultaneously unless something prevents it like weakness of strength: or is the one who this happens to a child or decrepit old man; or is it a time of intense heat or extremely cold frost.
He should then be satisfied with his food, cold vegetables, and the meat of birds and kids; and avoid wine, fatty meats, and foods that fill the veins with blood. Until you are sure that the abscess is cured and there is no longer any fear of a discharge of matter to the limb, then let the patient return to his former diet with which he is accustomed.
When the broken bone begins to heal, the patient should be fed with very nourishing and sustaining foods that are rich in nutrients and viscosity such as porridge made from cooked wheat flour with water, rice, heads, feet, tripe of calves, eggs, fresh fish; strong wine, and similar things. For this diet brings about the quicker and better knitting together of fractures.
And you should know that when bones are broken in men who have reached old age and decrepitude, they cannot always be joined together again and heal according to their natural state because of the dryness of those individuals' members; rather they are healed and joined at such places which remain soft like the bones of small children.
However nature bonds over the broken bone from every side something like a glue that has thickness; this adheres to and tightens it until they are joined together and bound with one another until such time as it reaches its former strength and firmness such that is not prevented from doing anything it did before, and for this reason you must give nourishing food to the patient that have weight, viscosity, and a thick consistency just as we said.
And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members since a broken leg differs from a skull fracture, and a fractured breastbone differs from a broken spine; likewise all other parts differ one from another; I have come with an enumeration of every type of fracture set out in its own chapter. And the types of bone fractures also vary within themselves.
Because it becomes an arched fracture, apart from when splinters occur within it. And sometimes it becomes a fracture along the length of the bone; and there are splinters, that is, broken pieces, and projections coming off, as in a reed when it is cut with a knife for writing. And there are no projections; and it is a fracture with a wound and disruption at the end; and it is a small crevice-like fracture.
And for every type there is a specific tool or instrument for its restoration, as will be recalled later, set out in their respective places.
And from this the bone fracture is recognizedโits tortuousness and its prominence; and its appearance to the sense [of sight], and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent tortuousness of place, nor a sound on your touch when you handle the bone with agitation, and the patient does not feel great pain; then there is no fracture there, but possibly some tortuousness or small crevice: therefore one must not move it at all with hand and pressure, but rather place over it the medicines which will be recalled later, suitable to the place; then let it be bound with a fine bandage.
And know that when a place becomes arched and splits into two, apart from when splinters occur within it, but still every part is removed from its fellow; then you must begin your hour of rectifying it by equalizing it before a hot abscess occurs to it.
If he also has a hot abscess, then leave it for several days until the abscess quiets down. Then temper him according to whatever degree you please, depending on his gentleness and understanding.
And know that his recovery and the restoration of his equality is easier than that of a bone, where splinters occur.
Then bind him according to what you will recall about it.
But if there are splinters in the bone, then an extension of this fractured limb is necessary from two parts, whether it is a hand or foot: or with your own hand, if it's a small limb: or with two ropes, or with one rope and one hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb over a level place, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the fractured limb are extended: then try with all your skill and in whatever way possible to bring back those additions to their places: and beware so as not to cause pain or injury on the weak by your operation: and try as much as you can with your strength to join one bone with its fellow according to better shapes.
And it is necessary at that hour for you to try and handle him with your own hand. If therefore you see there anything unusual, correct it, and temper it with the measure of your strength.
And beware of excessive extension or strong compression as many fools do it. For many times they cause through their operation a hot abscess or contracting of the limb: as we have often seen from their operations.
Then attach it after equalization, perform the appropriate procedure, and secure that member; ensure rest and tranquility, and instruct the patient accordingly. And make sure he is cautioned not to move it during his watchful hours, or while asleep at the time of his turning, and agitating, and when making discharges, and all movements with his last remaining strength. And he should be cautioned against placing the member in a position that causes pain to follow. That is, because when he feels pain or injury in the positioning of the member, then it must be changed to another position where there is no pain.
And caution him to keep his position equal and straight, so that the member does not become twisted when restored.
And the quality of the fracture's fix is as I described it.
You should know that fractured members differ due to their smallness or largeness, and their shape.
Therefore, for those that are small, such as the arm, finger, thigh, and similar, there should be a soft, fine linen wrapping. For those that are large, such as the hip or leg, there should be a wide, coarse wrapping.
For a wide bandage connects the large member to itself on all sides of its equal binding so that no part is left uncovered.
Then start by applying an appropriate ointment to the site of equalization after you have evacuated it; apply this onto a soft dressing over the fracture location. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the site of fracture itself with three or four turns, according as the limb deserves; and squeeze your hand a little with the bandage.
Then go with him to the upper part above the site of fracture, and squeeze less than your previous tightness where you tightened the broken area. Then stretch yourself with the wrap away from the site of fracture somewhat, and loosen the tightness gradually until you obtain something large from a healthy place.
Then take another splint, and wrap it again over the broken area with turns. Afterwards go with the wrapping to the lower part below the fracture. And let your work be in the tightness of the wrapping and its loosening, as we said about the first upper wrap.
Then place between the wraps some soft linen or cloth to fill any gaps due to the fracture's curvature, if there is such a curvature; otherwise do not put anything into it.
Then wrap over the same splint with another one. Afterwards place on top of these wraps pads made from linen strips cut off-centre immediately, if there is no swelling or hot abscess at the site.
However, if there is swelling or an abscess, then place on it what sits over the abscess and draws off pus; and leave it for a few days. Then tighten the pads over it.
The pads can be made from halves of reeds scraped and shaped skilfully; or they can be made from wood used to make sieves which are made from pine or cypress, that is, palm branches, or rushes: and the width of each pad should conform to this shape and have the same outline.
However, the star-shaped instrument which is placed over that incision should be a little thicker and wider than the other instruments; and the length of the instrument should depend on the size and magnitude of the member.
Then tie over the star-shaped instrument with another thread according to the same first ligation. Then bind above with threads off-centre, as we have explained about the ligation; and it is necessary that your ligation should be tighter over the place of fracture than elsewhere; and the more distant from the fracture the binding is, the looser it should be.
And it is necessary that the threads should be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the case of some ignorant operators who use their own threads made from twisted linen cords, it is a serious mistake; for when these are pulled they slip out of position.
And thin threads are equally unsuitable; for you do not achieve the intended ligation with them.
And it is necessary that there should be no more than the width of one finger between star-shaped instruments.
If the patient is injured by the ends of the instruments after the ligation in healthy places, then place under them soft tow or crimson wool until nothing further is harmed by it.
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and it happens that the skin is torn, I shall return to this point specifically in chapter two.
And note that it is not necessary for every broken member to be bound with star-shaped instruments from the first day onwards. That is, because when a member is large, you should not place stars on it unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your assessment of the risk of warm abscess.
And this is the method of plasters by which the ancients restored what was broken or dislocated.
The method of the common abbreviated plaster that restores fractures and is suitable for many constitutions, especially women and children; since it is such that neither heat nor cold conquer.
And it is as if you were to take dust from the mill and marrow flour that hangs on the walls of the mill near the movement of the millstone: and prepare it just so except that sifters should sieve it with egg white: and lay down its mixture not thick, nor thin. Then use this.
The method of another plaster that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists. Take almess (almes), laudanum, acacia, enula (elecampane root) and mugwort; of all sucks take 10 ounces, myrrh and aloes each take 5 ounces, and alythil (galbanum) take 20 ounces; grind everything together three times and sift it with egg white or water: mix them with alethil water or egg white if the constitution of the patient is hot. Then use this plaster. For it is of good constitution, restoring broken bones quickly and suiting many people.
The method of another plaster that also suits fractures and twists. Take mugwort, mallow, and white althea, of each 10 ounces; myrrh, 5 ounces; aloe, 5 ounces; acacia, 6 ounces; Armenian bole, 20 ounces. All these are to be thoroughly pounded and then sifted, and mixed with water or a fresh egg white: they are then to be administered.
The method of applying a plaster to joints or separated bones; it soothes sudden pain in them, and the bone dislocation, fracture. Let dressed wool be taken, submerged in vinegar and cooked oil; then place it on the affected area.
This plaster has no restorative power but is good for soothing hot inflammations; and it specifically eliminates pain.
The method of applying a plaster which restores broken bones. Take the leaves of deaf fig and wild poppy; grind all together to make a plaster out of both.
The method of applying an abbreviated plaster to aid the restoration process for bone fractures; this is also effective when you want a remaining inflammation to resolve. Take althea root, chamomile, violet flowers and herb meal; all in equal parts. Grind them all up then mix with wine if the affected limb is not hot.
If the limb is hot then mix it with moist coriander water or just water; use as required.
The method of applying another stronger plaster to resolve an issue; more effective than the previous one when a hard inflammation occurs during the limb's restoration process. Take a part of the root of althea, and a part of flax seeds, and balaustia, and mellilot, and chamomile, and violet flowers, and camomile, all in equal parts; grind them all up, and make an ointment with willow water, or sweet water, or wine. Apply all of that according to the warmth of the limb, and the calming of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that anything should be placed on a broken limb during its restoration other than a poultice made of clay and oil; he specified that it should be neither too thick nor too thin.
Galen believed that things should be placed on a broken limb during its restoration which draw out heat and dryness, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense, and other similar substances of the kind we have described.
The way to make an ointment which soothes wounds and pain. Take mallow, and chickpeas, and cut human hair or bird feathers, and althea, all in equal parts; grind them up, sift them through a sieve, then make an ointment from the mixture.
The length of time that the dressing should stay in place depends on when you observe that the patient is not suffering from pain or itching and the fractured bone has not shifted from its position; if this is so, then do not remove it for many days. But if they do experience severe itching or disturbing pain at the site of the dressing, or swelling occurs; then be quick to remove it within an hour and take away the ointment from them: instead apply a soft cloth or a soft marine sponge which has been soaked in warm water; wash the area with this until the itching subsides and the pain is settled.
But if they do experience severe itching or disturbing pain at the site of the dressing, or swelling occurs; then be quick to remove it within an hour and take away the ointment from them: instead apply a soft cloth or a soft marine sponge which has been soaked in warm water; wash the area with this until the itching subsides and the pain is settled. Let the limb rest for an hour. Place over it a woolen compress soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil; bind this over for one night until you are sure the warmth has dispersed from the abscess, and let the limb rest until its inflammation subsides and its pain is relieved.
Then return to the fine stitch and a small plaster; do not draw this tight like your first one but keep it light until healed.
If you see that the abscess and redness are gone along with pain, inflammation, and all other symptoms, yet needing plaster or stitch, repeat as at first.
If nothing has happened to the limb as we said then do not remove it until after three or four or five or seven days. And when you remove it after twenty days from the limb as seems to you from its solution as we said until bone adheres and flesh grows over, then add more stitches than your first set altogether: also give a greater increase in soft food than last time.
But if you see the fracture site drying out more than should, then know nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Scour it with warm water around each time you remove it and let this be for three days; also ease the stitch a little.
Through this treatment nourishment flows to the limb and it heals quickly.
But that which ignorant restorers do on the other side of a fracture when it does not heal as it should and heals with twist is their treatment fault and great fear; if right they would have said so say the ancients in their books and done likewise.
And I have not seen any traces of them whatsoever there, and it is more correct that this should not be done.
Manufacturing an accident in the head.
Types of fractures vary greatly in form and there are many causes.
One type of fracture is caused by a sword strike; the blow removes bone down to the marrow beneath it, as an axe does with wood; hence this kind of fracture is called axial.
Or the sword cuts into some bone and nicks its surface but does not penetrate all the way through; this type is called kalaan, meaning an absolute levitation.
And it is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
There is the fracture caused by crushing or grinding; its cause may be a blow with a stone, or a fall on rock, or something similar.
This fracture can also be a penetration one, which approaches the membrane beneath bone; or it is on the surface of bone; and this wound may equally be either small or large.
There is a fracture hidden within bone as fine as hair; it is a small crack and so this type is called capillaris.
A fracture may result from a fall or blow by stone (or the like), which makes bone flake inward and form a hollow; as happens with air bladders when they are struck and some of their contents sink inside.
And indeed it occurs mostly in the heads of moist bones, such as are the heads of children.
And there occur with all these types of fractures the dislocated, separated bones, and I shall come with a reminder of that whole thing in its place.
And we recognize all these types of fractures by examination of them and investigation with probes, as well as the removal of corrupted flesh that is on them.
The hairline type is recognized by this: when it is detected over the bone and wiped clean, and a cauterizing iron is passed over it; for the fracture then appears black.
But when treating a fracture, first consider the patient's condition: then if you see from their condition any signs that clearly indicate fear, such as vomiting, fainting, loss of intellect, loss of voice, syncope, acute fever, or red and bulging eyes, and other similar symptoms in many conditions, certainly they will not heal; and if you see conditions that do not terrify you, and hope for healing: then begin their treatment.
That is, if one comes to you wounded first with a bone wound: and it is in the days of winter, then you must strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day according to every condition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what lies beneath the bone becomes corrupted and those conditions that we described occur.
If the bone fracture has already reached the membrane touching the brain, and is accompanied by minute fragments and retraction: then you must cut away the comminuted and abraded parts, as I have described to you.
And you should scrape away the scalp of the wounded person; and expose the bone according to any method that is possible for you, both in accordance with the shape of the wound and what is light over the sick person.
If it should happen to you that during the exposure of the bone there is a flow of blood or a hot abscess, then oppose it with what is appropriate. And you should fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess subsides, and be confident that there will not be any flow of blood. Then begin the treatment of the bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with an Incisory knife of sharp steel; and this is its form.
Then apply another wider Incisory knife after the first; and this is its form.
Then apply yet another even wider Incisory knife than the previous one.
The second method is to have a number of different Incisory knives, some wider than others and some shorter than others; their ends should be very sharp and made of iron or steel: and strike them on the Incisory knife gently so as not to shake the head, and injure it.
If however the bone is hard and tough: then it is necessary to bore around its circumference before you apply the Incisories, with drills which are called Non-penetrating Drills; they are not so named unless because itself does not penetrate through the thickness of bone to that which is behind it, on account of a rounded end beneath the head of it, which is sharp like a chisel and a small circle prevents submerging into and penetrating the density of the bone.
You should take a large number of these drills, each suitable for the thickness of the bone, until you have a drill for every part of the skull; the point of each drill must be suited to the length and breadth according to the thickness of that particular skull.
These are three types of drills or trepans.
The quality of the hole-making around the broken bone is such that you place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then change the drill to another place and put what is between all the holes in the thickness of a finger, or around it.
Next, cut with knives what is between all the holes in the bone; make it thinner than you can on that side of fineness, as we have said, until you remove the bone either by hand or with some other of the instruments which you prepared for this purpose such as forceps and fine scissors.
And you must take every precaution to ensure that the drill or knife does not touch any of this dura mater.
When you have gone all around the bone by drilling and separated it from the dura mater, if this is continuous with it and you draw it out, then you must scrape and trim evenly that end which remains in the bone with another knife similar to the first one. However, it should be thinner and finer than the other knives.
If any of the small bones or membranes remain, then take them away carefully with what you have at hand from among your instruments. Then treat the wound after that with dressings and ointments as we have said.
And there is another method of operating which is easy and completely remote from danger; this was described by Galen, who praised it highly. These are his words. It is necessary for you first of all to begin by laying bare that portion of the bone where the fracture is most violent and evident; until when you have laid it bare, place under it this end of the Lenticular knife, which has this shape.
And the lenticular part, which is smooth does not cut anything; and its sharp part, which tapers on both sides lengthwise as you see, so that the lenticular part rests upon the siphon with its sharp edge facing toward the bone.
Then strike upon the knife from one side with a small mallet until you cut through the entire bone without difficulty, as it gives way; and be confident about your cloth wrapping so that nothing happens to it which you fear at all.
And if the surgeon were not stupider than other men and more ignorant of it; nor sleeping, then should any part of the cloth remain attached to the bone in certain places, he would cut that away from it with the end of this very lenticular knife, and remove it easily. It is freed from that without injury and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not extend through to the cloth, and what is torn away from the bone is its surface, while roughnesses and fine splinters remain in it; then you must scrape off that roughness, and remove those splinters with fine scrapers of various sizes which you have prepared, so that you can use ones most suitable and best for each place according to what the operation leads you to, and also according to the fractured bone itself and its shape. You must ensure that your blades are sharpened, especially those of the scalpels. Then use the finer one afterwards.
You must ensure that your blades are sharpened, especially those of the scalpels. Then use the finer one afterwards. And do not stop doing this continuously until you reach the finest and sharpest of them all.
For each of the smaller hairline fractures and subtle breaks, it is essential to provide care in accordance with what leads to its correction.
And this is something that cannot be hidden from anyone who has any interest in this art; they should pay attention to what we have written and demonstrated regarding major fractures.
If a piece of skin is found to be retained when you remove the bone, then you must take a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil before placing it over the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of cloth, doubled or tripled, and soak it in wine and rose oil before placing it over the first piece of cloth; do this as gently as you can to avoid irritating the wound.
Next apply a broad bandage on top; do not tighten it unless necessary to keep the wound closed; leave it in place for one or two days until you are confident that there is no risk of hot pus developing. Then remove the bandage and apply afterwards medicines that deal with excessive dryness; such as lily roots, herb flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; it is best to make a powder out of these medicines and sprinkle them over the wound like a dry dusting.
And universally administer to it all medicine whose property is to cleanse and not bite. And ensure that according to your skill, the wound during your treatment is clear and clean: with neither any ointment scum nor filth on it.
And ensure that according to your skill, the wound during your treatment is clear and clean: with neither any ointment scum nor filth on it. Nor should you allow any pus to form on it at all; for when pus forms over the brain's membrane, it corrupts and rots it and then a great harm befalls the patient after that: and this happens in head wounds too, once the bone is cleaned, especially if its treatment is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore, consider that if any of the complications we've described happen to your patient, you should know it is undoubtedly harmful.
And if blackness doesn't happen unless it's caused by the medicine you've put on it and it's in that medicine's power to make this blackness: then take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and mix them with linen cloths. Then put it on this wound; afterward treat it with appropriate healing spices until it's healed.
On resetting a broken nose:
Know that only its two upper parts break at the same time or one of them; for it consists of two bones: since its lower part is cartilage, it doesn't break but can suffer abrasion, twisting and crevice formation instead.
If one of its two upper parts breaks, then you should put your little finger in the nose's hole and bring that broken part back into place with your index finger inside and thumb outside until it regains its normal shape; and do this skilfully but gently. And beware, lest your operation cause that pain upon the patient.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach it with your finger; then you must equalize with a small radius rod.
But if the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar to that and hasten with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after seven or ten days during the healing of the warm swelling.
Next, insert a linen wick into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part; or insert two wicks if the fracture is in two parts: and let the wick be of such thickness as to fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers said that the wicks should be dipped in butter, and changed every day. That, however, does not seem right to me; rather, the wick should be dipped in white of egg, made with flour dust. Then leave the wick until the bone hardens and the cartilage strengthens.
And sometimes a goose quill is inserted into the nose instead of a wick, after it is wrapped with soft cloth; and this holds the broken nose more firmly, so that the patient is not prevented from breathing.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, use the wicks.
If, while operating, a hot pustule occurs on the nose again, treat it with nasal plasters made of caerbath or coto steeped in rosehip oil, or with a small amount of dyakylon.
If a hot pustule does not occur, then the plaster itself should be made with sesame flour and powder of incense mixed with egg white. Then place a soft pad on top, and do not tie the nose with anything at all.
However, if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then it is necessary to make an incision above them and extract them using suitable instruments. Then suture the incision, and treat it with what promotes flesh growth and consolidation using appropriate plasters or ointments.
If there is a wound between the nostrils, it should be treated with lint; and a lead pipe should be inserted into it until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is disrupted.
When the lower jaw is disrupted and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound, examine whether it is fractured on the outside only and has not broken into two parts, and that it remains within; then its diagnosis is easy.
If its fracture is on the right side, it is necessary to insert the left index finger into the patient's jaw; similarly, if the fracture is in their left jaw, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and push with it the swelling of the fracture inward from outside with ease using your other hand from inside the displaced bone part, and align them.
If the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two parts, then you must apply extension from both sides, according to its straightness, until it is possible to achieve alignment.
However, if there is already loosening or breakage of the teeth, then you should bind those which you hope will remain with gold wire or silver, or with silk thread. Then place a poultice on the broken jaw. Then place on top of it a doubled cloth, and put on the cloth a large flat stone, or a piece of leather sole equal in size (to the jaw), lengthwise.
Then bind it from above according to how its binding has been prepared for you and the suitability of its application until it is healed; and direct the patient towards calmness and rest, and provide him with soft, easily-absorbed food.
However, if you consider that its shape is changing in some way, then hasten to remove the binding on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and apply a plaster to it made of flour of lentils with egg white, or with sesames flour; after you have removed the poultice, and place over this soft wool.
While the plaster remains bound to it, and there is no change in the arrangement of bones, release it (the patient) without removing it until it is healed; or if you bind the fracture. For this fracture often takes three weeks to heal with binding.
If meanwhile there arises a hot swelling, then apply what we have spoken of many times to its reduction, until that swelling is removed.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, consider it. If the piece of bone has already been separated from it, or by surgery: then consider carefully how to remove these fragments of bone with what is appropriate for you among your instruments.
But if the wound's opening is narrow, then widen it with a scalpel according to your needs.
Then, when you have removed the fragments and none remain in it, close the wound if it is wide; but if not, place over it a plaster that suits its type, and heal it until healed.
On the restoration of the Forkbone when it is broken.
The Forkbone is indeed often broken on its front side from the shoulder-blade, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Or it breaks and separates into two pieces without fragments; this is easier to restore.
Or there may be bone fragments; this is more difficult to restore.
Or the fracture occurs with wounding.
The procedure in this case when the fracture is without wounding consists of making two assistants present so that one holds the support which follows the broken Forkbone and the other extends the neck towards him.
Then align the fracture with your fingers until it takes its proper form without protuberance or depression.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place under the patient's ticklish spot a sphere made of cloth or wool; and let its size be according to the amount needed; extend and raise the fork, and shorten the sphere with your hand until the fracture is reduced as it should be.
If you cannot draw the end of the fork outwards because it has gone too deep, then the patient must lie on their back with a pillow of medium size under their shoulder; have your assistant press down on the patient's shoulder towards the lower parts until the head of the fork that is in the depths is raised upwards; and then straighten the fracture and align it with your fingers.
If you feel a splinter from the fork, and it moves, then you must cut open above it and extract that splinter easily.
If it is retained in the bone, then use your tool on its incision with one of the knives you prepared for it, after you have placed under the fork the preserving instrument; and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It resembles a spoon that has no hollow.
Its width should be according to the size of the bone by which you need it, and its smallness. Its length should also be according to what is possible for you in the operation.
It should have two ends as you see, one end broad and the other narrow.
If the wound opening that you cut when extracting the splinter of bone is broad and you are sure it is free from pus, then sew together the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the rupture is small or you fear a hot abscess: then fill the wound with cloths and dressings according to the size of the tear of the injury.
If a hot abscess occurs, then soak a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top.
However, when a bone protrudes without a wound and without amputation, you should apply a plaster made from flour and egg white on top of it. And place soft tow on top of it. Then put a ball under the armpit if you need to support it. Then take a haematoma, that is, the wheel used by the Saracens which should be very long and its width should be one palm or close to it. Then place a folded dressing on the tow and plaster. Then take a small wooden board whose width is three fingers long, and its length should be similarly so. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the wooden board in that place of the haematoma which falls over the fracture and joint. Then place the haematoma over the fracture as you have rolled it up and wrap it around their neck with one armpit above and another below; bring it back to cover every part such that the protrusion supports the bone; this is so that nothing will be hidden from you, and all of it in a way which does not remove the wooden board from on top of the broken bone. You must examine the patient every day. Whenever the wound is softened, and you see that the bone has already moved; then straighten it, and tighten the splint.
Then place the patient's pillow on his back, and put under his armpit, near their pillow, a small cushion at night, so that when they are lifted up it can support them from beneath. Thus the fracture of the forearm is elevated by raising the shoulder.
Or bind their arm to their neck; and do not loosen the splint if nothing untoward happens from itching or an abscess until twelve days have passed.
Then renew the plaster if you see that its surface has worn away. And add to its tightness, and leave it until the fracture has healed and become firm.
The fracture of the forearm is indeed tightened and strengthened greatly within twenty-eight days; and sometimes it happens sooner for some people.
On the healing of a dislocated shoulder.
The shoulder is rarely broken except towards the outer side of it; and what breaks from it are only its edges.
When a part of it breaks and the fracture is in its middle, and you cannot see this except by feeling; then according to the form of the fracture attempt the preparation for it. And reduce it as much as you can with all your skill to its original shape.
Then place flour powder from a mill with egg white on the wound, and soft lint, and put a little bandage made of doubled cloth on top. Then place over it a flat wooden spatula with an edge that is as wide as the entire spatula or slightly larger.
If however there is any indentation under the spatula at some of its places, then fill this indent with soft lint until it descends to equal level.
Then strap it on top with long bandages of linen that are tight-fitting and secure the spatula firmly until you cannot move it from its place.
And check the dressing every day. Whenever the dressing softens therefore, tighten it and level out the spatula if it moves from its place; and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
And the spatula is replaced after twenty or twenty-five days.
When this number of days is complete therefore, untie the bandage; and you will be safe. For it is made of bones whose fracture or separation is not feared.
But if you find that a piece of bone has broken off and is sticking out through the skin, then cut above it, and take it away. And do what we have said regarding the treatment of a broken fork with hot poultice if anything happens from it.
On repairing fractures of the chest.
The chest sometimes breaks in its middle part, and this happens rarely. Its extremities indeed break frequently, and get crushed due to its accidents.
When its middle part breaks towards the lower parts, and it suffers great pain, and difficulty in breathing, along with a cough; and maybe vomits blood, as well as reveals the depression of the broken bone, which does not escape feeling, The restoration is to make the patient lie on his back on his bed: and place pillows between their shoulders.
Then press his shoulders, and bring the ribs together from both sides with your hands: and carefully align it in every way possible until the shape of the bone returns to how it should be.
Then place a plaster and a poultice on top of it, and put a star-shaped splint made from thin willow or hazel wood over this, and ones similar to its lightness, after you have wrapped them in cloth. Then carefully bandage it over the broken bone so that it does not move: and go with the bandage around its back several times, and tighten it with an appropriate tension.
Then check the bandage every hour, and whenever it loosens, tighten it: and if its condition leads to a need for removal due to itching or corrosion in that place, or pain, or abscesses: then hurry up and remove it, take off the plaster, and correct what happened with an appropriate way of treatment.
Then bring back the plaster if you see it facing outwards: and attach a new bandage to it until it heals.
The restoration of ribs, when they are broken.
You know that rib fractures do not occur except at the thick parts which follow the back and from their ends on the front side. And they do not suffer abrasion except for this reason: that they are made of cartilage. Perception of the same is not hidden from sense during investigation with the fingers.
And their restoration is done in this way: you bring the fracture back together with your fingers as much as possible until the shape has been restored to what it should be. Then apply plaster casts and bind the broken bone with splints if they need it.
And if the rib fracture is towards the internal organs, then the patient experiences severe pain and stabbing, like the stabbing which occurs to one who has pleurisy, because of this the bone pierces the lung and they also experience difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting a lot of blood; this condition is difficult to cure.
The ancients have devised many ingenious techniques for this and among them are those who say that you should feed the patient food which causes inflammation and gas in order to inflame the abdomen so that it extends outwards and pushes the fracture out towards the outside.
We however reject that it should be done quickly to cause a hot abscess if one does not occur. But if an abscess has already occurred then you should put something else into it.
And some of them said: a gas-causing substance should be placed on the site and then sucked out with force; this is similar to reasoning. However, there is a concern that it may draw superfluous fluids towards itself due to its weak constitution.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the wound be covered with wool that has already been soaked in warm oil; and they should place little pellets between the ribs until it is full, so that there may be an equal binding when you wrap it around according to its roundness.
Afterwards the patient should be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
But if the patient is severely oppressed by it and cannot tolerate it, and when we open up the bandage their mouth is injured by the sharp object, and we fear for the patient; then we must cut open the wound and expose the broken rib. Then we should place on it the instrument for healing a fracture, which has been mentioned previously; and we cut through the bone with ease, and we set the broken ends together.
Afterwards we should bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a stitch; and we heal it with plasters until it is cured.
But if a hot abscess should occur meanwhile, then hasten and pour little pellets into rose oil, and place it on the wound; and the patient will be treated for an abscess with what is suitable to its condition.
Meanwhile they should also lie on their side until it heals.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebra of the back and neck.
Indeed fractures of the bones of the neck sometimes occur; and they rarely suffer abrasion, just like the vertebra of the back. When this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider the following factors. If you see that their hands have become soft and numb, and dead; they cannot move them, stretch them or grip with them; and when you squeeze them with your fingers and prick them with a needle, they do not feel it and there is no pain: then know that they will not recover, and in most cases this condition is fatal.
But if they can move them and feel the grip with their fingers and the pricking [with a needle]: then know that the bone is undamaged, and that the patient will recover with treatment.
If the same condition affects the vertebrae of the back, and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider their feet: if you see that these have become soft, and what happens in them is similar to what happens in the hands, and when they lie on their back wind goes out and waste comes out without control; and when they turn onto their belly, waste comes out without control; and when they turn onto their back again, and want to urinate but cannot: then know that it is fatal. Therefore do not trouble yourself with treating them.
If none of this happens to them, the condition is less serious.
And the treatment for this condition is to apply a soothing poultice of warm compresses; so that you place on the affected vertebra only rose oil mixed with ground beef.
Apply this several times a day until the warm swelling subsides; then place over it one of the tightening, drying plasters and bind it tightly with a bandage: and instruct the patient to rest and remain calm. He must not sleep on the side where he finds pain until it is cured.
If this happens due to the grinding of bone splinters or something that has already separated from it, then you must cut above the skin and remove it. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches. Then treat it with any flesh-colored ointment until it is healed.
But if the last bone of the hip is broken and it is the end of the tailbone: then you must put your left thumb into the anus, and with the other hand equally align the broken bone as far as possible, and do this a second time.
Then place something over it, remove it, and treat the wound with the previous cure until it is healed.
On restoration of the anus.
Chapter 11.
Bones of the anus rarely break. If they do break, then their fracture is not a break but rather crushing at the ends; and they are split lengthwise and fall into the bowel; and it happens that the patient feels pain in the place, and an ache; and the leg that was broken goes to sleep.
And its restoration is that you must extend your hand over it until you feel the fracture as shown in the figure.
If the fracture is only at its ends then align that fracture according to what is prepared for you in the figure until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is longitudinal or has already shifted inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach until you prepare to repair the fracture. When you have therefore equalized it, place a plaster cast upon it; then put on top of it a splint made of wood or leather, and bind the binding firmly over which you fear no change in the fracture nor displacement of the splint.
Evenly compress the concavity with that which fills it until the binding takes hold of it equally; and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
If a hot swelling should occur, then cease extending it and repairing it until the hot swelling subsides; and place on top of it what sits upon it as previously described, then return to its repair; and bind it as necessary.
If there is splintering of the bone or shattering, extract it.
On the repair of a broken arm.
The splint is that which is between the elbow and the head of the spatula.
If it breaks, its repair is by one of two methods.
One of which is to take a flat piece of wood, half the thickness, in this shape that follows.
And bind two bindings at both ends.
Then hang it from an elevated place; and have the patient sit on a chair. He should then place his broken arm on a wooden support until he reaches his little finger, in the middle of which is attached the curved part of the wood.
Then hang something heavy above it so that it stretches out his arm downwards. Then the doctor should align the fracture with his hands until it returns to its proper place.
Another method is to have the patient lie on their back with their neck bent backwards; then hang his arm from his own neck using a strap. Instruct two assistants to hold it; one above the fracture with his hands and the other below, each pulling in their own direction.
And if you want a stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with one strap and above it with another; each of the two assistants should pull in their own direction.
If the fracture is near the shoulder joint, then one strap should be placed below the little finger and another below the fracture towards the elbow.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow joint, then a strap should be placed above that point and another above the elbow itself.
Then align the fracture easily without effort until it is properly aligned and well set; then bind it if there is no hot swelling.
If there is hot swelling, then leave the binding until the seventh day. And place on it a woolen compress soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the swelling subsides; then bind it; the method of binding is to apply a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a bandage made from new cloth over the plaster. Then bring their arm up for support, and place their open hand over their shoulder.
And place the cloth and secure it tightly over their arm as a splint, so that the arm remains fixed in position; if nothing hinders you from doing this, then no part of the broken bone will shift against you.
If you fear that something from the broken bone might shift against you, then use splints; and it is best to place over the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And place your finger between the width of each splint; and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an additional three fingers' breadth on either side.
Then bind tightly over the splints using the binding I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is best that your binding be tighter over the area of fracture itself. And the more the fracture extends, let your binding be less tight.
If therefore you see that the splints and binding are placed as we have said when you restore their limb just now, then do so; and if you fear a hot inflammation, then loosen the binding and remove the splints until the seventh day, as we mentioned.
Then inspect the ligature every three days so that there is no itching or swelling at the site, nor does food fail to reach the limb due to excess binding. Therefore correct everything according to what we have said.
If it is with confidence that nothing will happen from it, then do not remove the ligature unless after three days or more.
And if the patient's sleep is on their back with their hands over their stomach, place beneath them as a pillow a pad full of wool evenly.
And consider every hour of the night or day to ensure that the broken member's position is not altered nor the ligature loosened. Therefore, rectify it all with your best efforts.
And provide the patient's food according to the order we outlined earlier, so that their diet is soft at first until the jaw begins to tighten; then you must thicken their food.
For the jaw and leg are usually bound for forty days; it must then be loosened, a bath administered, and it is anointed with ointments that correct it.
But if the fracture is foul and crushed, then do not remove from it the ligature and splints for fifty days or up to two months.
### On Restoring a Broken Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two forearm bones.
One of these is small; this one follows the thumb. The other one is large and it is placed below the small bone from underneath.
Perhaps only the larger forearm bone is broken, or perhaps it's just the smaller one; perhaps they are both broken at once.
When the lower jaw is broken in a small area, its restoration is easy and healing is easier.
And when the lower jaw is broken badly, its fracture is bad, and healing is difficult.
This situation is worse when both bones break at the same time.
If the broken bone is a small part of the upper jaw, it is best for the doctor to apply a small extension during its restoration until they are level.
If the broken bone is a large part of the jaw, then a very strong extension must be applied.
A hand-shaped mould should be placed during its restoration with the extended part elevated on a pillow. The thumb of the hand should be higher than all its fingers and its knuckles lower than any other or the rest: the patient must then sit square on themselves with a pillow before them or directly under them at an elevated height so as not to cause them effort.
Then the attendant should extend their arm from beneath it or with their hand or with a ligature. Another attendant must similarly extend from above.
Then the doctor should level the bone until it is returned to its best possible form.
But if there are splinters of bone in the fracture then try to restore every piece back into its place with your strength.
If however you see a splinter that has separated and is piercing the skin, with no hope of restoring it, then find its place and remove it as we have said above.
If there is a fracture with a wound, I have already made a special chapter on it, so take the treatment from there.
If at the beginning of your restoration a hot abscess occurs, then line a piece of cloth with an ointment made of rose oil, white wax and beeswax of medium thickness and softness: bind the cloth on it tightly with fine bandages until the abscess subsides; then remove the ointment and apply a plaster prepared from flour and egg whites. Then apply splints; the one applied over the fracture itself should be somewhat wider and stronger.
And note that the number of splints for the arm is six in most cases; whether there is a fracture in one bone or two bones at once.
Then apply your bandage over the fracture site more tightly and strongly; somewhat tighter above or below it: or make the bandaging softer where indicated earlier in this chapter.
And the cloths that wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist; not hard or rough. And the thread that binds it should be of pure linen, medium between fine and coarse, as we have said.
And examine the limb and its ligaments after several days. If anything that requires correction occurs, such as itching of the limb: then you should bathe the limb with warm water until the itching stops and release the limb from bandaging until it rests; after that repeat the binding.
If the bandage is already loosened, and the bone removed along with similar things: then you must correct it all by your skill, and examine it again.
If nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive constriction, then you must soften it a little and leave it for several days until nourishment can reach it again, then tighten it.
If none of the aforementioned problems occur to the patient then they need not be released until after around twenty days.
Then let the patient's hand hang from their neck. Their neck should be level [with the wound] and they must be prevented from any violent movements by their own strength. Make them sleep on their back.
This fracture heals within thirty days or thirty-two, perhaps twenty-eight. All of this depends on the characteristics of the individual's constitution and strength.
On the healing of fractures to the hand.
It is rare for the fingers or knuckles of the hand to suffer fracture. This does not occur unless by frequent attrition [of these bones].
When fracture or attrition of the heel occurs then the patient must be seated square [on an elevated seat] and a corresponding stool placed before them. Then place their hand upon it, outstretched.
Then let the attendant stretch the broken bones until they join together with good alignment.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and lint, lest a warm abscess occur. Next place the dressing on top according to the size of the wound, and you have now wrapped it with a linen cloth.
But if the fracture is towards the lower part near the sole of the foot, then make a similar sphere out of cloth and advise the patient to press their fractured foot against it; afterwards bind it with a long cloth.
And let the dressing be made of leather, which should be soft so that it conforms to the shape of the foot; and bind it as tightly as is required.
But if the fracture is on the outside, then you must place a dressing on top and another underneath on the sole of the foot; and let the hand be open and straight. Next bind it as you would wrap the hand, and extend this binding between the toes with a bandage.
If any of the joints are fractured, then if it is the thumb bind as required. Then bind it with the foot, and if there is swelling apply a straight dressing to it; this will raise the fracture and prevent movement.
But if the fracture is in any other fingers such as the middle, index, little or ring finger; then bind it and secure it with a healthy finger next to it, or you may bind all of them together in sequence which is better. Or apply a small dressing on top as we said for the thumb.
And be mindful of the restoration process and afterwards as you deal with any warm abscesses; apply what is necessary when something occurs according to your instructions.
The restoration of a broken hip.
The hip bone is frequently broken, and this becomes apparent to the senses: since it turns towards the inner and rear parts.
And its restoration is done in such a way that the ligament above the fracture is tied tight, and another ligament beneath the fracture. And the patient shall be laid out on their face.
Then the attendant must stretch out every ligament to its proper place according to its equality: and this when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
But if the fracture is near the root of the hip bone, then let a ligament be towards the pectineal muscle, so that the stretching goes upwards: and another ligament beneath the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then let a ligament be near the knee, so that the stretching goes downwards.
Then the physician should equalize the bone with both hands until it is brought back to its normal shape; and the bone must be joined by a good joining together.
Then it is necessary to put on a plaster cast and bandage if the limb does not develop an abscess. But if there is an abscess, then leave it for a few days until the hot abscess subsides; afterwards return to your treatment.
The bandage should be like this: You must wrap over the fracture a piece of linen cloth, that is, a bandage; and twice double it, or even triple it: and let there be some extra left over. Then wrap the leg until you reach the heel at the base of the buttocks.
Insert a long thread between the hip and leg near the knee towards the bottom, and the ends of the thread come out from the upper part of both sides. Then wrap the remaining bandage over the leg and hip.
Then place splints over the hip at the fracture site, and put one splint over the leg bone.
Then fill the gaps between the leg and hip with soft pads to even out the tightness.
Then start with a tight bandage from the middle, over the fracture site with three or four turns. And the further you extend the bandage from the fracture site, let your bandaging be looser and softer.
Then go towards the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the hip and leg. Tie with both three splints which are above. Then go with the two ends of thread towards the bottom until you reach the heel of the foot. And with both, tighten the ends of the splints from the other side so that the bandage does not come off its place.
Then leave the bandage on until it is healed so that no erosion, abscess or swelling happens to the limb and similar things. If any of these happen, then... Soak it with the remedy for that problem, and correct what happened completely as we have said many times.
If there is a piece of bone that pierces from the bone itself: then it must be removed equally, if it is possible for you to do so. And if not, put it over that [piece of bone], remove it, and care for the one whose mention has preceded, until they are healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is tightened, besides what is added to it are splints, as we have said for the aid and arm.
However, with this fracture being restored in such a way as to not cause the infirm to limp. And if it is restored solely, besides what is applied to its other leg, then it is necessary that the infirm will always limp.
And you should know that the hip is tightened within fifty days, or slightly more, or less: all of this depends on the diversity of complexions and other bodily dispositions.
On restoring the fracture of the knee-cap.
Know that the knee-cap rarely fractures but often becomes worn down through attrition.
If the knee-cap does fracture, then it will either be a crack or a hole in its parts. And this occurs both with and without a wound. And it stands over it all with feeling.
And its restoration is such that what has been torn apart from its parts will be levelled with the digits until it joins and knits together as far as possible in terms of evenness, ease, and knitting.
Then apply a plaster made of sesame flour or wheat flour with egg white: place over it a round splint if needed: and secure this from above with a suitable bandage to hold it in place.
Then consider all the arrangements we described for other fractures such as warm inflammation and similar conditions; apply to each whatever is appropriate until healing occurs.
## On Restoration of a Broken Leg.
You should be aware that the leg has two bones; one is thick and called the thigh bone, and the other is thin and known as the shinbone.
Both types of leg bone can fracture in the same ways as the two bones of the arm; consequently, their restoration is equal and treatment is identical.
If both leg bones break at the same time, the leg becomes completely dislocated.
If the thin bone breaks, the leg turns towards the front.
If the thick bone breaks you will find it below; and this is among those that are not concealed from view.
Then apply traction, alignment, and splinting equally as for the arm.
However, if the leg fracture is severe with many jagged edges, you must apply less traction and gentler alignment.
The treatment of the leg differs from that of the arm in one respect; when you have aligned the splints and completed all other steps, take two wooden splints made from pine used for roofing tiles and crafted from palm leaves: choose those with medium thickness and not too thin; their length should match the distance from knee to foot.
Then roll each cloth twice along its length. And place one part of the leg from one side, and the other from the other side; and let they be from the knee down to below the foot.
Then bind the two bandages in three places at both ends and in the middle. For when restraint is prohibited, the leg deviates to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now let there be administered a splint of wood according to the length of the leg, and place the leg upon it so as to preserve it from movement.
And indeed you should most definitely do this for a fracture when there is an accompanying wound.
Then examine the leg every day, and be attentive to it with the utmost care from abscesses, or swelling, or other things. If therefore anything of these happens, then oppose it with that which is necessary until it be cured, if God wills it.
On the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.
Indeed, the calcaneus does not completely fracture.
The bones of the foot sometimes fracture, as do the toes; and they only break in multiple places due to abrasion.
If the bones of the foot fracture and you see those bones rising above one another, then let the patient put their foot upon prepared ground as if they are walking.
Stand thou then, and place thy foot over that which is elevated from those bones; afterwards press, or trample it down; and make it even until it returns to its proper place.
Then apply the plaster and put some tow on top; place under the belly of the foot a small board with two flat ends.
Then bind it with a bandage suitable for the foot, after you have wrapped it up with linen and other things that are required.
When therefore three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage. For you will find that the bones have become even if they were broken or displaced. The operation for them is therefore as you see it to be.
But if any of the toes are broken, restore them and make them even according to what I have explained to you concerning the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint under the toe according to its length and make it slightly wider; then put beneath the foot this board which I have explained to you, and bind it with a suitable bandage.
But if what is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then place a splint over the whole toe of its appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth; bind this board at the lower part of the foot; and let it stand on one end of the board outside the belly of the foot so that it may hold by good retention.
And it is fitting for you to remember all that I have said concerning other fractures from the accidents which we have discussed; apply everything appropriate to each accident.
On the fracture of a woman's pubic bone, the peg-like bone, and the man's thighbone.
When a woman's pubic bone is fractured, make her sit on a square-shaped seat. Then lean her slightly towards the back of her body and have someone hold her from behind.
Then the midwife should fill her pubic region with cotton wool until it is full and a sphere-like shape is formed from the pubic bone.
Then shake the woman gently and slowly raise her back up. For that cotton wool will exit until it is like a sphere before the pubic bone's opening, and the broken bone returns to its place.
Then place a small cushion under her back. So when she wants to urinate again, gently remove the cotton wool and let her urinate; then return it as you first put it in; afterwards, have her go back to her cushion.
Have her do this for seven days or so until the bone is restored.
And if you wish, take a lizard's gallbladder and bind it with a reed tube over the opening, then insert the entire gallbladder into her pubic region. Then blow into the tube with might until the gallbladder is inflated within her pubic region as the fracture returns.
Then it should be filled with cotton as we described, for several days until she is healed.
When the bone of the pecten in a man or woman breaks, then treat it with the same procedure and apparatus that we described for repairing the ankle bone.
The correct procedure is not hidden from those close fractures which rarely occur, especially to one who has some expertise or practice.
And understand my book well, because this very fracture itself will indicate to you the correct procedure for setting and splinting it in many cases; so do understand it.
When the male penis is broken, take the throat of a goose; insert this rod into it. Then place over it a bandage made of cloth and wrap the area up; keep this on for three days or thereabouts, and if God wills, healing will occur.
On repairing fractures with accompanying wounds.
If a fracture occurs along with an open wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the hip or thigh or similar, you should bleed the patient without delay; if the indications for bleeding are present, proceed according to what has been mentioned before.
If the wound is discharging blood, you must proceed promptly to cut away its edges; sprinkle over this some ground zege (Cyperus rotundas) powder if no other medication is immediately available.
Then begin to treat the fracture on that very day; do not postpone this unless an abscess occurs later on.
If an abscess of the hot type occurs, then delay treating the fracture until the ninth day, so that the abscess may subside. And do not approach him on the third day or the fourth at all, for you would cause bad things to happen to him.
If the broken bone is prominent under the skin, you should attempt to realign it and make it even with your hands gently and with little force.
If its extension is not prepared and you cannot realign it with your hands, then reduce it with this instrument. And this is an instrument that is made of iron, its length being the quantity of seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound. And for this reason it is necessary that the physician take three or four of them according to how much he needs for its treatment in every kind of fracture.
And it should be round, with a small thickness so that it is not doubled when compressed on top of it during the procedure, and have sharp edges with a bevel at its ends. And its upper part should be rounded to thickness from the middle of it down to its lower ends.
And this is its form.
In this operation, the physician must place its sharp curved end over the protruding bone and push it with one movement until the broken ends are brought together in alignment.
Try to bring the ends of the fracture into alignment with each other.
If the end of its broken bone is thin and does not take the instrument well, then it is necessary to cut off the end of that bone until the instrument can get a good purchase on it.
If you cannot reduce it with what we have described, then cut it with what is appropriate for it from the incisions we mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way possible for you.
Then scrape off what remains on the bone of roughness and small splinters.
So when the bone is reduced and the patient experiences severe pain after its reduction, then you know that it has not returned to its natural position.
Do so. For you cause the patient great discomfort when your restoration of the bone is complete.
Then immerse a cloth in black astringent wine. And especially if it is summer. And do not apply poultices, nor anything with oil; so as to not cause the wound to become gangrenous and corrupt.
Then administer pills at the hour of your completion of the bone restoration. And leave the wound open; such that you cut a hole with scissors into the bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be careful not to bind the wound tightly over the fracture. For many times have stupid doctors done this; and they caused the death of their patients, or gangrene, or pus, that is, suppuration. And your binding should be soft, gentle; different from the bindings of other fractures.
If the wound is serious or extensive and you fear some of the complications we have described and find that there is pain at a particular spot, then it should not be necessary to apply stars over it. And make rolls from hard linen cloths instead of the stars and compress it with them.
However when it is after one day or two and you see the wound begin to produce pus then remove from above it the linen cloth which you placed over it with wine. Then apply dressings and ointments with which we are accustomed to treat wounds like the four-ingredient ointment and those similar to it.
And it is advisable that you loosen any binding. And examine the wound every day morning and evening until it is healed.
And the limb should be prepared so that pus runs freely from it downwards.
If much time passes since the injury was sustained and it does not heal or cease producing pus then you should know that there are small splinters of bone within it. For this reason one must probe the wound with a probe. How many of these small splinters have become detached you must remove them and extract those still within the wound. And of those that are not detached and pierce the flesh causing pain one should attempt to cut them so they may be removed by any means possible for you.
If a proud flesh or spreading abscess arises from the wound that is, an inflammatory swelling of various kinds or another type of corruption and putrefaction then one must apply to each accordingly with what has already been described in their respective chapters.
And from that which is necessary for my speech to stand on, and to whom you make your present mind when a bone is broken, and it protrudes above the member, like the hip bone, and the assistor, and similar to these of the large members, there is, so as not to presume its traction, for many times death occurs from it; indeed, leave it alone until it rots.
Perhaps indeed it will fall by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then therefore treat the wound if it seems to you; and if not, leave it be.
On treating skin nodules on a fracture site.
Many times, this nodule occurs on the site of healing from fracture. Especially when it is near joints; and the shape of the member is affected by it. And perhaps prevents the limb from its natural function.
Therefore consider it then, if the nodule is fresh; apply to it medicines which have astringent properties, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, resin, gum arabic, and similar.
Such that you take from these some or all of them; mix them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar; and place this mixture on the nodule, wrapped in lint, and bind it tightly.
And leave the binding, do not remove it for many days. Then dissolve that binding, and apply another, until the nodule is removed.
Either tightly bind over the same sheet of lead, off-centre. For lead is the property of removing all that is feared from the members.
But if the stitch has already turned into a stone and it is tight, and necessity urgently requires its removal: then find it on top of it from its upper side, and cut off the protruding superfluity; or scrape it with some scrapers until it is removed: and take care of that place until it heals.
On the treatment when restored, and the member remains thin after that, not according to its nature.
When the fracture of bone is restored, and the member remains thin after that, weak: then it is not so but for many reasons. One of which is the abundance of loosening and binding the bandage not as it should be: either due to an excess of tightness of the bindings until nourishment is prevented from reaching the member; or due to an abundance of superfluous ointment at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the body of the patient, and their weakness.
And its treatment is to feed the patient, and make their body soft until blood multiplies in them. And provide a bath. And introduce joy and happiness over them.
Then put tar on the member: so that it draws the poison to itself greatly. And treat it with frequent ointment of warm water until nourishment runs through, and returns to its natural form.
The treatment of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly.
When it happens that a limb has already been restored after its healing in a crooked manner, and there is an elevation of the broken bone, or knottedness: and it is marred by this defect in the shape of the limb, nevertheless the limb is not hindered from its natural operation: then you should not heed the counsel of him who thinks that the limb ought to be broken again.
And there have been many foolish physicians and restorers who did that in our land.
And this operation is truly blameworthy, leading to death or great fear, so that it might be mortal.
But if the lameness and knottedness are recent: then it is necessary that [the limb] be embrocated with warm water, in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as althea leaves and its root, and conyfy, and similar things. And make for him a plaster with a softening plaster, such as properly made dichile.
Or take the mucilage of althea root, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil: and plaster [the limb] with that.
Or take fat figs, and pound them with pigeon dung, and similar things which are called by the name of medicines that reduce solidity.
And sometimes knottedness is resolved by frequent, old, and gentle friction which is done with moist hands. And the movement of the limb should be applied to every part at all hours.
If the curvature has already progressed and become severe, and it has turned into a bone spur, and the need for treatment with iron has arisen, then one must cut its upper part, release the bone continuity, and incise what is excessive due to nodulation or bone with delicate cutters; and care should be taken in that with diligence and effort.
About the discussion on dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of certain joints from their proper place. Why it is forbidden to move [it] itself, and the shape of the limb is distorted. And it causes severe pains and injuries to happen in the afflicted person.
When dislocation happens to someone, then one must hasten to restore it; and not delay [it] at all.
For if one delays [treatment], the site becomes inflamed, and perhaps with that reduction of the dislocation.
Because of that, it is not advisable to move [it] or stretch during the hour of its inflammation. Since it often causes spasms and painful injuries to happen.
But when that happens, then one must hurry to the bloodletting of the patient. Then leave [it] alone until the inflammation quiets down.
After that, the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil. Then it should be pulled out gently.
And every part that comes to mind must be treated with respect.
I have already arranged the headings of dislocations, as well as what preceded it with regards to fractures, from top to bottom of the body.
On treating the dislocation of the lower jaw.
Both jaws rarely become dislocated unless it's just one of them.
And the only way both jaws can become dislocated is through one of two methods. Or they may be slightly removed from their places by slight movement, and somewhat softened in the process. Or they may become fully dislocated until the jaws soften at the level of the chest, and so much saliva runs out that he cannot hold it back, nor can close his mouth, and his tongue is rolled up with speech.
But when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place of its own accord after a short while.
If it is a complete dislocation however, then its reduction must be administered quickly and not delayed at all: the assistant should hold the patient's head, while the surgeon inserts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocated jaw between their teeth if only one jaw has become dislocated. Or they may insert both thumbs together if the jaws have become dislocated on both sides. And his remaining fingers should stay outside of the patient's mouth with which he holds it steady.
And instruct the patient to clean their jaws and move them around for chewing on all sides. And the physician should move the jaw to one side, and push it until it returns to its place.
If its return is difficult, especially if both jaws are affected at the same time: then apply steam with warm water and oil until it becomes easy to move them both; do not delay reducing movement of either side at all, as we have said.
When they return and are level with each other, and the patient's mouth is closed without any slackness: then place over them small pieces of cloth that have been coated in wax; and rose-scented oil.
Afterwards, bind it with soft bandages without difficulty.
And the patient should sleep on their back; and place his head resting between two pillows so that he cannot move it from side to side; nor shall he attempt or be forced to chew anything; rather let him take his food by gentle suction until such time as his pains are removed, and his jaw loosened: then may he eat what he wishes and give it without difficulty.
He should not exert himself in the use of his mouth for eating, drinking, or yawning until such time as the jaw is loosened and healed.
But if the return of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places; then often there result from this fevers with constant sweating: and perhaps the patient's stomach is loosened, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
Therefore when you see this, then know that it is a grave matter; and often the patient whose jaws are so dislocated dies within ten days.
On reducing the dislocation of the Fork bone and upper arm.
The Fork bone does not become dislocated from the inner side because of its continuity with the chest. It becomes dislocated sometimes outwards, which is clear to sense perception.
And its restoration is for the sick person to lie on their back and stretch out their arms. Then squeeze the area with your palm using firm pressure because it will go back into place.
Then apply an ointment and compresses to it and bind it tightly.
The extremities that follow the elbow and are continuous with it do not become dislocated except rarely. But if it does become dislocated some day, then it must be restored and adjusted according to what we have said and prepared for you.
Then put an ointment and compresses on it and bandage it tightly. And instruct the sick person to remain calm and at rest until they have healed.
And with this same treatment the upper arm is restored when it too becomes separated from its place.
On reducing the dislocation of the upper arm.
Know that the upper arm does not become dislocated except in three ways.
One of which is to dislocate toward the side of the little rib below. The second is to dislocate towards the side of the chest. And perhaps it is dislocated in the upper part of the arm, which occurs rarely.
It does not become dislocated at the back because of the blade bone (scapula). And it is not dislocated to the front due to nerves.
Indeed it is most often dislocated and comes out towards the lower little rib, especially among those whose flesh is scant. Since it goes out quickly in them, and comes back in quickly.
But in those whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite of that; namely, that it goes out with difficulty and comes back in with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men that there is a blow or fall and the arm becomes dislocated with a hot swelling, and because of this they think it has already been dislocated.
Therefore it is necessary that you examine it until you stand firm about its certainty, and then proceed with the cure of it.
A dislocation is recognized when it is towards the lower little rib; and you must distinguish between a dislocated arm and a healthy one. For you find between them an evident difference and find in the head of the dislocated arm a hollow, and below the little rib near the touch of the head of the arm as if it were an egg; and the sufferer cannot draw his hand to his ear nor move it with all motions.
Similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards, you will find a clear swelling that cannot be hidden.
The reduction of this particular dislocation is easily done when it is recent or the patient is a weak child.
The reduction involves having an assistant raise their hand upwards. Then place your thumbs under the victim's armpits and lift the shoulder joint with strength upwards into its socket; meanwhile, the assistant lifts their hand and stretches it upward. Afterwards, place [the arm] down as it indeed returns quickly.
However, if it does not return as described and many days have passed since the dislocation occurred: then one should bathe the patient in warm water and apply a softening embrocation that eases pain, such as when boiled roots of althea, fenugreek, and mallow are applied.
Next the patient should lie on their back; an armpit pad of equal parts soft wool and hard packing should be placed under each armpit.
Next the doctor should place their heel on the pad and lift the head of the shoulder with strength while drawing the patient's arm downwards.
If you wish to reduce it this way, then have present a man taller than the patient who stands by their side and inserts his shoulder under the victim's armpit; he lifts up the armpit until the patient is hanging suspended in midair. The assistant should pull the patient's hand towards the lower part of their belly. If the patient is light, then they should be hung with something else to weigh them down; for the dislocation returns immediately.
It is also reduced by another method: a long piece of wood should be fixed into the ground; its head should be round like the handle of a mortar; it should not be too thick nor too thin. Then place the patient on top of soft cloths that have been placed over the wood, with the patient standing along the length of the wood.
Then pull their hand towards the lower part on one side and stretch out their body from the other with strength; for the joint returns to its place swiftly.
If all of the above is difficult for its reduction, then use this treatment: take a piece of wood two arms' length long, four fingers wide and as thick as two fingers; it should have a round head to ease its entry into the patient's anus, with this shape.
Then soft cloths should be wrapped around the round head so it does not injure the patient.
Then place it under the patient's anus so that when their hand or arm is stretched out over the wood down to the lower part, the wood should be tied on top of the assistant, arm and end of the hand.
Then place the arm across the step of a ladder and stretch out their hand to the lower part; let the rest of their body hang on the other side. For the joint enters immediately.
When therefore its entry has been completed according to whichever method is possible: then it is necessary that you place beneath the tincle a woollen sphere of equal quantity. Then place the plaster prepared from mill dust with frankincense and egg white over the whole shoulder, just as it is rolled off from above.
Then bind tightly beneath the tincle with a suitable bandage: and roll the bandage over the plaster from above: and attach his hand to his neck, and let it be left there without moving his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that little food be given to the patient until his limb has regained its strength: because this is quicker for his recovery.
Then a larger bandage should be applied after seven or five days, and it should be tightened with movement. If therefore it has become firm and has not softened, then he is already healed.
But if the joint is frequently dislocated due to moisture that affects it or some other cause: then it is necessary that a three-holed caustic be applied as set forth above in the chapter on the cautery.
If all this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days, but the joint is not made firm, and the plaster and bandage are reapplied several times without becoming firm, and it falls off and cannot be raised upwards towards his neck: then you should know that its nerves which go to the head of the shoulder have already been cut or stretched or softened; and you should know that this joint will never become fixed in place.
But a dislocation that is towards the chest and nipple or one that is reduced to the back is done with thrusting and stretching of the hands until it returns; then the remaining bandage and treatment should be applied until it heals.
If there is heaviness after healing in the limb and slowness of movement, then let the patient use the baths many times until that heaviness eases up and returns to its original nature.
On the cure of elbow dislocation.
You should know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and likewise returns with difficulty too; it can be dislocated in all directions but primarily forward or backward.
And its dislocation will not be hidden from you: it falls under sight and touch regardless of the shape it is dislocated into. And when you join a dislocated elbow to a healthy one, it will be clear to you. For the joint will be crushed and unable to bend the arm or touch its shoulder.
And you must hurry and reduce the dislocation immediately before it gets a hot abscess.
For if it gets a hot abscess, its reduction becomes difficult; perhaps it won't heal at all, especially when on the back. It is worse than all other forms of dislocation and has intense pain for them; many times death comes with it.
And its restoration when it is among those that can be reduced is as follows: the patient's hand should be stretched with both hands; their arm should be extended and the doctor's hand placed above and below the elbow, who then pushes the joint with his thumbs together or with the root of his palms until it returns to place.
Or the dislocation is forward; then he returns and doubles up his hand with his own hand until he strikes the elbow that has been dislocated with the root of his palm.
If the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a violent and very strong extension; it is for two attendants to extend the arm, and for two more attendants also to hold him so that he is not moved during the extension.
Then the arm is rotated towards every part after a folded cloth or a wide bandage has been wrapped around his hand.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he anoints it with oil so that it is one of those things which helps to ease the joint and make it supple. Then he drives the joint with a violent push until it returns to its place.
And after its reduction has been accomplished it should be covered with a plaster containing an astringent and drying agent along with egg-white; and it is to be bound with a bandage of suitable tightness. And the arm should be hung from the patient's neck; and it is to be left for several days.
Then it is to be loosened. If therefore the joint is firmly established in its place, then remove the bandage from it, and dismiss the patient.
And if you see that the joint is not bound tightly enough, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and dismiss the patient for several days until it is properly bound. Then release him/her.
If he experiences heaviness after the joint is reduced and the dislocation is back in place: then apply moist dressings during bathing, and gentle friction, and compression, until it improves; or apply to the joint capons' rump fat, that is, rich mutton fat. Then bind it, and leave the dressing on day and night. Then remove the dressing and put him into the bath. When he is sweating, then gently rub the joint with moderate friction. Then repeat the capons' fat dressing once, twice and three times with each entry into the bath until it improves.
And if you wish, put on it pigeon droppings, moist, heated with butter, and bind it above this.
Do this several times. For it eases the pain and returns to its place.
ยถ On the treatment of dislocations by Albucasis.
The hand joint of the arm frequently becomes dislocated.
And its reduction is easy to achieve. In contrast, the other joints. However, it is necessary that the speed of its reduction should be made within the hour during which it becomes dislocated before the place becomes congested; otherwise, there may occur a hot swelling to him.
The reduction of its dislocation is done by placing the weak hand Mahassem on a board and have the assistant extend his arm; then place your palm over the prominence of the joint and push it until it returns into place.
However, it is necessary to consider that if the palm has already receded towards the belly of the hand: then the patient should place the back of their hand on a board for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation proceeds towards the back of the hand, then the position of his hand will be intrinsic over the board, i.e., the interior part of his hand is placed upon the board so that the physician's hand falls over the same eminence of the joint.
If therefore it returns immediately, that is good; but if not, then compress it with a poultice that heals abscesses and leave it be without further interference.
For if the patient cannot tolerate it and you are unable to achieve reduction after some days have passed but the joint remains in its twisted state; this does no harm to the patient other than softening of the hand such that they can grip nothing: then know that nerves have been either cut or bruised.
There is therefore no remedy other than binding with a caustic near its end. And perhaps it will not bring about any improvement.
Since therefore it does not return to the correct position, place over it the poultice that we described earlier. Then it should be bound up and left for five days; afterwards, it is released and the patient's hand is allowed to move freely again.
If however its motion is lost and there is any sense of gravity upon it; then ease it with warm water and gentle friction several times until the tension is eased.
On the treatment of finger dislocations.
When any finger is dislocated in any direction, or towards the back of the palm, or towards its belly; then extend the finger and push on the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its proper position.
Hold the head of the finger and suspend it towards the side to which it is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
Then suspend the finger and extend it until it becomes straight again on its own day.
When night falls, bandage it according to the description given; and do not cease to loosen the bandage during the day; exercise the finger with movement; and re-bandage it at night.
Do this for several days until the finger is stiff.
And do the same with it if it is dislocated towards the belly of the hand; and bind it to that side, and carry out your first procedure until it heals.
And do likewise with it when it is dislocated towards the other sides.
On the treatment of dislocations of the vertebrae in the back.
When someone has a complete dislocation of the vertebrae in the back or neck, or when many vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then there is no cure since death hastens to the sick person.
And the sign of this is that the sick person's ejection occurs involuntarily and they cannot hold it back; and often some parts of their body become weak due to this, or both legs, or both arms, or one of them, or a single vertebra moves out of place.
The wound is frequently moved, which causes frequent dislodgement into four parts.
That which is displaced to the rear is called gibbosity.
The treatment for it is that you must consider then if gibbosity occurs during childhood; there is no cure and no healing can come of it at all.
In that which occurs from a fall or blow or similar causes, the ancients have already spoken at length about methods of treatment. Of which very little returns with benefit.
I myself have now shortened it from that which was excused little enough for much of its proximity to my intention: and by the exposition I made when presenting that one, and formed an instrument differently from how they showed it, and presented it thus.
I say therefore that there is no skill or healing to be had from a gibbosity occurring from the front.
And likewise, for that which occurs on two sides as well.
And it cannot be cured from these except that which occurs on the back specifically, as I relate: and let the sick person be laid face down on a level bench near to a wall; and a damp cloth should be spread underneath them so their chest is not harmed.
Then a straight pole should be placed fixed into the earth at one end of the bench about where their head is; and another pole should be placed about where their feet are at the other end of the bench; and an assistant holds this latter pole without it being secured firmly into the ground. And one assistant holds the other (instrument).
Then roll it over the patient's head, and under their armpits tie a soft yet strong bandage; extend the end of the bandage to the wooden support by his head, and secure it there.
Then tighten another bandage over their hips, above their knees, and at their calves. Then gather all the bandages together, and secure them to another wooden support at their feet.
Then each assistant should take a side of the wooden support and the bandage, but make sure that neither wooden support is moved from its fixed position as we described before.
The physician should place their palms on the patient's spine with strength until it returns to normal; or they can use a board instead. Then the physician should attach their feet to the board until it returns to normal.
If this treatment does not work, then get another board that is about three arms' lengths in length. And the wooden peg we mentioned before that is near the patient should be placed into the wall at the point where the end of the board can rest on it. Then place the middle of the board over their spine. And the physician should put their feet on the other end of the board. They should tighten it well until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a tool that is wrapped around your hand; and this is how it is done: embed into the ground by their head at the very end of the bed two pieces of wood each one arm's length long; and do likewise at their feet.
The length between all the wood should be a span long: and now having made a hole at each place where the lathe passes through: fasten down firmly all the timber into the ground so it cannot move at all.
Insert the round wood: and there is the lathe which revolves with its string through two holes of two woods.
And at the end of it is a hole where the wood is fixed with its length being equal to one span and what it revolves with: and similarly there are two other woods that also have this feature.
Then tighten the strings that you have tightened on the patient's chest to the lathe by their head: and those that are tied around their legs to the one at their feet.
Then have a helper stand by each lathe to turn the handle with which the lathe revolves: and let the physician adjust the vertebrae as we said before.
This is the shape of the lathe that follows.
Then after the vertebrae return and the place is levelled, it is necessary to apply a dry plaster with egg white. Then a bandage. After that apply over the plaster some thin strips of wood about three fingers wide or close to it. And the length should be enough to cover the hunchback's bump as well as a healthy portion of their vertebrae above it.
Then bind them with the string that we mentioned. And let the patient be given light nourishment until they heal.
If anything remains prominent at the site as the healing ends: then it is necessary that medicines which soften and soothe be administered with the application of the board we described over a long period. And now a lead plate is applied to it.
And sometimes there is a prominence at the very end of the spine: and this is thought to be caused by a dislocation, and it is that bone which now protrudes. Why should one not presume that this medicine will be applied to him: for it may indeed cause death.
On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You should know that a dislocation is the only injury which occurs in the ankle and shoulder joints; nor does it occur to them as it does with other joints due to minor displacement or concavity.
The ankle joint is indeed dislocated in four parts. Which is to say it is dislocated forwards and backwards.
It most commonly dislocates inwards: and it rarely dislocates forwards or backwards.
The treatment of its inward dislocation is as follows: for when you join the healthy leg with that of the patient, it is longer; and his knee is more prominent than that of a healthy person, and he cannot flex his foot at the hip: and there is swelling in the area below the hip due to the head of the femur having reached this point.
The sign that it has dislocated outwards is that its symptoms are the opposite of these symptoms.
The sign of a dislocation to the front is that they extend their healthy leg fully but cannot do so without pain at the knee; and when trying to walk they cannot step forward on it; moreover, urine retention occurs and there may be swelling in the groin region, and during walking they strike the heel.
The sign of a dislocation to the rear is that they cannot extend their knee nor flex it before flexing the groin; also their leg will be shortened compared with the other one; and the groin area will feel softened and there will be hip pain near the point of the buttock.
Reduction of these types of dislocations is done by considering whether the dislocation is old and has been there for some time or not. Then if you reduce the dislocation and it remains so after the procedure then there is no cure for it at all. Therefore one should not assume that it cannot be done.
In the case of a fresh dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocation, you should hurry to roll the joint and extend it inwards and outwards while moving it left and right; perhaps it will go back into place and then not require any further treatment.
If it does not go back into place in this way then you must prepare a strong assistant to extend their leg from the lower part either with his hands or with a bandage tied above their knee; another assistant will extend the patient's hand from above and insert his hands under the patient's toes. Then bind gently with a bandage over the hip joint and hold the end of the other bandage.
Its extension is either from the front part of the groin to the fork region or from behind to the back.
And let their extension be with one force until the patient is raised from the ground with his body, and he remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common type among four types.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
Indeed, in its proper reduction when the dislocation is inward, it is necessary that the patient lie on his back on his healthy side. Then place a bandage over the root of the hip bone, at that which is between the hip head and the area beneath the groin. Then extend the bandage upwards from the groin area to the higher part of the body, towards the fork region.
Then another strong helper takes his arms, reduces the thick area of the affected hip, and extends it outward with a forceful extension. Now indeed it has returned to its place.
And this type is the easiest among other types of treatment by which this limb is reduced.
But if it slips from you and does not obey you to go in with this type of treatment at all, then the two feet of the patient should be bound together with a strong yet gentle bandage over the two heels and over the two knees; and its length is that of four fingers long for each. And let the affected leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then the patient should be hung upside down over the head of the wooden pole that is inside the house; and its length from the ground to the top should be equal to twice the length of an arm.
Next instruct a strong young man to secure the head of the thigh; and let another be found who will hang with the patient; and let this other young man push with strength while securing the thigh, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
However when it is returning to its proper place and the joint has been dislocated outwards, then the patient must lie on a couch as we have described for one with a hunchback. And the bandage should be wrapped over their leg as well as above their chest.
Then two wooden poles should be placed; one near the patient's feet and another near their head. Next an additional wooden pole should be placed and firmly fixed to the middle of the couch; over this wet cloth should be wrapped so as not to hurt the patient; and let the pole be between their thighs such that it prevents them from being pulled towards their feet when being stretched out.
Then each helper should pull in their direction; while the physician steadies the patient with his hand to guide the repositioning.
If it therefore follows this process of returning [to its proper place], then there will be good [results].
And if it does not [follow this process], then place them on the same board as before; and press down on their spine evenly as we described for treating hunchbacks. However the patient should lie on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward then it is necessary for the patient's leg to be quickly stretched out; and again this should take place on a couch as previously described; and the physician will place the palm of their right hand over the patient's groin. Then he grasps it with one hand and, while holding it fast, places it extended downwards towards the lower region of the knee.
And if the dislocation is backwards: then it should not be necessary to extend the patient downwards and raise them up from the ground; instead, they should be placed on a hard surface, just as one would do in the case of their hip being dislocated outwards, according to what we have said about having them lie on two hips, facing down with ligaments extended, as mentioned previously.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a board over the place where the joint comes out once the reduction is complete as required.
And the sign of its return will not be hidden from you: this is when you extend the patient's two legs and, upon seeing them equal in length, and the patient tightening their leg and stretching it without discomfort; then you know that the limb has returned as it should. Then join the two thighs together, apply a plaster cast, and tighten with imemati, that is, a tourniquet, so that the hip does not move at all: and have the patient rest for three or four days.
Then untie the ligaments and remove the plaster cast, comparing the leg with the other one: then, if you see them equal in length, know that the dislocation is now firmly set; therefore, allow the patient to walk.
And if you see any softening in it, then return and plaster it again, tightening it according to your original method; and leave it for three days.
Then untie it and have the patient delay their walking on both legs for a few days until it is well strengthened.
The dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outwards, inwards, and downwards, that is, backwards.
And it is not dislocated forwards.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you tell the patient to apply their leg to their hip. But if it does not adhere to the hip, then you know that the knee is dislocated.
The restoration of all ways of its dislocation is that you make the patient sit upright so they can already stretch their leg on it if possible and have your back adhere to their face, and put their foot between your feet.
Then make their knee adhere to your palms and straighten them between your fingers over their knee. Then apply with the palm of your hand both sides of their knee forcefully. And another helper stretches the patient's foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of it returning is that the leg adheres to the hip gently without strain.
Then bandage them and make their leg adhere to the hip. Then bind it with wool for three or four days. Then loosen the bindings.
And let the patient not walk for some days until he is healed.
If, however, you are refused its reduction, then apply a strong extension with the ligaments, whose preceding description was given in the treatment of dislocated hip, until it returns.
The treatment of calcaneal dislocation.
The calcaneus is sometimes dislocated by a slight force, and sometimes it is dislocated along its length. And its dislocation occurs either internally or externally.
The sign of its dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen, proceeding towards the side to which it is dislocated.
The cure for its dislocation is an easy return: it must be extended with ease by hand and made even until it returns to its place.
In its treatment when it is dislocated along its length, you must have the patient sit upright: and let a strong assistant hold him firmly from behind at the middle of his back.
Then you hold with your right hand his foot from above, and with your left hand below the place of the dislocation on his foot.
Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand. Then, pull it with two fingers of your left hand.
Then extend with the left (hand) and push the sole of his foot towards the leg without effort.
Do it twice, as we have described.
Then push the sole of his foot towards the leg with your third finger, and you draw the dislocation.
If therefore it returns to the same vein or two according to this manner and you see that the foot is equalized, it is good; if not, then repeat the operation on it because it will return.
If however you are prevented from reducing it with what we have described: then make the patient lie on their back on the ground and fix a stake firmly into the earth so that it falls between their thighs; and now wrap a cloth around them to prevent injury to the patient.
Next, have an assistant take their thigh; then the other assistant extends their foot either with their hands or with a cord that is tied around the ankle. Then have each assistant stretch against the stretching of their partner; and let the stake stand between the patient's two thighs holding them so that they are not pulled down towards their feet during the stretching.
Then the physician should equalize the dislocation with their hands, while another assistant holds the healthy leg down towards the feet. For a dislocation returns with speed.
When therefore the dislocation returns and you see that it has healed, then apply a plaster and bandage and bind them tightly with cords, and tie the foot to their leg with a cord.
And you must be cautious or fearful about the nerves which are above the back of the heel so that the cord is not too tight and injures them.
Then discharge him after two or three days. If however the cord loosens, tighten it; then release him on the third or fourth day and prevent the patient from walking for forty days. If he attempts to walk before that time, it is not safe that the dislocation will not dissolve and be corrupted, and it will not accept treatment thereafter.
If a hot abscess occurs to him: then you ought to administer to its reduction that which our previous account prescribed elsewhere for treatment, and an embrocation until it is removed.
On the dislocation of the toes of the foot and its cure.
It is necessary that what has been dislocated from them be reduced with a little extension without effort; and this indeed is not difficult but rather easy.
If, however, the dislocation is at some of the joints of the sole of the foot: then the sick person ought to make his foot sit on an equal spot of the ground or on a board; and he must stand like one walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot on that which is prominent among those joints. Then press it with your foot with force until it returns, and see that it is now reduced, and no prominence appears in its place.
Then put under his foot a board that receives the whole foot; it should have two ends. Then bind it with a suitable bandage for three days. Then loosen it and make him rest from walking for many days until he is bound and secured by the reduction.
On types of dislocation with a wound or fracture.
When something happens from that and you attempt its treatment and its restoration, death often succeeds; and because of this, it is not appropriate to presume over the treatment of such a condition unless one is wise in art, long-practiced, merciful, pious, slow, not audacious, nor presumptuous: and so that they use at the outset medicines which cool hot abscesses only: and leave the sick person to divine judgement. Unless you see or hope for salvation from ruin with the easing of illness, and where there is some sign of hope. Attempt therefore to reduce it immediately at the beginning of the condition before a hot abscess occurs.
If therefore the limb returns according to our wish, then administer a regime that cools the abscess; and treat the wound with what is appropriate to it from drying ointments.
If there is dislocation with a fracture and separate cracks occur in the bone, then attempt their removal, and do what we said for simple illnesses regarding those places.
And beware according to your ability, and guard yourself from entering the path of fear; as was said in my sermon to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more enduring for your glory, and safer for your body among them during your lifetime.
