Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	And now we begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, students, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, in order to achieve its purpose and due to its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I have fulfilled my promise to you to complete this treatise, which is part of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation of midwifery has been completely forgotten in our region and time, until the science of it was lost, and its evidence was not preserved; and no one knows about it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were misunderstood by those who practiced it at that time before the understanding of it was closed and its strength and art were extended.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I have arranged this treatise in the second method of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because of the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work, as well as for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In ancient times, the reason why a surgeon was not immediately skilled in their craft in our time is because the art of medicine is long and complex, and it requires practice in the science of anatomy, which was rediscovered by Galen before he knew the important parts of the limbs and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and also knowing the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their hardness; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their essence.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	As Hippocrates said that one name is not enough, but in the work, it is smaller, and more so in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have not already said about him in the introduction of this book; because those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, cannot avoid falling into error, by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When a doctor saw a woman who had been infected with a phlegmon in the neck and had punctured some neck arteries, causing great blood loss that led to her death between her hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor saw that the stone was very large and had passed through the urethra of that man, who died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And he had already tried to remove it and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor saw that a duke of our land had been injured by surgery, and he went to a skilled blacksmith who was skilled in the area of the fracture; and because of his ignorance, the doctor removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and strong structures, and did not let the wound breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he removed the bandage according to his desires, and removed the splint, and let it rest for several days and commanded that they remove the bandage; and during this time the wound and the foot became infected, and it reached a point of no return.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage, and then he felt relief from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so it could not be restrained from that one, and it did not cease to spread the corruption in the limb until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess with cancer, and it became ulcerated around the days, until the fire magnified the malice of it against him.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cranium is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not allow that it reach him from all sides, but rather that it be in the limb that suffers from all of it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for that reason, children, it is necessary for you to operate in two different ways: one in the operation that is associated with health, and the other in the work that is at risk in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed in all places of this book in which the operation is performed in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard that and lay aside that, so that the fools do not approach to speak to you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your arms with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Use the best way by God's grace to lead to salvation and praiseworthy succession, and relieve terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and keep your arms from that which causes you fear, so that your position in your faith and in your name will not be lost: because more remains for your glory, and further back in the world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Sometimes it is said in certain passages:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat a bad patient, because bad doctors will not be remembered.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already obeyed this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The beginning of the division of the book, and first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered by the foot entering, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of cauteries, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on vents, and on plasters, and on the extraction of bones and similar things to those, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of torticollis and similar things to those; chapter ordered from the head to the foot, and on the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of pointed cautery and sharp medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that begins the treatise on all the free.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That you know the quality of those remedies and of the ointments of it, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the remedy and of the ointment of it is long and extended, and subtle for knowledge, and secretly hidden; and from there to speak much about wisdoms, and they are disagreed, and to me it suffices a little of their speeches, I fear prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so it is said that the cautery is brought to the entire complex universally, which is called matter or its matter, except for two complexes, which are called tail complexes of matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail complex, dry matter is disordered; for one said that the cautery was beneficial to that, and the others said the opposite of that, which is not convenient in an illness that is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient for an illness to be cured by something that is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who said the opposite of that, they said that by cautery is made beneficial in all illness tail complexes that are found in men's bodies, because when you compare the bodies of men and their humidity to the complex of fire, the bodies of men are cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that, that I have experimented with this sometime ago.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But may not come over that which has already been extracted and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous exercise, and has known the difference of the complexes of men and the disposition of their illnesses in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other body parts, do not fear you, and especially in wet and humid diseases, since all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree about the use of the pointed cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing by burning with fire and its goodness is that the fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and not the other member attached to it, except for a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the burning medicine does not reach those in the members that are attached to each other, and often it causes the disease to come into the sick member and often it is difficult.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	The fire, because of its greatness and the goodness of its substance, does not do this but rather it is superfluous. And we know this from experience and from the long time of service in the study of the art over the truth of the causes; and for this reason you should be excused from the length of the speech. And if it were not that it is not read aloud in this pause, to you secretly about the fire, and the quality of the operation of which in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, which would be philosophical demonstrative, which would be sharpened in your misfortunes.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And you should know, sons, that they separate from the time in which it is appropriate to perform cauterization and wait for the best time of primevera.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by the time accident is submerged in the juice of that which is suitable for cauterization, and especially if it is for pain or necessary pain, quickly and forcefully, the ones who do not suffer delay because they fear the evil that may come from those who enter, which is greater than small harm.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not cautery in your feet, sons, or, I say, that which is only estimated by the common people and foolish doctors, because at that malady which is healed by cauterization is not ridiculed all the time, and they wait for that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as there is that they fear for it, because cauterization is not only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moistures which are the cause of pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cauterization is performed excessively on the medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness will return in some hour of time, depending on the complexity of the patient and the location of their illness, and their condition, and what is prepared in their body from the accumulation of excess in them, and what they have acquired through their acquisition of foods and similar causes; but if the illness in which they are administered cauteri is a subtle illness in a member of few excess and moisture, as with a tooth cautery for pain and similar causes, it is possible that in them that pain will not return, but rather something else is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Furthermore, the common belief is that cauteri is the last resort of medicine, and the noble belief is not what I understand in them, because they believe that there is no cure that is more effective than medicine or another cause for appropriate cauteri.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauteri is the last resort of medicine is not only when they administer the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and at the end of the cause they administer honey cauteri, and it helps at that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And usually, after this point, the cautery of the last remedy of medicine is not understood by the common people and many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold cautery is better than iron cautery, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cauterization does not cause harm, because it is not absolutely true, as you have already seen and heard of those who use gold in their bodies instead of others, and gold cautery is good and better than iron cautery, but however when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not your decision, because it is made according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the humor; and if you adjust over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some sheets are prepared by the craftsman for that purpose.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, iron cautery is made lighter and more directly to the direction of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter in the second chapter of the cautery, and I have ordered those between the feet, so that they ask him what he wants from there.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for head pain caused by coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is caused by moisture and coldness over the body, which are the causes of many traumatic accidents, called coronary artery disease, from the head to the parts of the shoulders and ears, and many sleep disturbances, and pain in the teeth and jaw, and universally from all illnesses that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similarities in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to take laxative medicine to cleanse his head for three or four nights, according to the patient's age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then do that shaving between your hands on a tilted chair, and place your hand over his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And place your thumb on top of the patient's nose between their eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the location you mentioned is reached, mark that spot and then remove the pointed cautery or the olive-shaped one.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that one over the location that is best suited for the attempt, holding it with your hand as it descends, and gradually tighten it until it is firmly held. Then rotate that one.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then slightly raise your hand and look at the location, and if you see that some amount of bone has been exposed, such as the amount of grain, then raise your hand. If your hand does not return to its original position, then place it on that iron or another one, if it is cold, before it is visible from the bone that I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on that location and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place a clean cloth over that location and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the wound with the four-herb ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the plague is opened, as much harm gets out of the arm, so it becomes better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that a cautery should be applied to the sinew inside the bone, and it should be held with the cautery until some part of the bone is attached.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then wipe away that which is attached to the bone, and then care for it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that the cautery should reach the back, until it enters strongly into the bone before it breaks, and this is the way to make a small incision:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that wound the evil spirits escape from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then cared for until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two kinds of cautery in all men, except for those who are second in fear; and let that one be better for your health when it is, because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of which we have testified in the other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of a natural nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and from that house and that work saves life.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cauteries of the chapter.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the entire chapter there are chronic and long-lasting pains, and that is prolonged in the patient, and uses garlic, charcoal, capipurges, ointments, guaiacum, cadels, gualinas, and similar things, and more so if it has already been cauterized with a certain cautery that they know and do not improve from any of those causes, then consider that if the chapter of the patient is of great creation in its nature; and not free and easily moved by a great fright, then that cauterizer should use another cauterization after that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize it on the top of its chapter with the cauterization before the codex is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the codex and expose the bone in the amount that we have found and cauterize it with a cautery in the part behind the chapter in the place called the bladder, — and that is the place where the pillow is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And let your hand remain in that position, and do not expose the bone, as the patient may experience great pain different from all other cautery pains of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	I would say that this cautery is in that location, because it is the one that burns the corns of the head and the occipital region is a more subtle cautery than the one that burns the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the ancient non-antique cautery of the emerging.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the part of the head that is sharp and sudden, or when the pain extends to the stomach, let the medicines that relieve the head be evacuated, and let the other cure be administered, which I have mentioned in the books on illnesses; and all is not appropriate, then the cautery in this case is done in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The sharp burning medicine is that you take a thin piece of iron, and scrape it on that and apply the ends of it to the affected parts with some powder.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then approach the location of the pain with a small scalpel inserted into the skin where the pain is located, and hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to the area stopped by constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage and treat the wound for two or three days, and then place a poultice over the affected area where the pain is located.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do so with some remedies that I have written about in the other treatise on remedies.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cauterization is done in this way: light the cautery of which this is the shape:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a claw hammer because its head is shaped like a carnation with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small projection.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the location of the pain, and remove your hand - so that the scab that is left does not stick to the wound - and rotate the small iron at speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood that is held back due to the tightness of the ligature is too much for the patient, and you lift your hand to prevent the artery from being held back, which is left, so that no bleeding occurs.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a bandage soaked in salt water over the area, and leave it there for three days; then apply a wet bandage, and then care for the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the tip of the knife according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this area.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient wounds.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you care for a wound that we have mentioned in the previous cure, and the cure that we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and if you do not apply the cure, and if the wound does not allow the first cautery or the cautery of fire, then wait until the cautery is whitish, as it means above the location of the pain, along the long line that is the main one, or another; then place your hand for a short while and strongly in the area where you pierce the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is often damaged by chewing, and that the jaw not be stuck and the nerve that may be affected, and that it does not become spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of blood from the artery that is being cautery, where in the cauterization of which there is fear, and more especially for those who do not know what to do and are not studious; and leave the operation in its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find the remembrance of the regimen for the flow of blood from the artery according to its own method, in its own place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not allow this cauterization and you see the patient's body tolerably well, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in the chapter of stretching of the artery as cauterization having two points, and this is the best cauterization and more conformable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of the pains of gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain occurs in the big toe due to infiltration and is cured by causing laxatives and the other cure as mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not remain, then use the cauterizer, and this one has no point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then bring the point close to the fire, and it should be moved around the entire big toe as if it were turned over, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	With the cauterizer, slowly touch the tip of the big toe as much as possible without hurting the place with the attempt.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterizer touches all the big toe, and it is felt, then cure the places before they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured and is not cured by cauterization except for the species that come through flexion, as we have said in the sections of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the affected area due to dryness or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that area of turmoil with Jew's remedies and capiciol, and do not combine your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first from the golden hair, the second a little further from the temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your hand on the opposite side of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the visible part.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is that you cauterize that part with the cauterizing instrument at the right of the golden hair, a little further up from the crown of the head, and in the temple another, the longest of which should be second to the length of the first, and place your hand over the cauterizing instrument until the quantity of the majority of the affected area is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauterizing instrument, and it is a special type of knife, the shape of which is given below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May it however be more subtle than that one has with veils; and cover it with a cloth in case of excessive greasiness, one.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the place with that which is given as procedure until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy is cured with that which we have said and does not compare your medicine and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the parts of his head; and with the cauteries and in the middle of his head, as we have said; and with the cauteries in his neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cauteries is made according to what is said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more distant; and then care for the place with that which processes.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by flatulence.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	When giving medicine to the patient at the beginning of treatment, give them large and tasty pills.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a poultice made of the following described in the treatise on it.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place some leeches, which are a method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do this second according to the following order that has already been said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If those remedies are successful; and if not, then make three cautery points on the back part of his head, which should be placed in the most superior part of the head between the part that is closest to the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the largest amount of the said remedy between each cautery, and then care for the cautery as it is done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you feel more pain and the patient is able to bear it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you feel greater pain, then cauterize that one on both feet.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then care for it until it is healed; and the cautery should be applied according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter Nine
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of the perineum and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Having processed the softening of the head as we have said; and then shave the patient's head, and then use that pointed cautery in the middle of the head, and cauterize all the corners of the head, and cauterize on the back part of it, and three cauterizations on the spinal columns of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body of those and the patients tolerating it, and the illness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the spinal columns of the back, and afterwards cauterize into where the sound of the mot of his neck, and raise the tied hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then care for that until it is healed, and this should be cauterized with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter Ten
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is by flexibility.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, if you want to modify the patient's mind at the beginning of their illness and on the other side, the cure that we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gargarisms and masticatory foods to the one who modifies, giving them that for several days, good benefit of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the back of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery in the occiput of them, and over each hair of the head cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that with cautery which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is a cautery oil according to what is preceded.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then use a delicate cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted moisture and thin, then cauterize those with the cautery we have mentioned in the one that has paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tending towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him that which purifies his brain according to that which has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and make a clean incision on his scalp according to the circle, and place that there in the middle of his head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be lying down, and be held from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then place the liniment; and it is worthy of ancient sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And scald that on the fire for warming, which the one who suffers it says is enough when it is in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then approach that one in the middle of their head at the circle, and leave them there until they are diluted.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And then give that person a bath every week, following the other regimen of their body until they are healed; or if you want, make small points with a pointed cautery according to the most appropriate part, as long as you have your hand on a cautery that is properly ordered: this is a special kind of cauterizer that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place your hand on that side that is swollen in bed or in grayish wool.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the cauterization of water descending into the belly.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you that the beginning of water in the belly by the symptoms that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient that water which softens their head, and keep that one from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that one sweat in hot water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command the patient to tilt their head, and cauterize that spot with the pointed cautery in the middle of the forehead; and then cauterize that spot with two cautery instruments on two temples if it is the beginning of a headache in two hemispheres, or with one if it is the beginning of a headache in one hemisphere.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise all the veins and ligaments that are located behind the neck, and place those cautery instruments in that long area in the vicinity of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And watch out for blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from there, stop the cautery with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you should know the skill of extracting ligaments and puncturing those and preventing blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes cautery is applied to the neck behind two bones with two cautery instruments produced earlier.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tear ducts.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the joints are excessively flowing through veins and arteries that are clearly visible at the head's front and it is verified that this is an excessive amount of fluid, then cauterize that pointed cautery which we mentioned in the beginning of the chapter about water collecting in the joints, and cauterize on the middle of the head and two cauteries on the neck below two temples, and two cauteries on the neck below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is necessary for addition, then cauterize that on the entire length of the neck's hair over the small bump at the top of the shoulder with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	About cauterization of bad smell from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that water which we mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient the chopsticks for three nights; and afterwards remove the head of it, and cauterize with the pointed cautery or olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then, with that pointed cautery, carefully cauterize the area between the two upper eyelids near the eyebrows, a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that one.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the shape of that pointed cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterizing the eyelids to soften them.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a pointed cautery; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize it between the two upper eyelids a little, in the middle part, and lengthen the eyebrows.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the length of the eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too hard against the cautery, but according to the amount that the burned part of the eyelid can bear.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When the eyelid cautery is applied to the eyelid when the eyebrows are converted into parts and puncture the eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyebrows are converted into parts and puncture the eyelid, the cautery is applied in two ways, either by burning or by medical means.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is by fire, command the patient to lie down with his eyes closed, while his eyelashes are prolonged and equalized; and if he punctures that which is his own nature, then strengthen the eyelids of the patient with a bandage so that they are not injured until the eyelashes have grown.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they have grown and equalized, place the head of the patient on his chest, and apply a bandage over the eyelids of the patient, which should be shaped like a fan of mercy, and its beginning should be near the eyelashes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply a soft cotton pad on the eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then extinguish the cautery that has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the figure that has been described, bit by bit, in zigzag motions, until the surface of the codex is completely burned, appearing like a map of the world.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health from the work of healing is that you have already closed the eyelid of the eye, which has been contracted by the hairs of the eyebrows being raised for the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and place your hand over the area until the wound is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that spot until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns by the hairs for some reason, and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another cautery over that area as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and is equal to the other eye, so that the hairs do not poke the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the pointed cautery be used as medicine to command the patient to shave their hairs that are prolonged and uneven, and then make a shape of paper or cloth like a mirror.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some known and fresh herbs and mix them well with those causes, and make that into a poultice so that it is not scattered; and spread that over the paper which is made like a mirror, and place that over the affected area; and place the affected area on a soft cloth in a bowl of hot water, and the head of the patient should be in a comfortable position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the patient over the medicine and press that on the affected area without causing any discomfort until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, which is like a burn from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the patient feels the sharp bite of the medicine, then remove the medicine and place it on the patient's forehead; when the bite ceases, remove the medicine and wash the affected area with water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as it was when it was laved from the contraction of fire or incision, because that is good; and if not, return to the medicine on the area where the medicine has not pressed and does not disintegrate until your operation is equalized and is opposite the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the patient's shoulder until the tumor of the disease is removed, and then cure that wound with ointment or another medicine until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary for you to keep your operation, you must guard it with diligent watchfulness that in the wound no more of the medicine is lost, and if the eyelid softens and some cause of the hairs punishing in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and usually do as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the method of extraction of mirtha.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the wounds of men are varied according to their size and location, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not cover the path of righteousness to that one whom you study in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the wound.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the method we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not compare your treatment, then command the patient to place his head on your knee, and hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is not too close nor too far.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a poultice of bread or mustard on the wound of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the cautery of this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be round, like the shape of a stick or a pen of the volt, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be sharp, like a needle.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the round one is better for the work of the body.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and introduce some saliva and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it has not been opened, then open that and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place your hand over the heated cautery, and hold it with a small cloth from the elbow to the part of the nose, so that your hand or the patient is not burned, and then place the cautery on the elbow and burn that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	If at the beginning of the treatment the cautery goes into the bone, it is well; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, depending on the case; and leave that for three days, and then place your hand over that to apply a dry ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after several days it has not healed, then place the sharp acidic medicine inside the bone until it is revealed and scraped as appropriate in its capital part.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing the fistula that was first described: enter at the location of the fistula and open that, and then place your hand in that fissure which is the shape of the bone: And from there put a quantity of one unc of lead; and hold your hand well with retention, and do not burn the patient because the lead does not reach the elbow of that; and cover that over the elbow of the patient with album of egg white or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals that for wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about the cauterization and the cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nose drop and reduce the fistula to the nose when it comes to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18:
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery for the cleft palate.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	These are accidental fissures that occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures with what we have said about the divisions and do not expand your cure, then use the small cauterizing iron in this form that is made as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And place it according to the thickness of the spoon.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place your finger carefully in those fissures until the cauterizing iron reaches the edge of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19:
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cautery for a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and a blister is made, and it is torn, and it is peeled off, and it is punctured, and a fistula is formed, and then you care for that and do not leave the treatment, since you should ignite the cautery according to the amount that has been received in the fistula, and put that ignited cautery into the mouth of the fistula, and your hand enters until the hot iron reaches the front of it, and at the back of it make a small incision or two; and then care for that which we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the sinus is removed and healed, then it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the location and treat the rotten bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery for the teeth and of softening of the jaws.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the joints are softened by moisture and the teeth are rotted, and those remedies do not cure them, then pause the patient's head on your thigh, and approach the heated iron in the form that will come to you, so that you place the quill on the tooth and insert it into that place where the iron is hottest, and hold it there for a short time until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should close their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, as that rotten tooth is sealed, the softened gums are strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if it is frozen or worms, and the remedy does not cure it, then use the cautery in that place in two ways: either with a cow's horn cautery, or with a fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	When you take the pointed cautery, grab a piece of iron from the fire, and then wrap it with cloth, and place it over the end of the tent, and then immerse that pointed cautery, and place it over the painful tooth quickly before it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat those movements until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, immerse some wool or cloth in the pointed cautery above, and place that over the painful tooth, and place it over the burning iron until the iron reaches the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization with fire is that you wait until the sound of iron or iron, and if there is any groaning in his body and the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form that comes, and place that over the tooth and your hand inside when the cautery is cooled; and do that some movements until the pain remains or on that day or on the other day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And if the patient bites down on the good border of that cautery, hold it for an hour and then scrape it off; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And burn whatever you can reach with your hand.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of burning outgrowths.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When outgrowths are soft and caused by humors that are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you want to gently remove them, then ignite the cautery with the shape of which is as follows, having two ends easily so that the smoke from the cautery can pass through the other end, and place that ignited end over the abscess, and another if necessary, until it reaches the center of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it on the side in boiling water until it has burned out that which the fire has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound and treat it with bandages until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the needle or pointed cautery is such that it should be used in this way.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cauterization of a bunion and of its contraction.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes over the thoracic cavity, especially when it is caused by coldness, then it is recommended that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part of the gallbladder in the area where the pain is located.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the cautery to the gallbladder or burn the intestinal canal of it, but a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that part with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower spine of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of it should be like the previous one.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When a cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors that the patient does not have fever or chills, and it is an old disease, then cauterize with two cauteries on the collarbone in the locations where the ribs meet and curve; and with another cauteri in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and let the cauteri be shaped according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization should be made with the pointed cautery called puncta, whose form precedes in the punctation of heel pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let your points enter into those; and take care of that which is preceded by that metal that should be healed before it is cured.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cauteri have three prongs so that cauterization can be made in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization of the tip of the finger.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the helper is dislocated due to slippery moisture and is not stopped at its return time, it must be returned to where it usually returns, and with a small movement, it can be adjusted as we have confirmed, so first reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; and raise the elbow which is in the part of the finger where the joint is dislocated, if the joint is dislocated at the base.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery which has two ends; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the elbow until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will be as follows:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And according to the amount of trial, it is as follows:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some adjustments are made according to this count and why they are cauterized.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place your hand on the cautery, holding it with a clean cloth, and then apply pressure to make the patient comfortable without causing any harm for a while until they are relieved.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and below, and it has been made like this, then cauterize the muscle with a clavilh cautery or a pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When the stomach is filled with cold humors and their multiplication increases within it, and if you continue with the treatment methods without confirming it, then it is likely that the patient will be in a position lying on their back, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize with three cautery: one cauterizing the chest for the length of a pointed clavilh cautery, and two cautery on the back of the cauterizing cautery, forming a triangular figure; and adjust those that are not adjusted to prevent them from touching each other.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two skin folds of the back of the neck.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the shape of the cautery is in this form, it is added. And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cauteri in the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is to be cauterized at that point where this cautery frightens, and you should put your hand over the stomach puncture according to the quantity that you want to test, and then cauterize that with this cautery at the points; and then cure that with the remedy that is preceded before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the foot due to cold or moisture or heavy air before it reaches its normal complexity by excessive exit, and the patient is cured with the remedy that we have said and not compared, then you should place the patient lying on their neck, and put your hand over the area to test three cauteries according to this form and this quantity under the ankles, which is the position of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the greatest length of the said, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straightened.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not understand your own hand movement with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of that which is adhered to the quantity of the mouth of the wound, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then let him sit, the one who has already extended his limbs, and raised his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a pointed cautery, when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the wound be covered with the entire body so that it adheres to the whole body and reaches inside the intestines, because the wound here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the puncture of an abscess on the thigh with a pointed cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the inflammation or abscess in the thigh has ended and you want to know if that abscess is in the muscle of the thigh or in its membrane, then if it is in the muscle of the thigh, the patient's pain and heaviness are increased.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the thigh, then the pain is greatly increased and often wearies the doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be placed on their side; and then touch the location of the abscess with your finger; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the form of which has been described in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize it with that and ignite the cautery until all the tissue is well cooked, until it reaches the bone, until it escapes into the sinus.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that until the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cauterization unless the one that has been studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in which the most harmful effects have been known; but this one has experimented with some heating on this operation, nevertheless it leaves the other to us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cautery for flatulence.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cautery for the flatulence of the ribs should be made in this way, and this is the one that you take from the long dry rib that is found, and it should be of the largest size.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and place it in the fire, and cauterize with a cautery at that location which is between the continuity of the furcula and the collar; and with two small cauteries placed just below the part where the beard was left, and with two small cauteries in that area between the fifth rib and the scapula, declining a little towards the back; and with one cautery at the middle of the chest; and with one on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back; and with one cautery in that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries on the sides of the chest, just below the cautery that is between the two shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not confuse your hand with the pointed cautery, it should be in the visible part of the wound.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And as was said in ancient texts that those who use pointed cautery like a ray and ignite it, they put it in that place between the ribs, until it reaches that pus and all the bad blood is removed, just as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation, do not be afraid that the pointed cautery might cause harm, because it has already happened in the location of the fistula that could not be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery for the melon.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the disease of the melon, do not follow what we have said about the cure in the division, but rather use three methods for the cautery, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three or four cautery strokes along the length of the melon according to the figure of the cautery of the foot, whose figure has been shown.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And each cautery should have the largest diameter of a small finger or a bit more, and the handle of the cautery should be the same handle as the one we mentioned in the cautery of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be on their side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two ends, which we mentioned in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord that is at the end of the bed where the patient's left side is.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be the one that lifts the cord according to the length of the body, so that the points can be made at the appropriate latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two ends, light one, in the moment when those penetrate the cord from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and so four points are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three ends.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not stay for too many days, because it is more beneficial than the other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cautery for hydropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not used in hydropsy but on the spot itself properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydropsy, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment with it, but rather place four cautery needles around the navel, and one on the stomach, and another on the chest, and another on the back, and two between the ribs on the back, and one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be appropriate to the size of the needle.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery in place so that it does not pull on the arm for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the pointed cautery that heals for which they are attached to him, and serve them with food and assistance for recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the pointed cautery that is cauterized on the belly should be like a claw according to the shape above, and the one that is cauterized on the back should be like an olive according to its previous shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydrops and filled with water sitrina, cautery the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati that is between the ear and the ring, and elevate your hand above the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return to that entirely, because the water sitrina will evaporate.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	And the cautery should be in this form: And then make two cautery on both thighs, and in each thigh make a cautery at the end of the cautery cuticular.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and leave the knee and the other one at the lower part of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some liquid may drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And take care of those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cautery of belly wounds.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When belly wounds are caused by injury and moisture entering the body, which is the digestive and retentive power in the stomach and intestines, and those are cured with the methods of treatment and not confined, and sometimes the patient suffers from a strong cauterization, then cauterize that one with a large cauterization on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterization of the circle and with four cauteries around the delicate belly, with the clavilh cauterization; and with the cauterization on the alcatin over aloes, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If you see the excessive moisture and the patient is tolerating it, then cauterize that area on the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cautery devices near the stomach and away from the groin, which will greatly improve the condition.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter thirty-four:
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hernias.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there is a natural old hernia or one filled with thick humors or corrupted moisture, and it is cured by the method we have mentioned in the division, do not compare it to the other curative methods. Instead, cauterize three cautery devices on the small of the back, and two on the abdomen.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach of the patient is inflamed, the food is not digested, and the face is swollen, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and use one cautery device on the back, and another cautery device on the belly, using a claw-like cauteri, and leave the cauteri in place for some time, and then cure the patient so that they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	About the cauterization of the urethra near the opening of their abscess.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut the urethra, you should use a cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that burning cautery into the cut urethra, and ensure that it reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, if the wounds are too large, then cauterize each of them after you have recovered, and cure those affected by applying that which you give them from the ointments before they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is more dangerous.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	About the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then heal with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When a person has an abscess in the natural position behind, and it is ancient, pierce it and drain off the corrupted fluids, and then apply a soft cloth that is suitable for that area, and know the amount of its depth and place it in front.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then use a cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then put that lit cautery into this abscess, and according to the amount in which it intersects the cloth.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat with that cautery until those corrupted parts are burned away once or twice or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the abscess goes to the core of the bladder or the core of the intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the wound is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter has not been removed from it for a long time, then you will know that it is penetrating into the bone and corrupting it, or that something similar to those causes from which it will remember the memory in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the lungs.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the lungs due to cold or thick inhalation, and when the patient's chest is closed, then you should cauterize that over the lungs with a pointed cautery on each lung, using a needle of which the remembrance is needed.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if you cauterize it too much, then do it a little later, so that three cautery lines will come, and they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder is weakened and softened by injury and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold back urine, then cauterize that part of the urethra which is closest to the bladder, with a thorn from a thistle, and cauterize another part directly with a cautery, and another in the opposite side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of the fingers; and cauterize that part with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use a thorn as appropriate.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the mouth.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is injury and moisture in the mouth, and it is prohibited to press it, and the teeth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and there is pain from their presence, then apply that place with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery over the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and use a thorn.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates in the joints and causes pain in the affected area, and when it is compared to the other, the cushion is extended over the other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is atrophied in that place.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cover the patient with a cloth similar to the one used for cauterization, so that you can easily move it around the circumference of the elbow, and so that the elbow does not take the middle position of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cauterization should be in the shape of the one used for stomach cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cauterization is not available to you, then use three pointed cautery needles made of large olive wood.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cauterization should be made according to the thickness of the skin throughout the arm; and take care that it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the Cautery of the Sciatic Nerve Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the part of the leg, and its cause is coldness and moisture, the patient is cured by the method we have mentioned and not by comparing it to other methods, which are outdated. Therefore, you should reduce the patient's humors with heavy pills, fetid or artificial pills, or similar ones; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization in that case has two ways: either with a cauterizing agent that burns, or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	In the second method, there are two ways: one of which cauterizes that area on the part of the leg with three triangular-shaped cauterizing instruments in this form; and you should make them to have good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterizing instrument should be equal to the thickness of the pill and if the cauterizing instrument is made of olive oil or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some wounds should be made on the side of the leg above the knee so that there are four cauterizing instruments.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulder, so that the circle contains and burns the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to use the cautery in the shoulder when pain adheres to the shoulder and does not extend into the space.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the space, then cauterize that part with two cautery tools on the shoulder over the area where you wrap the patient who has pain; and one cautery tool on the back for a few days on the left side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cuticular, and the depth of the cautery according to the amount of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient wraps that pain extends into the area below the feet, then cauterize that part with three or four or more points of cautery if necessary from that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient wraps pain is behind the knee and in the shoulder, then cauterize that part with one cautery tool on the cuticle.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	When performing cautery, be careful not to burn the nerves or large areas, and if you do, it may cause harm or contraction to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have also seen another case where they performed cautery on the scalp and continued until the tumor was achieved, and the bed was inflamed with fire before the entire foot was burned and corrupted.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then administer it to the patient.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts at once, cautery each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise say in the cauterization of any cautery, this is the method: make it like a circle of iron, the circumference of which should be the length of one palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of an olive or about a finger.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another third; and the spaces between them should be the length of a thumb; and those circles placed from two parts; and the length of those chains should be one or two thumbs, and make in those iron edges neatly dressed in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approximately heat the fire until it glows and produces sparks, and then place it on the surface of the affected area, the patient leaning over the left side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that spot with three pointed cautery instruments in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it alone for three days; apply a poultice to that spot and keep it open for several days; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Dear sons, of this kind of cauterization we have not used much because of the fear of its effect on the body, and because we have found some that affect it negatively.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	However, some cautery instruments are used directly on the affected area, and they are placed on that spot.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	However, some medical adhesives are used because you make two circles with an armula perforated in which the hook of the iron door is inserted; the length of the side should be as long as those of their nuts or screws.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between the patient's thighs is equal to the width of the couch, and it is covered from below and above, and contains something between them in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And if the patient is lying on their back, place your hand over the part of the water that the patient is lying on; and take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that water be little by little like fire, and let it boil for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to bite and to adhere to it — because that biting is like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off all the hot water from the patient with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it rest for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adhesion remains, and let it rest for some days, and pour water over it; this is a remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the space or the cushion, make it stand in the state where it contains water, as it is made in the same way in the sea.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of water bath, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and undiluted caustic of ammonium, taken from one part and strained in a new boiling water bath, through which the part left behind is perforated by a small tube according to the amount that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And strain the bottom of the boiling water bath in another boiling water bath, and boil over that alkali and live caustic of water twice, which takes those by a certain amount, and as soon as you understand those by a good compression, and leave the boiling water bath that issues from it in the part left behind to the boiling water bath.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and boil it over another live caustic and another alkali, which is of very strong acidity, which is administered in some medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, which operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines are cauterized widely, such as thyme and myrrh, which cause a painless effect that is mixed with them.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Gualia reported from an ancient man about the operation and cure that cured pain in all joints and sciatica, and magnified it as being of great value, saying that there was no need for other cures, and that it was healed by a remedy such as this, which is strong enough to enter into the body and already known about that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be near certain herbs, and if not found, then take fresh figs; and it should be crushed with a few grains of salt and placed on the painful area, or in the cushion, or on the chest, and left there.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the amount of three hours or for as long as the patient feels comfortable with the adhesion.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that into the body, and when the patient's body is wrapped, introduce that into the ground, where the pain ceases and is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use this cautery for these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	As Escorides said that when the goat wound is cauterized, the vein stretches to the eye; and this cautery should be done in this manner: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the foot and the fossa.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat dung and apply it to the wound with fire until it is charred; and place it on the wool and let it expand inside.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop until the sensation of pain reaches the ankle and the pain stops.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called the cautery of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in the two places due to various causes, such as from impact or from excessive evacuation, and from similar causes, due to the infusion of moist and crushed matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery does not cut, but only in this specific area where the effusion of matter occurs.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with medicinal pills and similar to them, which are made on both sides in the area where the pain is three lines wide, more than that should be tried in each line with cauteries or more, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And make a cautery with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries or with the middle claw cautery in this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cautery at the beginning of swelling.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Wedges are used in this disease in small children; and similar to the beginning of it in children, it is said that it occurs on their structure in the morning hours, elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And usually in the last lumbar vertebra of the back and on the night of it that already begins to overcome the others spondils.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see that and want to prevent it, then use this pointed cautery that is circular in the following form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which holds the cautery over every part of the sacrum equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the sacrum with two or three lines of the pointed cautery.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be directed towards each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then care for the area where you have said it is healed.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that the cautery is not administered in a state of paralysis that is caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And so when gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not return, then use the cautery again.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should cauterize that nearby evacuation in the circle of the foot joint with a pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use this pointed cautery of which this is the shape of it:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads to the other joints or to the ankles, and that does not improve, then cauterize each ankle with three or four pointed cauteries of this kind.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need more cauteries than these, then cauterize that and do not press your hand too hard against the cautery before, only around the shape of the needle.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain spreads to both ankles, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the feet and is called gout, then prick in the circle of the finger bones as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in those places, then prick around the base of the nails and on the pad of the palm.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain can be pushed away from the joints or muscles, then cauterize all the parts of the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not expel the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is given and flatulence is expelled, this cautery will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the fracture is in the ankles and the intestines are pushing against the skin on the inside, and this begins to happen, then tell the patient to leave their food for that day and use gentle medications so that the wound does not open from their belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until the fracture is set or appears on the skin or intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that arm to its place, and try to feel the break over the bone of the thighbone, near the end of which is similar to the shape of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then remove the cautery that has this form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is thin and remove the scales.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that part of the arm where you have placed your hand, and enter that into the middle of the thighbone; and if you have not succeeded in that first attempt, try again.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe the appearance of the intestine during your cauterization, so that you do not burn it because it does not come out from under the patient in death or some other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, do not contaminate your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And you know that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and thickness.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then take care of the location of the cautery for three days until the wound is healed from the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of those other injuries until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for 40 days until the wound is sealed and the plague has passed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And you know that the patient's food should be given according to the length of their treatment, which should not cause abdominal pain, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then after 40 days, administer adequate food, and keep that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And they should be tired of work and food replacement, and of drinking and vomiting, because when they follow this regimen of healing, the whole person is healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say that the cure for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and if they do not heal, cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the size of it, and let that which is extracted from the sore be done with the clean part of it; and then cure that wound with that which we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And they have said that the first wound should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with a needle.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed that is the most suitable for the width on the side of the rupture, and another line above; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is thinner and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of twisting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When in some members there is pain from impact or from persistent pain for a long time and does not improve with the usual medical treatments, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to each member according to its size, condition, virtue, and location of torture and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, then it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for according to the nature of those pains, they are points of a member that approach the bone, in order to prevent you from achieving those cautery before the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprosy is cured by great benefit, and greatly if the specific type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And thus, if you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy has come and if it is of the type that we have mentioned in the division and does not exist, and fear that the corruption comprehends all of the body of that one and all of its complexion, then cauterize that one on the forehead: with one at the middle of the head, and with the second behind it, and facing the front of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with one behind, on the nape or servitz.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your hand should hold the cautery a little into the bone, making a small incision, and then displace the scars, so that the exhalation of large vapors is relieved from there; and cauterize over the wound according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then you should cauterize those parts with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauterys on both ears, and two cauterys on two spines of the neck, and one cautery on the back, and one cautery on each shoulder, and two cauterys on each arm, and one over each elbow, and two cauterys on each hand, and two cauterys on each finger, and two cauterys on each foot, and two cauterys on each toe, and two cauterys on each muscle, and two cauterys on the tendons of the patient's hands; and cauterize all the joints of the mentioned legs and feet, and over each sole of their feet, and on the soles of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on top of the ankle, do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the teeth of the stomach and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and more effective it is; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with its predecessors, so that the body of the patient has already been stupefied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you should know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints, according to what is preceded by the tools of the species.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its location.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the pointed cautery enter the spine through a small opening.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with an ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes the veins are cauterized in such a way that they lead to the hands and feet, and the spine and the eyesight of the nerves that move that member, and it remains numb.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not apply anything to that except the one that is known in the anatomy of the member and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization of warts that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are large and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize with a pointed cautery on that spot through a small opening until it remains white and the color of the wart changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with a poultice made of flour and lentils, with olive oil and leaves of arnica, and with the sap of columbine or with the sap of ironwort, each part is mixed separately, and let it be applied as a bandage and placed on the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cautery of the neck.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a tumor begins to form and you want to remove it, then cauterize that circular cautery in its circle around it as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And they say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle; but I have not seen that, because I fear it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen that in some cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to be cauterized in its circle around it as we have said, or with a pointed cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cautery of the abdomen.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abdominal swelling is late in maturation, and it is due to excess or the condition of the patient, who is old and weak, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abdominal swelling; then cauterize around it with a pointed cautery, and apply that which will hasten its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to puncture it with the pointed cautery, then place the cautery in this form: and pause it at the middle point where it should enter the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed too deeply, in order to prevent the arm from being injured; and care must be taken to ensure it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cautery for corrosion
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is a corrupting agent that moves within the body, which corrodes whatever it comes into contact with like fire consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that corrodent in the place where cautery with fire is applied, then place small and large needles according to what is appropriate in the place where corrodent is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cautery all parts until you have removed all the corrosion and there is no remaining cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it for three days, and place olive oil mixed with honey on the cauteryed places until all the scars are healed and all the corruption is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then carefully cure those wounds that are generating meat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	However, if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the place where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And apply some acute medicine to the wounds, which is in place of the cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the cautery of fire is more useful for removing pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure of that with acute medicine in the division, and then take that which will be needed from it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cautery of the claws and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	These are warts that occur at the parts behind the foot, which is called claw, and it is a great cause, entering into which causes pain in the foot; and cautery is done in those two ways, either by fire or by water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, the cautery of fire is that you ignite the cautery like a pencil sharpener, which should be made of iron according to the amount that contains the claw of all part, and it should be of thin margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that fire over the knuckle, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the knuckle until the cautery reaches the depth of the knuckle.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And then leave it for three days until it begins to swell.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that with wild marjoram powder mixed with salt, and leave the poultice on for one night, until that disease is removed from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries with water, and take a syringe of iron or of iron or of pen needle, and place that over the knuckle; and then pour a few drops of water into the syringe, and rotate your hand, and press the margin of the needle on the root of the knuckle, and find the water flowing to the tip of the needle; and wait for the patient for a short time for the bite of the water to take effect for an hour, and then remove that, because the knuckle has its roots removed.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And they did that to those who approached all of which were in their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And they cured those who had removed the pus from their wounds with the saliva of the teeth that the meat entangles.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a person has tremors due to an injury or fever or for another similar cause, it is customary to cautery them with four cauteries or with one over the spines of their back, between each spine there is one cauteri; and on their chest, another cauteri olivar.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremors of the patient are relieved and the healing of the sick is accelerated.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cautery for accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are abscesses in the body that have been formed from thick, rotten materials, it is customary to begin with this, that they be cauteryed over the entire cap of the fistula with a thin, birch rod, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with the long, erectile tooth of an animal; or with a lentecular cauteri.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes, cautery is applied to the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and not believing, it disrupts the excessive actions of those, and heals from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is best to do this before evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cautery of fluxes of blood from an injury by cutting the archery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too many people are affected by the flux of archery that is cut from the wound, which ends up deformed, or from the incision of abscesses or cautery of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when something happens to anyone, you should immediately place your hand on the orifice of the archery, and press over that which you say is very painful, those affected people inside before the flux of the injury comes out, and it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then press on the fire the cautery olives few and many, by name, and exhale over those before they are much inflamed.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then approach the wound location and the area where the artery is torn, over that vein, quickly but not too fast so that it doesn't bleed again, and insert the cautery into that sanctum and restrict it.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the sanctum is expelled from the opening of the artery while you are reapplying the cautery and extending it, then take another cautery that is usually prepared for cauterizing in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the sanctum is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and that another evil comes upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the sanctum in those places, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either with a cautery as mentioned above, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of it are burned and the sanctum is restricted, or it is tied with a strong belt or a piece of cloth for strong structure, or it is placed on medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the sanctum; and they are strengthened by a pillow or a compress.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who administers a decent amount of oil and linen to the affected area and a tight bandage or by positioning due to burns and similar causes, does not compare but rather soothes.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it be that this is also used by someone who is not a doctor or has no medical knowledge, then begin with the resting of the indicated oil on the opening of that vein as we have mentioned, and understand that it should not remain on the shoulder for a long time; and over the shoulder, it should not remain; and over the shoulder, it should be sprinkled with cold water frequently until the swelling is reduced and increased; and continue with whatever cauterization or medical treatment is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions and perforations and bleeding and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Avicenna.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already mentioned in the first chapter that all diseases in which cauterization with fire or medicine is convenient and all the causes and instruments necessary for those forms of cauterization; and we have ordered the chapters of the subtraction of the head from the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that it may be helpful to those who desire such a thing, regarding what has been asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And I will begin by saying that in this chapter, one must learn what is mentioned in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that purpose, one must take great care in the operation mentioned in this chapter, which involves the evacuation of matter, which is done with suction or incision on the abscess or removal of exudation or purification of the plague or extraction of a stone or incision of a tumor and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that such a thing should not happen to you, because some of these procedures may involve the handling of human bodies or similar matters.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And there are some who may contract the disease and die from it, and suffer greatly due to the severity of the disease, and the length of the disease, and the fear of death that comes with it.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you their name and title, you hope for their health, and their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not believe that you should consent to any person who comes to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than usual, and your skill; and do not assume any cause without first obtaining certain knowledge of which it is true for you, and to which successful succession praiseworthy.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases of prognosis and indication of which is converted to health, because in that you have help over acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O children, God in you inspires his understanding and does not take direction from you and protection, because that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have distinguished this chapter by chapters following the second chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is to you rejoicing that asks about which and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Regarding the cure for gout, which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this disease affects children during childhood and when the child's head is first shaved.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are caused by an unknown reason.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have never seen this disease except in children; and to all those that I have seen it is accompanied by death, and for this reason it has been considered an incurable disease by me.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head which was full of water, and the head of it was always magnificently shining until it could not be covered by the greatness of its cap, and more than the moisture increased until it died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added between the cartilage and bone, or it is added behind the bone on the cavity.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the operation in that case where the moisture is between the cartilage and bone and the pus is small, then you should make a cut in the middle of the head at an angle, and the length of the cut should be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is further increased and the abscess becomes larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity goes to the bones, then you should open the folds of the cap that cover all parts and pour water into it when you understand that the wound is healing at the back and not at your fingertips.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So that you cut in the middle of the cap with three incisions according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And remove all the humidity from the incision; and strengthen the incisions with bandages and feathers; and apply olive oil every other day for five days, and remove the scab and cure the wound with ointments and strengthens the cap with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little humidity until that member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider depending on the size of the abscess and the collection of water, where some are more in the occipital region, or in the back part, or in the right or left; and then attend to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do this according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and engage in bloodletting, as it may cause the patient to become weak and more ill due to that flow of blood and the removal of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	About the incision of the arteries that are close to the temples, which are called temple arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a catarrh or swelling occurs in the throat or on the chest, and it is confirmed that this is the case, and you do not rely on medicine for its cure, then this cure should be done by incising those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And so, when you want to incise those arteries that run through the patient's neck, and you approach the location with dry cloth in order for the veins to be visible, and you strengthen the patient's neck with a cloth; and you consider where the vein is located; and the locations of each one on the locations that are close to the temples, and they are hidden only in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place a tent over the backbone, and insert each one into the space of each part that enters into the bone, and let that be according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the space behind the artery and cut it at the incidents above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the insertion be twice as long as the width, because when any vein is inserted, the blood flows out through the pulsatil exit, which is often blocked.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the backbone does not appear at the skin, then measure from the shoulder the quantity of three widths, and place a tent over it, and pierce into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which is obtained from the blood is one unit of volume, and it is not necessary to get more or less, and all of that is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the expansion of the backbone of him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the swelling, and if there is some cause of the cipherac on the bone, then insert it in such a way that it does not become an abscess carefully.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply strength to the wound with plasters and cloth of linen, and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	About the extraction of the stones that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or deep wound has occurred in the temples, due to humid almonds and due to their quality in the temples, or due to very severe and similar wounds, and it is treated with the methods of healing medicine and this does not help, then we have shown in these maladies extraction of the stones in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the eyelids; and understands the stone that is apparent in the temple where it is shown by its own side, and it is hidden only in a few people due to the force of the blow.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the collar of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then apply force to the location with a rough cloth or evaporate the location with hot water until the stone appears to you clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And at this time, you take the instrument that has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And at this time, you scratch the skin with a needle until you reach the arch; and then pierce into it and extract the thick parts until you remove the part of the needle and uncover the parts of the tunics that were left there, of all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it around the end of the needle, and then cut one part according to the amount by which its ends were stretched and bent, and do not cut too much, because if it is not cut, the blood will not flow out at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove about one drop of blood from the vein through a small hole.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the arch is large, then tie it in two places with strong double thread or with a cord that is long enough, and do not let it rot during the consolidation of the wound and allow blood to flow out.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut off the excess that is between two layers; and do this at that time or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that area with the pointed cautery through the hole in the cautery, and it will remain in the place of that wound.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better to do this if the patient has fever or is in a scalded condition; because cauterization is one of those causes that help to end moisture, and therefore it is better in such cases.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the archers that have collapsed the old wound location, and place them over the clean powder made properly, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and warm compresses until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And while you are performing another procedure to stop the flow of pus from the archer, at that time you should cover that pus, or the cauterization, or what fills the wound location, and press your hand inside until the pus is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes is not present to you at the moment, then place your hand over the location where the pus is until it is congealed, and cover the location with very cold water until the intensity subsides, and then press it according to what covers it.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is more painful during the extraction of an arrow is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, so that you have sensed both locations well, and pause when you feel, as if ignited, before they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of it is not all solidified by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two points should be like this.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the sharpness of two points is not better, because if they approach each other too quickly, they do not cut the flesh.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, if there is any thickness in those places, the heat of the fire should be applied to those places and the flesh should be cut more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and less painful.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two points should be the thickness of the said.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of bodies affected by sharp, acidic humors from the joints.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic humors are in the body, and they affect the joints above the crown of the head, and there is no other cause for the cure of medicine, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and feels pain in their forehead as if they were walking with ants, and the joints of that person are softened, and their skin is scratched by the acidity of the tears, the ancient remedies for this operation, and they call that cure "the spread.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is less than two such: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelashes that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And watch out for the beginning of the jaws, which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the armpits.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each beginning is equal to three times the width.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry cloth at hand, use it to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the space of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Exhaustrate all the pus that is between two incisions and scrape off the bone, which is on the bone, and then do so from the first incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then spread this space and insert another instrument into the first incision, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place your hand on the sharp side of the bone, and on the other side of the bone, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the hips.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	While continuing this incision, approach the edge of the codex, and make it in the groove between the other grooves.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And until the same quantity is reached, express the locations of the feet of the patient with a catheter.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And place your hand on each groove that is warm to the touch, and place it over those powders that are in between oil and water, and make sure not to cause an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for it with oil and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of gout by cauterization and the descending hooves from the parts of the chapter.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When applying cauterization and continuing it, sometimes the hooves of the patient become weak and their eyes are ulcerated and their hair falls out, and in the beginning of the chapter there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know that these accidents occur because the materials and cauterizations do not come from motas venas de las partidas dedintz.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for these is to command the patient to turn their head, and then make a small incision on the right side of their forehead, near the temple (and start the incision from the left temple towards the right; and it should go through the bone; and extend your hand under the temples which are swollen due to the biting), until it reveals the bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the pus with gauze or dry cloth and then fill it between the two lips of the incision at the old wound or with the cloths of the patient.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then clean above the pus with vinegar and oil to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have done that and see that the abscess has decreased, then apply a powder that dries out the meat, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collofania and mix them, and it is made into a paste and administered on these wounds to the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of that which is in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the cause that is in the ears belongs to one of four species: it is either a mineral stone or a cause similar to a stone, such as iron and verdigris, or it is a plant cause such as ceze or fava, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and its similar substances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a stone or other cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the ear, and if the ear is exposed to the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip some violent oil or chamomile into it, and administer the extraction of it, and make the sneezing condition, and open the nostrils for the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some cloths or wool around the ear circuit, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because these motions are often forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not ready, then administer extraction with the instrument called the epicicloid subtle, which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is ready, then use the small cautery; otherwise, administer extraction with the thin needle of double insertion.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not ready for that, then make a needle of iron and insert the end of the needle into the auditory canal and seal around the needle with beeswax and softened oil so that it does not leak except the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with a strong attraction, as many troops have reported with that which we have found.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not ready in this way, then take some soft or well-prepared cloth, which are taken by the amount of the soles, and place that at the end of the ray, and cover it properly with that placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the auditory canal with ease, and dry the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to cut the part where the abscess or spasm occurred.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting that part is to first restrain the patient's leg with the septum vein and remove it according to the method of its virtue, and then make a small hole in the earlobe and insert the needle into the location where the pus is most likely to be found.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the hole does not reach the stone, and the stone is found, then use appropriate instruments to remove that part; and then make the hole in that hour with speed, and cure it before it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is one of the grains that are believed to be inflated and is in the earlobe, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your command, then take a thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer that abscess of that wound which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	and do not do that when you think that that wound has already become moistened by the steam of the ear, and place that in small pieces, and try to extract those from the corners or from the subtle gestures, or from the beginning as it was previously mentioned, which is praised for the extraction of that.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	and may the water that is introduced into the ear canal be used for sneezing, and fill the patient's ear with an old cloth, and cover that ear with water, and if it is expelled by that, good; and if not, take many small pearls and lion's teeth according to the length of the said, and calf those in the fire for a short time, and the patient should put one of those in the passage of his ear and strike one other pearl on the pearl that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water has been drained out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been drained out, take paper or straw and, with one end of it in the earhole, extend the other end inside the ear until the most of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then use another straw and make so many holes in it until all the water has been drained out, and discard that which is below as mentioned of the extraordinary stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of beasts entering into that earhole, if it is a small size, use the same as above and similar to what we have said in the division; but if it is of great size, which causes appearance at the back of the vestibule, then administer the extraction of it with gentle and circular movements, and the cause of it is more unknown than all the other causes that occur in the earhole.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms that generate in the earhole, when you treat it with the same as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and do not compare your treatment, then cover that you regulate the earhole to the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is any cause of worms here, then extract that sharp or thin instrument, but if there is no cause, then take a narrow needle and place it above the wide part of which this is the form of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin end into the ear second to the amount that can be tolerated by the patient; then pull out the other with great force, and do so until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey you at all, then open and close the circuit of the candle as we have said; then administer distillations that have been previously expressed in the cure of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your emission is the one that pours out the medical oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be as if they are in the cavity of the catheter for containment here, where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rag and wrap it around the end of the affected part indecently, and then pour some oil or herbs or any of these medicines into the catheter — and that is in the syringe — and then place the rag above and press your hand on it to compress the oil until it is expelled into the cavity of the catheter and the patient feels the oil being absorbed.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is in the syringe should already have been heated by the fire for a short time.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will distill into the syringe is not too cold, because the medicines of the syringe do not bear cold.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of the opening of catheters.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some people are born without any openings in their abdomen, and this has also happened to some men, opening of the catheter in the flesh of the syringe by plague or by no flesh at all; and this opening is sometimes made in the front of the needle of the syringe which does not know the excrement, and sometimes in the parts in front.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And if the first thing that happens is in the front of the patient, which does not understand the position, it is in the major difficulties for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And if you succeed in placing the patient in the correct position, then hold the patient's head to the side and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an abnormal appearance, then open this thin spatula of the following form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which the width is small, one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula is two leons long so that it does not hit the head.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the appearance is caused by flesh that has risen in the head or in the meat of it, then open this thin needle and insert it into that vein until all the flesh is stopped.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the appearance is in the front of the head, then take this thin needle and cut that thread a little, and place it in the meat of the head.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the patient feels oppressed by the weight of the blanket, due to its heaviness, ease the pressure on him; and be careful not to press the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you have folded a piece of cloth of the same width as the throat gag that you have wrapped around his neck, and apply this to the ear for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any other material and insert it into the ear, powder it with salt and use it; and if you see that the ear is already infected, then remove the infected part and replace it with another piece of cloth that you have wrapped in a greased cotton that has been boiled, until the infection has healed; and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If you accidentally have bleeding from the wound, then soak a cloth or piece of cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other remedy that restricts the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of a black spot that appears on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	A black spot that appears on the eyelids of some people is due to humidity, while others are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should hold those who have this condition or not, and cut those who have the spots from their eyelids, and place your hand over the areas according to the following method.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain in the flow of unclean blood, then you should cauterize those spots with a pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is to incise and remove the dry and moist spots when they return from their eyelids; and when they are cauterized with fire, those spots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the treatment of a large black spot that appears on the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Dry spots that appear on the eyelids of some people are due to a cause that is similar to large black spots in their defense and hardness, and because they become larger, it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an accumulation of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the great swelling arises from that which appears from the eyelid and is smeared over the whole part; and the cause of this is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision over that part with a sharp instrument, and then scrape it from all parts to facilitate its discharge, and then suspend it with a bandage and remove it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you do not prepare the incision of it if it does not penetrate the eyelid with a few cuts at a time, then in this case it is not known for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and cure it within that which is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then it will not be harmed by that in which the oil of it restores it and encases it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the great swelling declines to the parts inside the eyelid, then scrape the eyelid and suspend it with a bandage, another that you indicate for incision, and press it from all parts, and if the eyelid is elongated by incision, then this is not known for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and care for the area with that which is inside that it may be healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the care of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is gray matter that is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially in children, aggravates wounds of those and accideso to their catartz the most; and they cannot regard the clarity of the sunlight because tears gather on those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you see those people talking on their faces all the time, and on their faces sleeping; and they are to the eyes of their eyelids humid, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of accernac apparent is in the wound; and that when you press the area with the fingers, you center accernac within those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And sometimes the operation is on that which the patient lies on his back and on his stomach, and then place a cloth of linen and of wool, and make a circle according to the quantity which contains all parts, and then place that over that and press with the fingers of all to be added accernac in the middle of the circle, and then insert spatum into the crack through the latitude, and the crack is not greater than the crack which is made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the first incision you make in the abdomen, continue until you reach the peritoneum, as it is often punctured by a white, sharp object.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those blood-stained cloths that you have placed between the patient's thighs and roll them between your right and left hand until they are clean.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert the spatula too far, as it could reach the bladder and cause harm.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see the spatula in your incision at the beginning, then insert a small gadget into the incision before proceeding; and then extract those cloths we mentioned earlier; and soak them in hot water and vinegar, place them over the area, and rub those affected parts.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And know that they are to be applied three times and placed in the cavity of the incision to remove that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess occurs in the affected area, then treat it with a healing ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	About the methods of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of wounds are not adjusted with natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch the wound and make methods of maladies as if they were constant tears and softening of the eyelids and cloth until that is the cause of destruction of the wound which is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either with a pointed cautery at high heat; or with an acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauteries; or by making an incision and suture; or by using cannulas as I will describe.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so cover that you place the cap of the wound on your left hand; then convert the eyelid of the wound to your left hand, and if it converts, it is good; and if not, insert the needle in the part where it is faithful behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through that part, and that is — near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are — near the hairs, and pull the thread above to the edge of the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then approach the part of the eyelid behind the eyelashes, and insert a thin, sharp instrument into the lacrimal canal; and then extract the foreign body and place it beside the eyelid, covering it with small pieces of cloth or cotton, and then apply pressure on the eyelid to prevent bleeding.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to note that the figure should be adjusted according to the degree of eyelid elevation, which varies among men, and those who require a larger incision in the eyelid should have it done according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then approach the part of the eyelid where you have placed the pressure, and begin by inserting the thin, sharp instrument into the lacrimal canal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onion in one of the two angles of the wound, and remove all the dead tissue from there, and adjust the edges of the wound with thin pieces of gauze or cotton, and clean the area, and if you want to apply something on top of that, do so, otherwise, it does not matter.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after three or four days, remove the sutures of the wounds and care for that area.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, remove the bandage from the sutures, and care for that area with a dry and constricting ointment, because the eyelid elevates due to the sealing of the wound and its attachment; but suture is better. And thus, I will now describe the ancient methods of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in their concern for the patient, it is a good operation, and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method in taxanir is to place a figure of a mermaid over the eyelid, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches, separating and gathering it according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, then take the inches, and if it is not equal, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle into the lacrimal major, and the second needle into the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the threads as described earlier, and then lift your hand with an equal elevation, and lift the entire eyelid over the area as recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is not yet healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if a blister occurs on your finger or your toe, cover that blister with cerate and the same kind of ointment, and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some eyelids are ended at the eyelid that they are converted into, then cover that which you use in that of which we have said of wound; but stitching in which is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Stitching the cannulas is the following form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And then you convert the eyelid and cut the figure that is designed according to what I have said; and then make two cannulas or two thin needles of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs is slightly less than the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already cut into the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each subtlety under that which superfluously from the eyelid of the eye, and press the needles of each part very tightly, and leave that for several days, until the tissue by the pressure dies and is denied and will rot within that if it does not come out.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then break the bone and cure the pain until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it is set, the eyelid is raised and the hairs are not pricked.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of raising the pricked hairs in the wound when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard, rough and pricked, then the operation is as follows: you take a thin needle and place it in the field of thin cotton and lion, and then adjust the ends of it and any that you find in a subtle way.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the fields should be the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you place another thin field next to it in a short time, and use the ends of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and position yourself close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, as it is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that requires sutures, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyeball until it goes through the upper part of the eye naturally.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the eyelid upwards and insert that into the eyelids, and have one or two or three of them.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand out from under that eyelid which is pulled upwards and insert it into the eyelids, following the natural shape of the eyelid.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled upwards and the eyelid does not come out, pull it upwards to the parts that you have composed at that point, until it comes out naturally from the trunk.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then place it against the wound, as you would pull upwards and close the wound, and sew it together, and leave it for two or three days, until the eyelid adheres to its natural position and heals well.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the skin is too short, then adjust a long piece of the natural skin, and raise it over that one, or let it hang inside until it is stretched out, and then raise that one.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the cure of a wrinkle that appears in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is a wrinkle in the eyelid, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is turned upwards, to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the skin or dryness or cauterization, and this is called leporina, and whether it is natural or accidental, it is caused by poor consolidation of the skin or dryness or cauterization, or similar to those.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is to cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of linen, and tie them together when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use remedies for it from the causes that dry and contract; because if you do so, it will return more wrinkled than at any time they have not had fire.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in those cases where there is a cause that melts like fenugreek, and embrocate with the water in which they are boiled and simmered, or with quince water, which should be liquefied with some oil, and apply it to the affected area, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your cure is that you puncture all the flesh that is not consolidated according to its original form after heating.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation, which we have said, is only a correction of the calcification that does not return the form of the area after heating.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of calcification that is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This calcification that is made in the eyelid, which is not called correctly calcification, is of two kinds: one natural, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental calcification is made by pressure or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place it on the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left eye into the lacrimal of the right eye, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the parts above and below the needle, and cut it with the needle, and insert it into an open space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the figure of the eyelid returns to its original form, it is good; otherwise, take the needle and place it on the broken part, and convert that into an eyelid, and make the two wounds in the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two wounds should be made into two angles at the beginning, and when they meet, make an angle from them that will form a figure like their own.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter lambda: λ.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh on that part for as much as it is wide from the side of the eyelid, which will close the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with wool thread; and then care for those areas with the medicines that we have mentioned as being softening and warming until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you have to make an incision or suture or cauterization, then make the flat incision on the eyelid according to what is prescribed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the wool between two lips as we have mentioned.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of incisions when they are raised or lowered, that the blood flow in the operation according to how it is prepared as an incision, and that is in the form of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the craftsmen always prepare everything in any way that is possible to do inside so that he can return the figure to its natural form, or close to that, and the patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the tools in the best arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men, such that the eyelid is solidified above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from facilitating movement and its natural works, then you should insert the extramattar under the eyelid, and raise it above, or extend it to the edge.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should insert a thin blade under the adhesion, which is not sharp enough for the incisions, having a small edge so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the blade that does not leave any mark on the eye.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be made to easily return the eyelid to its natural form and heal all the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should put saltwater in the eye, which you have washed; or distill it from the herb dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cotton pad, and place on the eye a piece of wool infused in hog's lard, and use third-day urine from causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the beginning of a gland and its height of flesh from the lacrimal.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that the gland is of two kinds, either nervous, resembling a thin, hard lump; or non-nervous, resembling white moisture, which when touched, is easily removed and does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And these species do not begin until the greater lacrimal duct, which gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	When the work begins at the beginning of it, the patient lies down on his back, and then raises the eyelids with your hand, and lifts the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the gland from a few times duplication and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert a small piece of horsehair or cow hair or cattle hair or similar, or strong and double the tip of the needle gradually and place it in the middle of the gland, and push it into the gland with the needle, and hold the gland firmly; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the part that covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And if you continue to press that leg into the back of them.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you insert the thin needle or small forceps into the lacrimal duct to prevent the lacrimal tissue from becoming inflamed and causing continuous tear flow.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the finger is placed on the sole or extended, as we have said, and then the thin needle is inserted through this hole, which has the following form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that the needle does not touch the corneal tunica and that a rupture occurs in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then insert the thin needle into the other eye and let it remain there until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the finger is not numb and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick in that spot, then this special method of treatment is used by doctors to heal it and it is healed as it would be with a wound and recommended for use in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to cut that, then you begin by opening the patient's thigh and taking a thin, sharp knife of high quality according to this form.
am subtilitat.	And you should use a thin, sharp knife of high quality according to this form.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is thin and curved and enters into the wound, then you sprinkle some of your blood on the wound made from sandalwood or rose oil or three-salt salt, and cover the wound with the other side.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is inside has been removed, but if the opposite pus is still in the wound, then you let it drain and cure the pus when it has been healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The function of the lacrimal gland, if it is not seen in the wound for great harm, should be suspended from the bone; and cut that from that one part, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cut out too many tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a warm compress to the eye and wait until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII:
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the beginning of a carbuncle and about that which is born from flesh adjusted in the skin.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes flesh is born in the skin and is overgrown before it covers the pupil, or it approaches or extends to the eyelids and strongly grasps the eyelids at the parts of the forehead and is assembled like a barbed wire.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation is performed by the patient placing their head on a pillow; and then opening the skin of that part and collecting all that flesh with scissors, and that flesh with a forceps or a pair of tweezers; and then incising the flesh from the beginning until it is all finished at the edges, and be careful not to tear that skin during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision is the one that you make those or the one that you spread out with the instrument that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps that are collected as soon as the shape of it comes close to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When the initial incision is completed and the entire flesh is removed, then fill the wound with salt crust, or distill it on powder and similar to corrosive medicines, and pause over the wound with a cloth soaked in vinegar until it is ensured that an abscess has formed.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause for alarm and the wound is not healing properly, and you fear an abscess has formed, then lance the wound and treat that abscess with something that promotes healing, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the surrounding flesh that was affected by this wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all care of the wound is done naturally or accidentally, use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that that member has suffered this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of serum from the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	If there are veins that are swollen and hardened on the wall and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, then they should be removed over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you should consider whether the wall in which there is swelling is strong and if there is no other disease that causes swelling, then you should collect that swelling.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to place their head on the table, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your judgment; and that onion should be of fine duplication in this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onions gradually in a cloth according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with fine forceps, with fine dissection, and wipe away the blood frequently as they become visible from the wall and are rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to damage the wall at its extremities; and if your operation is on the morning after the full moon, and you have a strong hand in your operation, then do not incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed the task, then drip some clear or red wine into the empty stomach to reduce the intensity of the pain that remains from the blow.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	However, if that is not possible at that time, then apply all of the remedies that relieve their pain, and leave them for several days until the pain is reduced and it is ensured that an abscess does not form.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing hernias to the abdomen.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with a pointed cautery or sharp medicine that has not been healed, do not push into them but rather pierce the abscess to remove all the moisture inside and around the bone until it is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the bone is discovered to be corrupted or black, then use this tool with this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if it is a hard, sharp cap, and made of iron, and the cap is redone with an air hole that has been made by puncturing with a needle or a small knife for a subtle puncture (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the location of the bone decay, and gradually rotate it between the toes, pressing your hand gently until you know that that decay is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And that should be done several times, and then restore the location with drying and hemostatic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from infection for 40 days, and there is no recurrence or pus formation and no accident occurs in that area, then you know it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the rupture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you should take a second bone of iron or sharp medical instrument, and when the bone is revealed, then you take a tribe in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The external part of the iron is triangular, and its handle is extended into the end with as much force as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that over the bone, and that near the lacrimal; and with your hand, grab a little of the flesh, and then rotate your hand to push the triangular iron into the bone, and the patient feels the pain as if something is piercing through it when you take your hand away.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, then restore the area with astringent medical remedies that are available to you.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, since the flesh and the area are hardened, then the matter that was flowing to the parts of the body returns to its source, therefore this is less painful for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the flesh.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the flesh is prominent and does not cause harm or reduction in the excretion, then gently move the patient, and then place it so that it follows, and then place several incisions on the neck for good drainage; and then apply a liniment made of acetate, aloe, seneca, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the flesh with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for cleaning the feet is to take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those into.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those over each other according to the amount that is needed for the wound.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply strong pressure with a durable and tight cloth; and repeat the bandages with the suction of the incisions; and then remove the bandages and let the wound remain straight during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the tendon becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the wound has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the feet and the bandage and the bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the beginning of the elevation of the choroid membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the choroid membrane, and it elevates and protrudes outside the eyelids, like a grayish film, and assumes the shape of a man, and you want to incise it, the operation is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from the lower part to the upper part, and then place another needle in the double part of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate, and let the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double part and lift it away from the lower part of the uvea, and apply pressure on that.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place it on the surface of the wool soaked in a mixture of honey and lime, until the thread breaks through the wound.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the wool with that which comforts the one who is suffering from the plague until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some bandages gathered from all parts of the cloth inside the wound are adjusted to a large circle, and then perforated with a thin spatula until it reaches the surface of the wound, and remove the moisture from the wound, and then lower it and insert it immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then apply strength until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease, which is called cataracts, is not other than a substance that is adjusted in the wound like water descending and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to work in it is that the patient should lie down on the prepared and adjusted bed, and then take the largest of your two hands and hold it over that one, and then see the substance coming to the parts left, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and keep the light, and the disease will be seen as it was.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down in the lower part, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the preparation of the descent to the lower part is not done, then have the patient spit between your fingers and take a thin spatula and place it on the cornea in front of the pupil (in the center of the eye), until the sickness is discharged.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when the sickness is discharged, you will drop in the eye a mixture of water with honey in which you have mixed fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which is suitable for performing the operation declared by the second healing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then cover that you make the patient spit into your hand and hold his eye closed with it, then pull out the string tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your hand near the eyelid of the affected eye, if the affected eye is the right one; or place your hand on the affected eye if it is the left one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And place your right hand on the affected eye if it is the left one; or place your left hand on the affected eye if it is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of your finger near the cornea on the side of the thick ray in the album of the affected eye, and then turn your hand and place your finger on that spot.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the affected eye and feel that your finger has reached the cause of the pain.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And cover that the length of your finger is equal to the distance between the edge of the pupil and the end of the eyelid, which is the cornea of the eye; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place your finger into the location where the water is, and then quickly lift it up and down a few times, so that if the water comes out, you will know which eye it came from, and then place your hand on its eyelid.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a while; if the water is descending, then pause at that other position in front of you where it is not too deep.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dry and not descending, then gently remove the mud from your hands, and wash them one by one in that water; and then place a small piece of clear gemstone salt in the water and wash your hands with it; and then place your hands on a towel or cloth infused with rose oil and album of egg whites and dry them with that.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May those who have lived in our time also pause on that three-legged stool made of egg whites.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey the command of your hand because of its hardness - which is common among men whose hands are hard - then cover it with a spatula called the handle of this one, which has the following shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce it at that joint, and do not let your hand in the trap, and do not be afraid to make a subtle move to the mud.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the second thing that we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And prepare the patient for bed, which is done by lying them down on their back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place your hand on that area to keep it flat and not cause any harm to the patient's head or any other part.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandage be according to their position until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that from the dark room and expose the free view, and let the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover that during the time of the cures or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having covered that, you can remove it because water can flow more easily and strongly with less regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then cover that and remove the bandage after the seventh day, and correct that with the liquid that causes the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you examine the patient's face and place your hand on their mouth to control their vomiting, which exists in the most darkened part of the room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually raise that hand and discuss its causes with them.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases the student of vision cannot see certain things, and then you should be prepared for the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have heard of some of those who are in that place, and one said that they make fire with a certain plant in the Arabian desert, which is pierced and from which water comes out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen anything in our land that has done this, nor have I found any water in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can be over those who do not know those things:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or copper properly, and their external parts are like this triangular subtlety, the sharp end being like that form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the treatment of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are different fleshy growths that are caused by some reason, such as a sting from a fly or a polyp; and this disease is called a polyp, which is similar to the representation of that fly.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there, the flesh is cancerous, a pimple, of dark color; and from there, the flesh is lion-colored, not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those fleshy growths that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover the patient's hands and place them under the sunlight, open their nostrils, and prick the affected area with a needle.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the parts of the deformed area, and then cut off that which you have comprehended from those areas with a sharp instrument under the skin, so that all the flesh is removed; because if there is any reason for which the abscission is possible, then immediately remove that with one of the thin instruments to facilitate it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord has a boil or an abscess that has burst, then you should place a poultice on it; or if it is a malignant abscess, then you should cut out the pus and cauterize the wound where all the cavities are.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then apply a poultice on the nose, near the beginning of the nostril, with honey or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and moisture enters into the palate, then you know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate after the poultice, then you know that there is no flesh in the pus under the bones of the nose to which it cannot reach through an abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, after the poultice has been applied, if there is any swelling in the area to which it applies, and you nuzzle in the mouth, and place between each one the quantity of the said oil or medicine, and engage the patient and introduce an end of the cloth into the nose with the ray or another cause that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that has been done, bring the patient's nose close to the opening of the nostrils, and place it on their pillow, because too many people do this action with children at school, and it is the usual cause for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place both of the patient's extremities on either side of their nose and the other on their nose, and administer a cord made of meat that is in the patient, and do this before you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the patient, and place in their nostril an instrument called a spoon, and do this for three days or more until all that is left of the meat is rotten.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in their nostril a tube made of lead to prevent further damage until they are healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if the cure does not work, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do that with silver or gold, which is similar to a small lantern uncovered, with a small basin, and the metal in the same way.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a tube, and the tube of the instrument at the end is to purge and is flat, uncovered; at which hand is in the back of it, and the handle is used when you scoop out oil or that water which you want from sucs and causes sucking.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this is how it is used: recipe of ground castor beans, of white bay leaves, of ginger, of long pepper, of escafragia, of spice ana unc. as you see fit with the juice of blood and of calf, and make those pills, and one pill is dissolved in warm water, and it is poured into the nostrils of the patient facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the noses outside of the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	When the veins on the outside of the nose are swollen and magnified, and they enter into other days when it is written that it is properly examined.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason, you should inscribe it at the beginning of its appearance, and record all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place your hand or cautery or medicine that is burning in the location of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If it is late when its appearance begins, then consider if it is hard, dark in color and has little sensation, do not touch that with iron which is a crusty abscess; because those swollen veins that inscribe this abscess end up causing great harm to that which the person had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of lion-like touch and not of dark color, and when its appearance is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and inscribe that sense of fear, and cure the location with what dries and constricts before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of sutures of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by pressure or similar causes.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, do not perform surgery on this operation unless in certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you notice any cause of those, whether it is fresh bruising or not, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then notice that you scrape each part of their exposed skin until it is healed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and above them sprinkle healed skin of dragon and three-leaved watercress, and place a layer of diachylon plaster or of any other consolidating plaster on top of the powder, and leave that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that plaster and care for that until the wounds are healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the solution of continuity or needles be added as we recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with the thread that you have used and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come in the lower abdominal regions.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Some women in the lower abdominal regions of their abdomen have hard abscesses similar to pus-filled boils, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should cut the abscess and each of those hard parts, and fill the location with a triple antiseptic until it is strong enough, and then wash with vinegar and treat the location with that which has stiptic properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the insertion of flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A great number of people have flesh inserted in the gums, which the ancients called albus, therefore you should suspend that with an onion or that which you have with the forceps and insert it into its place, and leave the wound to run or the scar.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place your hand on the affected area, or cover it with strengthening or stimulating powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then scrape it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery does not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for iron teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp, rough, and sometimes black scratches are adjusted on the surface of the teeth, in the parts of the jaw and between the gums, and they become yellow or green before corruption appears, then the teeth are black.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you should clean the patient between your hands and place your head on their chest, and remove the teeth in which those scratches and similar sand appear before any cause, and this is how blackness and yellowness and other colors are caused when they are not cleaned.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If this is the case at the beginning of the reasoning, then it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning on those teeth on the next day and the second and the third until the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various shapes of files and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that you know which file is used to shape the part of the tooth that is not between the teeth and another file that is used to shape between the teeth in different ways, and these forms of files should be prepared by you as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should cure the tooth from all pain and delay in its entire extraction, because there is no reason that exceeds the speed of its extraction when it is extracted, because its substance sublimates within which the extraction takes place.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May it be so that when the patient is prepared to have that tooth extracted, you must certainly be certain which tooth is causing pain, because sometimes the pain deceives the patient and thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad tooth and the painful one are extracted, as we have already seen this through the operation of the teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you need to determine which tooth is causing the pain, and you know how to do it, then carefully cut around the tooth with some tool that has some benefit, until the tooth is completely separated from the gum in all parts, and then pull that out, or use fine forceps to slowly separate it little by little until that concavity is formed.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then place a large log in front of the patient's head for good conversation or to prevent him from spitting out what he has, and carefully place the tooth in a straight manner so that it does not touch the patient or cause him more pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those tools and place it next to the tooth in all parts to facilitate and reduce the effort of removing it at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or worn, then carefully wrap that part and tightly hold it with a thin thread at the end so that it is not broken during your construction on that tooth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should work carefully on incising around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear it away from there, and return over the patient for the greater pain that is first felt by them.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practices and audacity in the eradication of them, since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many methods bring great ills upon people, which are more difficult than those that can be counted, and all of their reasons remain, or some of those, or that extract from there with ignorant barbers have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of it should be washed the mouth with vinegar or with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is an excess of blood flowing from the wound, as many methods have it, then cut off some amount of zeal and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not confirm that zeal, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and holding them subtly is what is praised for its use at the beginning of long extractions, with a short handle and large, so that they are not bent when performing those tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And there should be times with large handles until when you have those, they are not bent, and short extractions.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, straight extraction forceps, and in the extractions of those, they have teeth of which one is inserted into the other and are pulled with great strength, and sometimes shaped like the beak of a goose, which is called ciconia, it is held, and they are of great strength.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the jawbones that are impacted.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you have to remove a tooth that is impacted in some way, then place your hand over the location adjacent to the border for one day or two until that place is softened; and then introduce anesthetics or hold the extraction forceps of which are shaped like the beak of a goose called ciconia or held, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The outer parts of their hands were cut off with a knife or scissors.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey you with these forceps or hold them, then it is customary to put a clamp on the wound and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called the atali, which is a small hook with a shape like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is short and thick, then make it small, and do not make it too long or thin.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if the wound is not too wide, it is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which the following are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extramit that has some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more slender extension.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you have helped yourself with this instrument having two prongs, the following is the appropriate shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And you will need other instruments that I will describe in the removal of teeth; for this is done with an instrument that resembles a hook, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	from the triangular distal end that is too short or curved, which is some swelling, and not thin enough to be a triangle.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another wise thing is that the instruments of teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the craftsmen be skilled and subtle in the art, so that they can do the operation and treat various diseases; for some of these diseases are of such different shapes that the ancients did not say or describe a proper instrument for them.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 May it be triangular the bone of the jaw or of other bones of the mouth, or if it is decayed, then carefully remove it from its place with the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you to do this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 And if there is some swelling little by little, then pull it or hold it in the mouth so that it does not escape or go inside until the bone of the entire jaw is removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines for that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pustule on the bone, then puncture that pustule and its black core, and cure it within so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	About the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural course, especially when they grow towards women, and more so towards revered virgins; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is not in line with another tooth, and no fistula or linen can be placed near it, then extract that tooth. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should insert it into this instrument, which has the following form; it resembles a pig's trough, and should be made of Indian iron with an extra sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if you have inserted it into the instrument for too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it is not adjacent to another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the gum, then file it with an Indian iron file of the following form.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And use only one iron from India and the mallet; and use pointed tools like limes, which are made of agates, which are sharpened little by little in days of difficulty, so that no other tool is worn out and broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw lines on that side, and shave it with a safety razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a part that is bathed and the tongue lies, then you should clean it inside so that the asperity of that fraction is covered and equalized, and is filled to prevent the tongue from falling out or the word being corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of worn-out teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to the teeth before concussion and removal by impact or fall, and the patient cannot bear that which hurts, and you have cured it with a hemostatic medicine, and your cure has not been successful, then for so that they do not rot in those that are strong and made of gold and not of silver, because silver turns and becomes poor soon, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the patient is too thin and rough, according to the amount that could enter between the teeth; and the method of the recitation is that you take the patient and double him between two healthy teeth, and approach that he increases in two tortuous ways of the patient between two ugly ones, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the tessiment into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not ugly.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your string be the one that strengthens the patient from the reasons of the teeth that do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the superfluous parts of the patient from the forceps or scissors, and add those in each place with gestures, and convert those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the ugly one, so that it does not cause harm to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let that strict one with Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is broken or rough, strengthen those or those on the other patient in such a manner in all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straight teeth, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or teeth return to their respective places in these areas, they are reformed as we have recommended, and remain so.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only skilled artists and wise people can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some wounds are suitable for some causes of cow bones, and they are made into the shape of teeth, placed in the location where the tooth is missing, strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the beginning of the thread that runs through the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that runs from the tongue to some wounds or is natural and has been there since birth, or accidental and has occurred due to an injury that is already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in this is that the mouth of the patient is opened, and their own cap is placed on the tip; then the tongue is raised, and the thread is inserted according to the width until the tongue is released from its recension.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any difficulty or resistance in that area, and that is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should use force and cut through that part where it has not yet been incised and the tissue has not been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a deep incision in the flesh and cut through this area so that there is no bleeding of pus.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the footprints of the incision with clean water, warm water, or cold water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent the patient from swallowing anything else that is not consolidated.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is any bleeding of pus, place your hand over the area where the blood is coming from; if the pus flows out, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for that purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes so that the patient can be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some times the tongue is swollen and resembles a small protuberance that prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and if it is not treated quickly, it becomes very large and fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in this case involves opening the patient's mouth and examining the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see that the abscess has a dark or black color and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch that part.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is whitish, indicating moisture, then you should insert a thin probe into it and incise it from all parts; if pus comes out in the course of your operation, then pause over the wound with a piece of cloth until it is restricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with warm vinegar and salt; and cure the other part with that treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and that which is none in the groin and of the other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that are similar to wool, which are deformed and are called armpits, which when you cure them with that which we have said in the division and is not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch that with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of dark color and the root is large, then do not touch that with a knife for the sake of the wound; instead leave that to become ripe, and then either you will break that, or it will break by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, thin, and the root of it is thin, then that should be lanced.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether it has recovered from the abscess with caution completely or if it has decreased somewhat; and then make sure the patient lies on their side, and the head of it is in your hand, and the server takes between his hands the tongue of it, and the servant takes the instrument most noble of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or aram, and be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press that tongue and it shows you the abscess, then grab that cloth, place it over the wound, and pull it out as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you pull from the membranes, and then incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are curved, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, in order to be sharp and made of iron and well-sharpened.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	However, if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with this spatula of which this is the shape of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one wound, then incise the other according to this method of incision, and then place it on the patient's body, guarding against water logging.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is an internal bleeding, wash the wound with decoction of milfoil or marigold and similar to those of astringent causes that restrict the flow of blood, and cure it within that time when it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes, in the abdomen, other abscesses or those two golden ones, and incise them as I have said at the beginning of these two melons equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her abdomen, the abscess tended to a dark color, with little pain, which had already closed her abdomen, and the woman was breathing very streightly, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already pushed so much that it had half a finger's width between two ribs.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I cut it out carefully and placed it in one of the bones, and pulled out that, and threw away a great portion of it, and then I incised that from where I understood from the other wound, and then I covered the mouth of it, and pressed her tongue, and then I placed the bone in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then approach with a large amount of lint, but do not remove any of it at once, but a little at a time.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the entire gallbladder of that woman was removed, and soon afterwards, she began to bleed profusely, and then immediately applied a piece of cloth, and did not cease incising that abscess with an old knife for a long time, and successive abscesses appeared in place of that one, which incised until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should apply a poultice and cauterize the gallbladder of that woman, and then apply this remedy; and then you should walk around and not say what God has done for that woman near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of the gallbladder when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh causes the gallbladder to become abscessed and long, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is in the part behind which is thick and round, it is then called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the aforementioned condition is healed, and you do not continue your treatment, and if you have already seen that the abscess has been removed from it and is still subtle, then you should insert a round one; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and is not in the center, then you should try to remove it, as there is a fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you see the second way that I have mentioned about its whiteness and length, then you should examine the patient and take their tongue with an instrument that allows you to determine its shape and place the bone in a new one, and remove that one and insert it with one of two instruments that are called in the insertion of two needles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And make sure that you do not insert it except with what is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, because if you insert it from there, you will cause him to speak.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And when you insert it, use what we have recommended in the insertion of two needles, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the beginning of the operation, their fear and the sharpness of the cautery in their mouth are only water, and you should place your hand on the patient's head, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take some of the water we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and make a living cause from it, and do not press too hard or too subtly, and fill the hollow of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The exterior of the hollow where the medicine is placed should be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument on the medicine over the mouth, and the patient should bite on their own side to prevent saliva or other secretions from the mouth from entering the instrument due to the intrinsic medicine, so that no cause remains in the instrument.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine and press it on the uvula for the space of an hour until it is denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the bone, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the bone into a thin tube where the cloth adheres, and leave it there until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the bone, and then remove it after three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and after removing the cauterization, clean the area around the bone with a border, modify the remaining medicine in the circuit of the bone, wash it with cold water, and treat it with embrocation, and give it gargle medicines until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This special cure is safer than the beginning and longer-lasting in fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some people have been cured of the bone with a substance that is more subtle than cauterization and the beginning, which is cured by subfumigation in this way: take calamint, hyssop, origan, rue, Arabic scicados, camomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those herbs or some of them in a bowl, and they should be immersed in very hot water and boiled; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a strainer over the bowl, on which a tool made of aram according to this method should be placed; it can be made of silver or aram.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	If the patient's tongue is inserted into their mouth before the steam reaches the uvula on the throat, it can be an obstruction to the uvula.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this procedure until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this cure at the onset of an abscess, because it would worsen the abscess, and do not do this, but rather make a declaration of the abscess from there carefully.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	However, if you do not have this instrument presently, then take a cane and make a cloth of honey in the patient's mouth, because the mouth of the patient will be moistened, as the honey cloth prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres to the buttocks and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Wet cloths adhere to the buttocks or a thorn of the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then cover that which is visible from those things, on which the gaze rests, rather than using a tongue depressor instrument for sunlight, so that it is declared to you what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not visible and is hidden in the mouth, cover it with a cloth, so that you make the patient vomit, so that the food is digested in the stomach, because often the cause of the mouth disease is removed by vomiting; or the patient takes a piece of bread or a slice of lemon or a bowl of salt water; or takes a sponge sea lion, and places it very firmly on that, so that when the sponge is placed in the place where the spikes are and are removed, often the cause is removed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And often take an eel and place it very firmly on that, and let it sit for a while and then extract it; or take a pig's bladder and place it firmly on that, and let it sit for a while and then remove it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If we do not forget those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be as thick as a small one, and on the outside of it, there is a cavity that you insert into the patient's mouth for ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the head is elevated in it, and be careful that the touch of the bones of the neck does not occur to him, so that he does not suffer from this and that which the doctor puts on his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient feels pain from this, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause adjacent and puts it in downwards, and pulls his hand on the instrument upwards, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for him before he forgets.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood adjacent to the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood adjacent to the neck is treated with the medicines that we have mentioned in the division of the cure and not with comforts, consider then in the neck of the patient at noon, because you want to understand the tongue of him with the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the bleeding, remove it from that place with a small or precisely handled instrument.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you cannot remove that instrument, then take a concave needle and insert it into the wound of the patient, and place an ignited iron in the hollow of the needle, and do this as many times (until the bleeding is stopped and it stops coming out of the wound) and keep the patient away from all water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a wet cloth full of water and wipe the mouth of the patient with that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not give any food or drink to the patient for an hour, and then another servant holds their hand, as the bleeding has stopped.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	And if the recommended instrument is not forgotten, then fumigate the patient with camomile or with asafetida using the instrument that was recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and it will be well.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of performing this operation is that you take an olive branch with burning embers and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the tip of the instrument in that hole; and then remove the subfumigation; and put the patient's mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the subfumigation is not lost until you know that the subfumigation has reached the blood vessels, which will soon occur.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if not, then repeat the subfumigation after several days, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salty and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary this regimen should be discontinued.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat blood from the vein when it is visible; and it resembles forceps with sometimes, but it has some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	le qual should be at the head of the patient, and its tip resembles the beak of a heron, which is used to scrape, in which there is a rough edge made from lime, so that when it finds any cause, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the main part of the speech on the extraction and sectioning of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special types of tumors, of various sizes and shapes, according to the memory of them, each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in puncture and sectioning, depending on their size and shape, of which one is for the special type of abscesses that can be inserted; and because of this, they understand the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second type is for the places where the body is affected, such as the head, which is different from the abscess in the anus; and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from the abscess in the joint; and each of them has a specific operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more about abscesses, some of which are not to be punctured until their maturation is approaching or they have reached it.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses that are to be lanced when they are ready, not until their maturation is approaching or they have reached it, just like abscesses that are near joints, an abscess that approaches a joint, the cause of which is in its circuit, and very often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that contraction of that member occurs; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the puncture until it is matured, it will not be cured by the principal member; or it is near the anus, so lance it before it is matured; and do not lance it if it is not ready for digestion, but only the one that is near the anus, so that it does not pierce the intestine and is prolonged to the parts inside the anus, and it is made a fistula, or that it is made in the term of it that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the right time for the incision of the abscess, that is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is ripe when the pain ceases and the fever subsides, and there is a decrease in chills and pulse, and an increase in the hardness of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you know that the incision should be made in the location where the pus is most present, and from there will come the cure of the abscess.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The incision should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the flesh, if the abscesses are in the joints of the legs or feet, and in the locations of the lungs, of the nerve cords, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal places where there is no reflection; because in those that have reflection, use incision according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customary to make the incision before the digestion of the pus according to the complement that we have said; because if you incise that one first, the length of the wound of the patient and its disagreeable appearance, and very hard lips, and deep depth are prolonged.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May one perforate boils according to the latitude of the flesh or bone, as necessary, or according to what the member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer small perforations, and in large boils, large perforation and wide or deep incisions according to the difference in size of the boils.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others of the boils in which you should advise that the core be incised and squeezed, when made so that the pus and fluid are expelled, as if it were already stigmatized, as in the case of those that occur in the groin and armpits.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that have incisions with three angles; and of those that are incised with a figure like a fan of myrtle, as in the case of boils in the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are administered round incisions and lunar incisions, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May one who does not have such a thing as shallow boils, advise that you make a superficial perforation or just flatten it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not hesitate to lance it; take out a portion of the pus, and the next day introduce a smaller piece into the wound, and gradually increase the size of the piece removed until it is completely healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very young, female, a child, elderly, or in a state of old age and decay, where the animal spirit is more weak and resolved at the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter when performing incisions on abscesses, so that you remove the pus and consider whether the pus of the abscess is little or a flat section; then administer any appropriate remedies or antidotes. If the abscess is large and the fissures of the incision are deep, carefully apply pressure to each part until they converge.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a piece of the tendon or a part of it is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that place, then cover it with a piece of old cloth or new cloth made of fabric, as when you have taken out splinters or thorns, which are wet; and strengthen it on the third day; and then proceed to treat it and cure it with the same thing that comes from the wound until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if blood flows during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in which a cloth of linen has been soaked, and place that over the location where the blood is flowing from the wound.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the blood flow persists, then cover it with a remedy and cure, and powder the ones that have been recommended in various places of this our book and of division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is in a place of many nerves, then cover it with powders in vinegar and oil cauteric, and place those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is in summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you should place poultices made of ground barley or vinegar and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be applied within the first day, as we have said, and then you should remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to it what is suitable for its healing within the first day.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned, each abscess should be treated differently by different means specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses, and especially those containing membranous sacs that are their own; and the species of these are as follows.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And some of them are pointed, and of those that contain moisture similar to honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain moisture similar to sweat, and similar to theirs; and of those that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the dry section, and in the extraction of those that do not fear, as you should extract those that do not cause resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the dry section of those that you extract with an instrument of the form that you approach it, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that which contains is moisture, then cut that instrument in sections according to its length and on the surface according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line of B until the line of G. So when the moisture is evacuated, then you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because too many troops returned, if there is any cause from it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian mud, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it there for another day, because that water corrodes all that is left of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly clean that wound with Egyptian gauze secondly and thoroughly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that membrane; then heal the wound when it is fully cured.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert this second tool in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a crochet-shaped tool, and pierce between two lips of the sewing and pull out that of all parts, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your needle causes discomfort, then do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the abscess with sewing and healing according to what we have told you; sewing over an inflamed abscess is lighter, because it is less painful and less wet.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Some people have certain remedies for these abscesses that they keep in their heads; those who are completely dry; the reason is that if you pierce an abscess on the head of an old woman and then press the abscess, it will be like a deaf stone, rough, white, which cannot be washed, and if anyone touches that, they will be harmed.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other parts of the body, abscesses that occur in the head are not covered in this chapter, like the abscesses that occur on the heads of children and their causes must be explained, but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place your hand over the lowest part of them to prevent the smell of sanctity from reaching the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply the appropriate remedy to that of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulous glands that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses occur in the neck and in the arms and in the elbows; and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the ones that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunic, and like in the nodes and abscess of the head, like we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the specific types of these scrofula are lumps, some of which are hard, some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you see to be of good disposition in the Tapping, whose color is propitious to the color of the codex, and is dry to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the ribs, and is not adherent, so that you incise it from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and scrape it from all parts, and extend two fingers of the codex to open it, or two fingers if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more important not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the sponge not be sharp, so that it does not adjust to your hand when you incise, or disturb the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you were to incise a vein or rib and prohibit from your operation, then pause in the place of triturated glass or other powders which remain fluid of sand, and clean the place, and let that enter which has paused the acuteness of the abscess and the sponge becomes soft and begins to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the tooth is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before the task is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if there is any cause of the other small pustules, then examine those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the neck of the large vein, then do not examine that pustule from its neck.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you bend it too hard and let it fall out of its place, causing damage.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then complete the wound with a piece of old cloth that you have already immersed in Egyptian mud, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you examine that pustule entirely, then make sure to adjust the two lips of the wound and cause it to heal as soon as possible, so that there is no remaining excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is remaining excess due to the size of the pustule, then make sure to examine its neck, and drain it, and administer sutures and that which is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in the case of scrofula that contains humidity, perform a superficial puncture on this spot where it appears to you as the maturation point of it, and pause the puncture of that which is the lowest part of the neck, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer puncture, using instruments and similar to those, in order to erode that which is the root of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then you cure that instrument of flesh generation until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the separation of the head of the abscess inside the thigh.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this section in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who made that incision.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have deformities, the curve should be avoided in extracting the abscess head, as it is not done well for that reason because all the veins and major parts of the patient are there.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the illness is not in the tooth, cut off the section of epiglottis to prevent the loss that is caused by suffocation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want that, cut off three or four small sections of the epiglottis, in the area between two circles for quantity, which is in cipherac, not in cartilage, and this location is appropriate for section, which is free of flesh and the vessels of sanguine from it are less.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is not present, then extend the tongue of the throat outwards, and then cut the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sanguine if any cause from those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the windpipe second as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal through the flaccid one which is from that and the one that is from it disrupted and for the abscission of the throat.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Let the wound be left open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Since the hour has come when the puncture is feared, add two strips of cloth to the wound, and place it alone on the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause the flesh to heal before it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And as Albucasis says that the summary of the sermon we have recommended is that the view is that those who have had these abscesses for a long time, and the patient has died, and the doctor has inserted the tube, and they have incised the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason, let the wound remain open until the poison of the disease is consumed; and the poison lasts for three days; and therefore, for that reason, the doctor should thus treat the wound, and cure it before it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen is that a servant holds a knife and measures the length of the lung, and they called it for its treatment, and then they removed the mucus as if it were the mucus of the dead, and then they removed the wound and removed the sanctum which was in the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it was confessed that there was no incision of the vein or guide, and the wind was from the plague, and cured her inside with fire that healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if the servant did not return to his right mind in the mouth, and then returned to his better dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epilepsy there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section over abscess which occurs in the groin, and is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess named hernia of the groin is an abscess of great size according to the color of the body, and it is caused by the women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, whether natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other way is similar to abscess which is caused by obstruction of the artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not make an assumption about it unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then you should examine that area and if it resembles a swollen node, and it is not attached to any of the veins, then you should insert that which is like the nodes, and extract that which contains the pus and bursa; otherwise, you should examine the entire area and then apply treatment with what you think will cure it before it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the separation of the types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the different kinds of nodes that I have already mentioned in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should consider how to distinguish between a node and an opening that causes doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that an opening has heat and fever and severe pain until the boiling of the excess is settled; and it is completed putrefaction that ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains that which is called the lion's tail, which is in the swelling itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if the second color of the body is present, and its beginning is like a swelling and is made thus with a knife, whether larger or smaller, and it is of two kinds, because one is fatty and contains moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, according to what I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So, when you reach the cure of the node, extract that and inquire about that at the beginning of the instrument which is called the introducer, according to its form which is approaching this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is necessary to inquire about abscesses and all nodes, and you take this instrument and introduce it into the wettest place where you find the abscess, and you rotate its tips little by little until you know that this instrument has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then place your hand according to the size of the abscess, and extract the introducer and consider what is inside of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture is lost, of whatever color it may be, then you insert it into the dry surface according to what I said in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture in the footprints of the intruder, then it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is dry on the surface, it has the shape of a crust according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, hang that piece of cloth on a hook, and excoriate the cord from all parts to facilitate removal, and keep the bag or sack over that and remove the sweat from that place.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that sweat, and therefore you should wait until it is ready to be removed at the bottom without any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it is removed with any cause, too little or too much, then the sweat returns to its previous state.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some part of it is still small, then apply a layer of some corrosive powders and strengthen the layer, and place your hand over the area where the abscess is located, and cure that from the other cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is necessary to cut open the wound, then you should close the two lips of the wound and treat that which is inside.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If it is necessary to apply pressure on the opposite side, whether pulsatil or not, then you should cover and fill the wound with a poultice made of vinegar and linen that has been soaked in urine for two days or three until the pus is drained and the inflammation subsides; and then return to incising that which remains.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those that have the forms of probes, and of three kinds, one of which is large and heavy, another is medium, and the third is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large probe is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium probe is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small probe is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, or of aufulud, and have rounded ends, in order that the instrument may not get stuck in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experimenters, and they are called alchemists, and one of them is called a hermeticist.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three spices, one of which is great, mastic, and paucola.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experimenter, his shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the mastic experimenter, his shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the paucola experimenter, his shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is appropriate for those abscesses and exudations and fistulas and boils because they are among the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made of large lions, as if with great needles that are sewn into the sutures, and they are made of gold, or of silver, or of copper, and the best are when they are made of gold.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made by the experimenters of black lead, which are said to be useful for those who open fistulas in the cavity where they are reflected, which are reflected on their levity at those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three kinds, that is, if it is long like theirs, or short, or medium, according to the amount of the wound and the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The great experience of the form:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The medium experience of the form:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The small experience of the form:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the nails are of special types, that is, of those that are simple, which has only a curve, and there are three kinds: large, few, and short.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their nails, there is one hook, and there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have two curves, there are three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of theirs, there are three curves, and there are three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple nail:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a medium simple nail:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple nail:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a large hook nail:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	A shape of a nail, in his:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	A shape of a few nails, in him:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	A shape of a large nail with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	A shape of a few nails with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	A shape of a few nails with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	A shape of a large nail with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	A shape of a few nails with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	A shape of a few nails with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the sharp scalpels that cut and scrape the boils and abscesses, and they have three species, four of which are large, few, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	A shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	A shape of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	A shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but so that it can be done well in the scraping of the boils, to avoid the risk of entering a vein or nerve, and for those it heals the patient and brings him peace by the adjustment of the scraping of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of embrocations, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of large embrocation:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of medium embrocation:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small embrocation:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Made from equal parts of oil and camphor, which is made into an alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is applied to the outer surface of the body, where the pricked area is hidden, and in that place apply the parts of the herbs you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatiums, which are placed between the parts of the body, for the opening of abscesses and do not puncture the patient, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of those that are removed from the flow of blood, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of which are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Made from equal parts of oil and lemon juice, round and of some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have great skills in performing these special types of wind instruments, many and few, so that for those who need to abscind flow of blood quickly, you can do so with velocity, and later when you first begin, there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to abscind blood in every part of the body, but only in fleshy locations, such as on the backs of the thighs and cushions, and on the sides of the arms, and on the breasts and belly and groins, and similarly to fleshy wounds.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some veins are made of these instruments, which are similar to those used for bleeding in this way; through which the blood is abscinded when it is done by phlebotomy, or you must begin from a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some veins are made round in this way:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the care of the breasts of men, which are like those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some women inflate the breasts of certain men as a compliment when they start to become hairy, and then they deflate the breasts, and assemble the breasts of women, and Roman appostemose, far away.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to that one who has already done this, cut those same lines in the shape of a crescent moon according to this form, from line B to line G, and then excoriate the entire grotesque area, and place the plaster of flesh-colored medicament on it, and adjust the two lips of the plaster to its curvature, and cure that one within which it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the parts below and is softened by its magnitude as it often is in women, then cut it into two parts, each part being similar to a lunar shape, of which each one contains the end of the other, within which the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line B and the line G. And then excoriate the cord that is between the two lips of the plaster, remove the fatness, and administer what we have said about the sutures and the powders that are necessary in its healing within which it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision as instructed by the patient's unease and due to excessive bleeding, then cover the wound with a layer of corrosive ointment and leave that place where it eats away at the gray matter, and cure that place where it is healing.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the puncture of abscesses that come from the tip of the finger.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the tip of the finger are of the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus pocket.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those that contain moisture, those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And as soon as all that is in the abscess is evacuated, then close it with a stitch on the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And as soon as the wound is closed, it should be treated with an ointment suitable for that, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glands of the neck and scrofulous swellings is, then you should lance it as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is extended to an area that cannot be pierced, then administer in it according to what we have said about that.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of abscesses that occur by laceration or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the laceration is broken, and the scar tissue that is above it becomes consolidated, then abscesses and symptoms occur through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is by laceration, it is longer attached to the chest; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a noise in that area.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And the one that is by vein returns to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incision over this abscess is an error, and especially in those that are after the limbs, and in the elbows, and in the back, and in many places of the body; and it is a great mistake, therefore be careful that its cure may not be avoided, and that which is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Above the part that belongs to them due to inflammation of the orifice of the arc, cut through the dry section in the long; and then remove the section with tweezers and remove the arc, and remove the tunics inside where it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle on that one and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the arc with a double fold in two places, — which causes you to have seen in extraction of two arcs that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then place your hand on the area between two ribs within which the whole of it is in, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated before the ribs fall; and cure that with appropriate remedies to that before it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is by section of the vein, then cover that you have your hand at that which is at your possible from the abscess to the section, and then introduce the needle behind the area where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double fold until you extract that from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a thread according to what I have told you in the vein of grape of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then introduce the true needle through the entire pustule, starting from the beginning of the needle, and strengthen the four threads in different places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the pustule in the middle of its location before you insert that which is inside it, and leave what is left over from the needle.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place your hand over the wound that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with cloths and poultices until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the pustule that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Such as the occurrence of pustules in the arches and veins, and similarly, the occurrence of pustules in nerves when they occur due to their compression or excessive work, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made the most of it in the locations of the assistants or the ankle, or in any location where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if the abscess is large and resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the patient, and when stretched violently, it causes pain in the patient similar to stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and it is removed by the cord, and it is ugly at all parts and does not go to the nearby or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be punctured with iron, because it would easily cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But if it is in the head or forehead, use the cord to drain it.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then use the forceps and remove that from the roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with an ointment, and scrape that, and remove that; and place the bandage over it, and cure it within the time that it becomes healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 31
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of the abscess that occurs in the cheek and also occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	When some men have moles on their bellies and in other parts of the body, which are called fungal because they resemble those that grow on mushrooms, with a subtle head and a large cap; and they also have conversing lips, which are small and others which are magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two parts which were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were turned inwards and they opened, and moisture ran from there all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I examined those and again inserted one in the foot for 18 unciae and the other for 1 uncia.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at the beginning of their insertion is to consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, moist, of subtle size; then you insert it with a flat spatula, and in your presence apply the cautery in the fire, because the mushroom-like growths that are expelled from it are dry; and if you find the dry, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is paralyzed and terrified, first take a sharp knife; then take a recent plaster that has been recently made, strengthen that arm, which we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the narrow structure of the plaster; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large plaster on that arm until it is removed and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	However, if the arm is very large, there may be some cause of fear and terror, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible that you incise the wound of that arm, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for it until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to incise the arm that is of dark color, weak sensation, and regularly shaped, because that is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will find the memory of cranes in the same place.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 62.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the treatment of hernias at the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernias at the navel are caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the abdominal wall, through which the intestine or hernia protrudes as it does in other ruptures; or by a sinus that flows with blood or lymph according to what is called this condition, or by tightness of the abdomen.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is by fissure of the abdominal wall and protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and appears in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then its position is similar to that which we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and when you press it, the pain increases, and when you return it; and often it returns to its place, and it is a great relief from the disease.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is by moisture, then the pain is severe and does not decrease when you press your hand, nor is it constricted or cramped.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for suppuration, then apply these signs to the abscess to make it discharge its pus.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is for flesh, then the abscess is large, thick, and hard, and it contains a certain amount of pus.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is for inflammation, then the touch of it is hot.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to suppuration from an abscess or a vein, or due to inflammation; therefore, it should be prohibited from treatment, as there is fear and anxiety about it, as taught in the chapter where it was said that abscesses from an abscess and a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, then command the patient to have their own bed, and be in a standing position; and around the entire umbilic, apply a bandage between your fingers over their belly, and command it to be in place; and around the umbilic, wrap a broad sponge over the location where you should have placed the bandage; and extend the mass of the abscess to its parts above the ankle; and around the circumference, apply a firm or loose bandage and the method of wrapping the bandage.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then approach the wound of the abscess that has spread over the skin and insert the mentioned instrument into that place and try to push the intestine back; and if you have not done this before or do not do it through the skin, then you will extract pus and push the intestine to the parts inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, then take that needle and remove any excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against your arc or vein, then circle that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two fields strong, and insert two needles around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place open where the flesh extends and falls out; or insert that when it becomes thin and can be removed, and then cure that with the ointment that covers the wounds inside where it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the umbilical region is made of flesh and nothing else in it or due to moisture, then cover the pus with what we have mentioned and remove the sanguineous part or the moisture, which is usually found in it, and then cure that place with a poultice that covers and heals it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De curacio de cranc.	About the cure of the neck.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already mentioned in the division, of special cases of the neck and in what manner one should proceed with its treatment, and that it is usually treated with ointments to prevent ulceration; and we have said that the neck generates in the greatest and most careful way of its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some warts on the neck are in places where eradication is possible, such as those on the breasts or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch out all of it, and especially when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, do not try to remove it yourself, because I have never seen or heard of anyone who could cure that or has reached that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is performed as we have said, you must precede by preceding and leaving the patient and purging them of black bile for some time, and then suture that, if it is found to be manifest.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in which it is located, and prohibit eating any food that could cause a reaction before; and then examine all parts of the body thoroughly without causing any reason for the operation to fail.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And leave the wound open, and do not close it prematurely, and express the pus, and clean the wound thoroughly with your hand or with an instrument that is as possible among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find resistance to the pus at the beginning of a vein or an artery, then cauterize it before the flow of pus stops, and then care for that with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 4
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of dropsy
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	In the division of the species of hydrocephalus from water, and the symptoms of each species, of its treatment with our medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is not the species of altitudes alone, and is not approximated to iron with the species of tympanists or hypopharynx, which is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydrocephalus tympanistre with our medicines and do not compare your medication, consider whether the patient has been weakened, or is another sick person with another hydrocephalus, such as if it is in the throat or stomach and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not treat it with iron, because there is fear of it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if you see the patient of great virtue, and it is not another disease but hydrocephalus alone, and not in children or old people, then the method of the operation for it is that you lift the patient between your arms, and give him the specific water to his belly with his hand, pushing the water to the part behind the penis, and then take a sponge according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	should be of two sharp parts long, from sharp extremity with space; but rather should be in it some brevity small by small, so that in the operation he does not pass into the intestine, and that he leaves him alone.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the generation of hydropsy is from the intestines, for it is customarily said that you should make the section along the belly for the amount of three fingers behind, on the right side of it over the peritoneum.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydropsy is due to a malfunction of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the belly for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make your section over the side on which you want to place the patient, so that the excess does not flow to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the whole chain with the instrument, and enter it into that section, and lift your hand between the chain and the stomach, and you excise it; and if the quantity of one finger or less.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then, approach the phlebotomy needle until it reaches the vein at the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then, extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of thin leather, with which at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is shaped at its end by carving according to the manner of a pen, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper part of it is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, then withdraw it slightly from the instrument, and thus evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, the patient will die from the resolution of their spirit animal, or an accident will occur to them.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Do not evacuate too much of that, and according to the amount that is appropriate for the patient's condition, the virtue of their leg, and the goodness of their body.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and retract the fluid that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you should cut to allow the tube that is above the cavity to be removed.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then insert the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of fluid, and do this for several days, and be careful not to let too much fluid out.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afraid of the patient, and let out a large amount of fluid, then cure that part with burial in sand, and wet it with water, and leave it in the sun for a long time; and cure that part with desiccatives until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the mouth and tongue when you have removed the fluid that precedes it.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who are born without a perforated bladder.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their navel not pierced (or it is narrow or it is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, cut the umbilical cord as soon as it is born with a very thin knife according to this form.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place a thin nail with a hammer and tie it for three days or for fourteen days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not remove the nail, it is possible that the urine that flows over the wound will not clean this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But if the one from whom you cut is narrow, it should be treated with a thin nail as we have said, for three days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But if the one in which you cut is not in its place, it causes a fistula, which is because of those who are born and the umbilical cord is not removed so that they cannot urinate at the parts below, until the umbilical cord raises the umbilicus to the parts above; and it is not in the generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a malformation due to the lack of proper positioning.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of operation in this case is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the drill from the left hand of the operator to the right hand of the patient with great extraction force, and insert the head of the drill into the second location of the pericardium with a sharp cut, as if writing with a pen, or not making any cuts at all, so that the tip of the drill resembles the head of the drill and the blood flows into the second location after the operation.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of flushing, four things can go wrong with this; and pause at the place where you cut the blood, and cure the wound before it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 66.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the white substance that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the drill and in the foreskin and black and adhesion of the prepuce of the head of the drill.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four things can go wrong with this white substance in the drill and its prominence of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And from that one is malignant and another is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, cover it with a thin layer of oil and cut open that part where all the pus is; then place a cloth over that part submerged in Egyptian ointment; and apply that, let the oil penetrate into the wound until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the malignant abscess is, cover it with a colored bandage, then apply a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the abscess is on the prepuce of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the abscess is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then cover it with a bandage that covers the part inside the prepuce until it consolidates; and then cure that deformation, because when you cure it along with the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not become ingrown.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if there have been accidents in the genitalia and in the dark and curly prepuce, then cover it with a bandage that covers everything that has already been blackened and that is about to corrupt or that is already corrupted; and apply linen over that, which is made from the flour of sandalwood, cinnamon, and cloves.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then care for that one with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is bleeding from a wound, then administer a lunar cauterization in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	where the cauterizing iron is at two positions together, one for bleeding and the other for the wound when it is opened.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the foreskin is corroded and destroyed completely in the hour, then insert a bladder needle into the opening of the prepuce to allow the patient to urinate through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that where the foreskin is attached, and it is not required circumcision; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) then excoriate with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate those extremely carefully, then excoriate with a spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and apply some force when the foreskin is thin, for it is easily punctured by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then gently separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a fine needle, which is already moistened in water to prevent other infections from adhering.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding before it becomes solidified.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Concerning the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as with other diseases: but rather, since it is our operation and our will, and it is usually in children, it is necessary to assign the best operation and a more humane way to save their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free men, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment, which is the reason why I have atrobat the greater part of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a thorn; and they use cord and incision with a needle.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already performed all these methods and have not achieved any better result with forceps, with a thread that is used in stitching like a finger, because the codena underneath often escapes, the codena of the prepuce in two tunics, and the tonica is often behind, and it is often necessary to start again and cause pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the stitching that is done for the alphecati, and it is digital, of which blacksmiths use, is not secure at the beginning of the member's limb, because often it goes into its wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, a finger, if often obazes iron and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the codena of the child is short by nature, and often moves in such a way that it does not require stitching, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And from the stitching that is done with forceps and a thread that is used in stitching like a finger, the good one, as I have experienced, because the forceps are of proportional beginning, for that reason the sharpness that is above is similar to the sharpness that is below; and therefore when you press your hand so proportional to two sharpnesses, and inscribed second according to a comparison in a time; and it is made compression of the thread in the shape containing the codena of the penis from all parts, and the one does not make any error of all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first step in the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands only a little, and do not make him lie on his side for too long, but let him rest between the two days.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make every effort to understand that method which is possible for him to receive his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make sure that he is between your hands prepared, and not too close; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind his foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on his side and blow into the hole, and pull out that which is in the hollow of his side, and modify that which is added to him from deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then place the bandage in the indicated location on the child's side, and place a small second bandage below that, and then tie the first bandage to the second one in a good way for retention, and insert it between two layers.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the chin slightly and straighten the neck; and then slowly and gently pull out the tongue, which is better; and place powder on top of the powder and cloth over it, in which is spread a mixture of mugwort and garlic oil in vinegar recently boiled with rosemary; and place that over the other side; and cure that with the appropriate cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is the form of the forceps for extraction, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The inner prongs should not be sharp and the outer ones should be, so that the nail of the thumb does not get hurt, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in extraction is when too much force is used to push the internal part of the tooth, or a part of it, out from the beginning.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, cover that which you extended from your hand to the tooth with your nail and insert it at the same level as the second one.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and insert it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days since the abscess formed behind the ear, then let the pus flow out slowly to avoid causing harm, scrape that area with a facility, and insert the prepared one thereafter.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the tip of the ear, as it should not be harmed by that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And treat that wound with the powder we recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it does not fit well over the wound and the parts do not match, then it should not be used there.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And treat that wound with what we said should be used until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or congestion of blood, or by poison or flesh, and similarly to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of it due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then make sure the patient is bent over their own lap.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that person on their own back and extend their belly from the part below their back, and the patient should strain their abdomen as much as possible towards the area above their back.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder is pressed to expel the stone towards the back parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if that water is not dissolved and is done with force, then make sure to administer extraction of it with the instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and have a thin lion's tongue, like a needle of a syringe, with a thin tip at the end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of extracting urine for that person is to take the thin, flat strip and tie it in the outlet of the urethra with wool or cotton for good grip; and insert the ends of the strip into the part behind the siringua, and if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, then insert it into the canula with force. Then suck the urine from the border and the album of the urine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And perform an incision on the patient, apply a poultice to the wound, and rub it with oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And introduce the finger to facilitate its approach to the edge of the wound; and then fold the wound above the part of the abdomen; and then push the finger into that; and then push it into the bladder, and that when the patient has reached the cause of the pain, and if it is not done in this order, but in the wrong way, it will cause twisting.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the thread slowly, as the urine flows onto the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then extract that and do for the cure of urine, use a finger, do not stop doing that and use a finger until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 99.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder irrigation with catheter and similar instruments that are suitable for that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or it becomes constricted there, and you want to drain fluids and medications into that area, then use the instrument called the cystoscope, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but in its exterior it is sharp, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that area there are three openings: two on one side, as needed.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is a container in which that substance is placed, and as soon as it fills up to the second quantity that is poured into it, it is added, until when any cause draws out the moisture from there, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, the liquid is drawn out, and when it is expelled long, then the instrument is placed in hot water in battles of sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to draw out moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the cystoscope into the moisture, and draw that liquid which is poured into the parts above, so that the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the cystoscope.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then introduce the catheter into the urethra as recommended in the charter; and then apply moisture with that water, which will soon pass through the bladder, and also to the patient.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the thin catheter that is used when the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or tin, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then the tube is inserted into the urethra.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder and place it in the water that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a strong double thread, and boil the water over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then introduce the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand on the bladder with the water as soon as you feel that the patient has expelled the water from the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not see the bladder, then take a piece of paper and make a circle from it; and perforate it throughout its entire surface; and then introduce the strong thread through those holes, as soon as it is turned; and then add the circle where it was attached, so that you can place your hand in that water that you want to use for irrigation, and listen and watch.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then approach that instrument and perform as you have done with the bladder, and express the humidity until it reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the stone in which operation on the hand is performed, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is stuck in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will relate those that are exposed and briefly explained.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that stones generated in the bladder mostly go to children; and among their symptoms is that the urine that is emitted from the bladder is like water in its fineness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain, and then lies down; and at that time, the belly is inflated with those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And this is the cure for children who have reached fourteen years of age; and it is difficult to cure the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is often caused by that which is between those things.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is less certain; And if it is few, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we arrive at the cure of that, we should start with the beginning of that which they call chirurgy, which extracts all the wound in the place where it is in their intestines; because that wound sometimes prevents the passage of the stone due to its examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the chirurgeon near the patient's feet and press them firmly and forcefully in order that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it jumps out from some other place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that remedy between your hands prepared, and place the patient's hands on the things of his body in order that the bladder is completely made to lean towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then approach that and all of that direction.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately make a small incision over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot completely remove the stone, then first apply oil to the indicated area of the left side of the patient's body, if the patient is a child, or the right side if the patient is an adult, and then insert it into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And then approach the stone where it was previously located.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually move it towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that area and expel it through the opening where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend their right hand upwards, holding the scrotum which is located above, and with their left hand hold the scrotum, which is located below, in the area where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a thin, sharp instrument into the incision, which has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide it in the space between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the cushion; and the incision should be made on the stone in the anus, and a transverse section should be made, so that the incision is wide enough and narrow enough according to the amount of the stone that is possible, and not too much, because if the stone is forced out it will cause more damage.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is a stone with sharp edges and margins, for which the passage of it is difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And like that stone is lion-like and round, and it is made of the same difficult passage.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that stone with sharp edges and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forced out, carefully guide it over that, or gently push it over that with a decent gesture, the end of which should be like a razor that pushes over the stone, and does not slip from it; or insert a thin instrument with a curved end behind it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do it on that one, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you want to stop bleeding, cut through it strongly with this three-pronged lancet made of glass.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the catheter into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it inside; and then push a little more of that; and similarly do if they are larger than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance requires that you insert this large saw, which causes one of two things to the patient: either death or because of its continuous drip of urine, for that the place is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If you do not administer extraction of it before it is completely forgotten, or if you engineer in the break of that with the forceps inside which extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and cut that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place that cloth soaked in oil or oily and wet, so that the abscess does not burst.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then place the patient on their side, and do not let the bandage come off for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when those wounds have come off, apply warm water and oil to the area, and cure that wound with daffinfion and daffinazole until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound an abscess has formed, it is hard and corrosive, and of that kind there are also those that are like when the wound is in the bladder frozen, and because of that the urine is prohibited (and that is known as the exit of the wound with urine), then enter the tiu said in the wound and extract that wound, which if it causes the bladder to corrode and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with warm water, vinegar, and salt, and with whatever is appropriate, with that which is suitable for the healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the areas where you have applied the medications and adjust them as needed during the entire treatment.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the bladder, and it is stuck there, and urine cannot be passed, then cure that with the remedy I previously recommended, which is called diuresis; many diseases are attributed to this cure; and I have already mentioned it, so you should take a hollow needle made of iron, of which this is its shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of a triangular shape, sharp, fixed in a rod.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a strong thread, and tie that bladder behind the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, piercing it until the hollow needle reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then rotate the hollow needle with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you should pierce that opening until you make the other one penetrate; for the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that part of the stone where the urethra is located, which is called the bladder, and it is drained by urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure cannot be performed for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place a cloth under the stone and another cloth on top of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then insert the blade between two grooves on the stone.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the membrane and modify the stone in the following way:
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place a cloth under the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other cloth on top of the stone should be placed so that when the cloth is removed, the stone returns to its original position and takes on its shape.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that, when you have placed the cloth on top, you should raise the stone to its parts above or return it to its original position and take on its shape as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are not commonly generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if one of those women has a stone, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many manipulations.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The first is that the woman is very tall and a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you cannot find a woman who is very skilled and knows how to perform the operation when the doctor is chaste, or among those who have never been married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a woman who is very skilled and knows this art, mainly the operation.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an earlier incision, and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if you need to do that, then you should take a very skilled woman who is not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	However, if you are not able to find her, then you should seek a wise and subtle woman, or present a married woman who has experience in the matter of women, or a woman who has never been involved in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then do that present procedure, and command the patient to do everything you tell them from the inquiry about the stone until the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover her genitals with a cloth and remove the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	And if it is found there, cover that with a cloth, and then command the patient to scrape off that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert that into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the stone, placing her left hand on the bladder, and carefully examine that with good perception.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	And if it is found there, then gradually remove that from the opening of the bladder to the parts below the belly until it reaches that at the edge of the wound.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then scrape off that in the area near the edge of the wound from any part where it is stuck and center the stone in that part, and the patient's hand should not remain on the stone covered with a cloth.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray on that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know how much the stone is from that area.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are small: some of them are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have spikes.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know how many types there are of that for what you mean about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to remove the sand, adjust in that location for three hours and then it is abscised, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare those tools that are called for the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to remove the sand and know that the extraction of the sand is from the artery that is incised, then place powder on the area and loosen those tools and structure descending, and do not repeat that; leave the stone and do not extract it, because the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the intensity of the blow decreases and the wound begins to heal, then return to your operation before the stone is completely removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane that contains the umbilical cord of the genitals, and it is called a hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veins are in the same membrane that nature has prepared for the umbilical cord, before it becomes another umbilical cord; and this is the cord of the genitals between the white membrane that we have said, and this is not other than a scar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening of the muscles, which happens to the genitals, so that this matter is accumulated in them, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow caused by an accident.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, such as yellow, red, orange, black, or white, and is the most common one.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the symptoms for which this water is used are as follows: if it is white bread, then the abscess will gradually change its color and appearance over time, and appear like a hen's egg, and the wound will heal, as the humidity affects all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in its own pancreatic fluid, then the abscess will gradually change into a hen's egg, and it is estimated that it is another hen's egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the neck of the wound and white bread, then it is customary to change the dressing.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then examine the color of the humidity in the abscess by looking at the shape of the wound; and according to what is found in the footprints of the wound, judge that which is present.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the care of this patient, it is customary to command the patient to be bled if possible, and sometimes examine their wounds.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then place them on their back on some cause, and place something under their mouth to prevent them from choking.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who extends their arm at a distance of one handspan from the patient's groin and the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a narrow scalpel and incise the patient's groin from the same side, entering through the length until the pubic bone.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And then make the incision at right angles, equally distant from the line that divides the patient's groin, until it reaches the white bone, including the hip joint.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that, observe, and be careful not to scratch it; and your scraping is the same as the one scratched by part of the joint that should be suspended above and subtly examined according to the amount possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the side of the body with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the wound with an incision, and extend the side to the parts above; and do not touch the cord that contains the testicles, and incise the side in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise it there or on the bottom, and more deeply into its side, because if you do not examine the incision of it carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound processes from that opening of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the side, return there, and adjust the two lips of the cord of the testicles with a stitch, and care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the wound becomes corrupted by another disease, then cover it with bandages that hold it up, and extract the wound, and care for it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in two parts, then you know that two are hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it is your opinion that it is an operation, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should wipe the wound, and insert it into the sections of wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil over two gnatius and the mirror of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top of them, and bind those with a bandage that is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then take two cloths and fold them according to this pattern; and make the ends of the wound with those that are pressed from the inside or from wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the braiding of the trousers, and one end holds the buttocks between the two, and the second holds the part of the panties, and two other ends on top of two cushions and two others on top of two ankles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the braiding of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of a surgical cut; and you should take a thin, pointed cautery and insert it into the groove of the genitals, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be done before the white cipher containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then perforate that cipher, and ignite it inside before all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cipher with your fingers, and excoriate it with your fingers, and excoriate it with the thin, pointed cautery; and insert it as much as possible inside in order to remove everything; and guard yourself from the heat that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer than a surgical cut, and better than an operation with a knife.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you feel resistance to the abscess at the time of incision or at the time of cauterization, or bleeding, then you should cure whatever resistance it causes to you, with treatment that is appropriate for it after it is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is afraid, and does not want to undergo the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia according to what we have recommended; and when you are certain that the hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then place the patient on some raised bed, approach and puncture the abscess in the lowest part of their stomach, and hold the puncture according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the wound and hold it there, so that the water continues to flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If resistance is encountered in the drainage of the wound at that time, then you should not puncture it unless the white thread in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prevents the escape of water, then place a pen or instrument in the wound from which water is extracted from the dropsy, the form of which is preceded; or adjust a small needle in the pressure of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you will know that the water has returned, and it is added back after several months or in the environment of those; and as it is added back, then it should be pierced according to that method, so that the patient can pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	About incision on fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You will know that during the incision on this hernia, there is great fear of losing the major dispositions; therefore, I see the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that and the signs of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that abscesses do not occur in the places where the joints are connected and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is found in the joints, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the place, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When the abscess is hardened and its color is dark, it does not hurt to it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some wounds are made by the opening of the arteries, and by inflammation of those that have already been pierced, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This is known by the discharge of the abscess when it reaches the skin, and not that touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	This is not discharged from it by any cause of compression on the skin.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is possible that on this specimen and on the other flesh, you incise the ligaments of the genitals, and then remove the white fat from above, and remove the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and then incise the suspensory ligament as much as you remove it from all parts of the fat.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the fat is already attached to those flesh, then you should remove it and incise that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an adhesion due to any cause of the intestines, or between them and the bladder, then you should carefully remove all that adhesion and incise it at the beginning with a rounded needle.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	However, if the flesh is native to that place of adhesion which is behind, then you should incise all of it and extract it as we have said before.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, fill the wound with flaxseed soaked in rose oil and wine; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	About the cure of hernia that is in the thigh.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The thigh is an abscess involuted by some envelope similar to a bursa due to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to perform exercise and walking over the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, fear of that which precedes it is remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, let me first explain the operation in the second part that will be done first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that you should place the patient on a raised chair; and then lift up the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to the parts behind; and then remove the cord of the inguinal canal to the groin, which is exposed to the thigh; and have another minister hold those, and extend them with great force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert a narrow, sharp blade through the cross section on the right side of the veins where the veins are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove all the parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of the arches, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with a double eye in it in those places where the accident occurred, and insert the other one at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those needles in the middle place through a straight section according to the length of the wound, and extract what has been added from the filthy and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound to prevent other wounds from occurring in which you want to be generated by causing the vessels that do not cause harm because of that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if it happens that all the veins are affected, then cover them so that the testicles are removed or that the testicles for that reason become connected to the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment from the beginning of the vessels, and that they are repaired, or that something else happens because it is not profitable for those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of internal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the angles of the belly, causing the intestines to protrude from any part of the intestine.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the abdomen or from an incision of it, and these two types occur for various causes: impact, overstretching, loud noise, or elevation of some heavy cause, or similar ones.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the symptoms of that disease, when it is caused by prolonged extension of the tendon, occur gradually over time and do not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms inside the tendon as it compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the symptoms of that disease when it is caused by the section of the tendon are as follows: at the beginning, severe pain occurs suddenly; and the abscess appears to be different from the usual appearance, and this is due to the intestine, and the cause of this is the fracture of the tendon parts.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes, the intestine is found to be protruding through the abdomen, and this is called an enterocele.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes it occurs in the intestine wound, and it is held there, and this is a great discomfort for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this disease, iron is often used, but it should be avoided because it can cause constipation.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of this operation is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at the parts of its cavity and obey its return, and then place it on his neck between your hands, and raise his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the cord that is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles entirely through the length; and then fasten in two lips of the section secondly that indicated to open the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is second by the quantity that you can possibly make from that it has been cut off.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape that foreskin which are placed the cord of the testicles, until it is uncovered the white skin from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then insert your finger in that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white skin, which is placed the cord of the cut off, and between the foreskin second, and free from that adhesion which is in the part behind the cut off.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Approach the patient's testicles with a ligature, and use an aspirating syringe on the left side of the abdomen, and raise the right side of the abdomen; then command the assistant to extend it, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And cover the patient's thighs with a cloth to prevent any cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white sheet during the operation.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause, then place it on the patient's abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And take a needle that is thick and long, about four fingers in length, and insert it at the back of the white sheet, which is the ligature of the testicles, the section; then incise the ends that emerge from the thick needle, and place some cotton on them in the shape of a cross; and tie it to the white sheet that we said was behind the ligature of the testicles.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the feet and tie those with very strong bandages before any of the vessels that nourish them can pass through, so that no abscess occurs from here onwards.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Then place another bandage along the second line, about three fingers away from the first, and leave these two bandages on the scrotum, the amount of which depends on the size of the patient, and insert it completely along the round shape, and then remove it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert it into the part behind the scrotum by section, which runs through the flesh and skin as we have recommended in that place where we have mentioned.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the affected area; and administer the bandage that we have recommended (and some white bandages of the cotton are cauterized, which we have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, because sometimes these occur), and leave the bandage until it falls off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the patient's urine is delayed, then apply a cold water enema and place your hand over the area where it should come out.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the wound with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of inflamed hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has not been cured by the application of iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that we see; the reason is that you should bring the veins close to the section above the patient; and then dry in the middle area around the abscess, where that comes from, until the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And then care for the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dissection that is made in the knees.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the knees as we have said, and indicate the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give any cause to the patient for the intestines in the groin; and if you do, that is enough; and return to it in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	However, if the time is prolonged, a small incision is made in the groin before giving the intestines back to the groin; and this is done by extending the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to be stretched, and then it becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed and suppurates.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for this is by cauterization as we have previously described it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some wounds are cured by iron in this way: and that is by the patient lying on their back between your hands, and then the area of the pustules is cut through with a section according to the amount of three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then a strong bandage is placed over the white groin that is pushed under the skin until it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rag and place it over the area of the pustules, and press it on the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then approach the two incisions at the end of the thigh bone, and adjust one of those sutures to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the thigh bone, and do not incise the thighbone completely, nor extend the intestine, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the wounds, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; because the thighbone contracts and is not adjusted to the elevation of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, as it is more propitious for healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the cords of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The cords of the testicles in some men are softened because the tissues that are between them are softened, and the wound is healed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore necessary is that one who is engaged in the treatment of this wound that he makes the patient lie on his side, and incises the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, use three or four sutures or a ligature to close the excess of the softened sinew and make a firm stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and care for the other wounds within which it is healed and the wounds fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	About Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is prohibited in our law, but for some reason it is allowed in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor should know about it when he is asked about it, so that he can answer him; and the other reason is that we have sometimes had the need for castration of other animals for our benefit, such as donkeys, and pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by traction or by incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When it is done for attrition, the method of the operation is to make a cut in the tail of the animal while its genitals are softened and loosened and hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those parts with your hand inside while they are still solved and do not appear from the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When it is done for castration due to fissure and division, take the animal and grab the cord of its testicles with your hand on the right side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the suspensory ligaments, and incise on each testicle with a cut between two testicles.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those that will be excreted.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any traces on those of the epididymis, but shave it subtly, which is above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one done for attrition, because attrition leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires gout.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And take care of the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure of hernias.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is where it appears in the scrotum, between two testicles, where a woman's penis is located.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some women have urine that is in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special case: the penis of a woman is located above the clitoris, and is similar to two testicles of a man, a little smaller than the entire vagina, where the penis of a man is located and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: one from men, and one special kind for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you insert those flesh parts adjusted inside until the opening of that one, and then cure those wounds with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second special case of men where urine is found in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of leanness and flesh eminence due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Great leanness is adjusted according to natural causes until it is stretched and made regular; and some women are magnified in certain ones as long as they are spread out with the same as in men and pervade during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then cover that you have excess leanness with your hand or an ounce and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not cut it at the end, especially at the front of the vagina, so that it does not become a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure it with the cure of the wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Flesh that is born is flesh that was not in the horrible of the mother until it fills that, and great leanness is also found at the parts deformed according to the same (and for that reason formerly they called it "malautia caudada"); therefore cover that you incise there with the same as incising leanness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or is a small one.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is caused by the previous disease, and that is made by meat not properly adjusted or by thin or thick phlegm.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made in the front of the thigh, or on its sides, or in the innermost part of the thigh, or in the lowest part of the thigh, and prohibits movement and engorgement and standing, and very strongly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the menstrual blood, if the obstruction is apparent, then put it; but if it is not apparent, then wait until you see it in the toes or in the feet.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is by thin phlegm, and it is made to the two lower lips, then cover and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your hand on both labia minora, and then gently press the indicated parts of the vulva.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread out, and then gently extend both labia minora until the thin tissue is broken and the opening is exposed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the area, and stitch the wound with sutures to prevent it from becoming solidified.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	However, if the tissue is thick and fleshy, then cut it with a sharp knife or a scalpel.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	However, if the opening is fleshy, then suspend it with a suture and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And then apply the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds, such as acetic acid, and bloodroot, and lead, adjusted to the amount of honey.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the wound from becoming solidified too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold that for several days and administer some of it to him.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes accidents occur in the main native tissue of other bodies, and later cover them according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for a cranial abscess, to the cranial abscess that is in the main body, do not make any contradiction with iron in any method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	About the treatment of gangrene, tail, and red blotch that occurs in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Gangrene is appreciated from the openings of the main veins until they are covered with continuous blood; and when gangrene and its causes are made, they are like that.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those and their symptoms, and to say which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, if swellings and pains occur in the groin area and do not appear to the touch, then no treatment is necessary with iron in those areas.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those swellings and pains that occur on the groin area, where touch is felt, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And if you place the woman in a supine position and extend the forceps or a sharp instrument, then incise those areas with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder those areas with one of the incising powders, such as acid or similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, and then place it in fresh water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the discharge of pus persists, then make that area into a decoction of wormwood and salted water and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of ordinary bread and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make an ointment with that on the back of her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the tumor is removed, it is good; and if not, make it adhere to two sponges, and apply it to the breasts for incision.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of colander or vinegar or grape must, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the Lord help you with this difficult task, so that you may insert what you have seen on the second page of that book equally.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of an abdominal hernia in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special cases of accidental abscesses in the mother, such as carbuncle and lapident abscess and ulcers and adherent and erpeptomens and fistulas and emorroids and thrush and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and the special cases of those and their symptoms, and their cures in this division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And when you want to know in this treatise about the treatment of abscess, which is the most common among all kinds of abscesses, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed with a needle.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp and accompanied by fever and sometimes swelling and if it increases over that sensation, then do not perform perforation on it, and treat it with something that helps to ripen it until the intensity of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then consider whether you should make a compress on a cloth that has two cloths; and lie on its back and adjust your feet to the part of the stomach that is farthest from the belly, and your thighs should be spread out, and place your hands behind your neck, and apply what is appropriate to that.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the instrument that is inserted into the abscess, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, hold it with the thumb of your left hand, and make sure that nothing from the instrument enters the vagina except the thumb of your left hand and the wet cloth.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the thumb of your left hand, then cover it with cotton to prevent any part of the instrument from entering the vagina.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And cover the handle that is on top of the instrument and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the handle until it is inserted into the vaginal opening.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears, and it is touched by the hand and the tongue and the mouth, then cover it with a cloth and hold it against the left side of the patient's head.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sanctum is evacuated, then cover it with a cloth soaked in warm oil or warm oil and place it on the abdomen in the section of the vagina.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place a cloth soaked in hot water, in which boiled wormwood was placed, on the larger joint and above the knee.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be cured in two days with the ointment that is suitable for that wound until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some compresses are washed the thigh and the wound with water and honey, and then with water in which boiled quince or long pepper has been placed, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the thigh with a compress, then you must be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care that it is treated with that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to best treat infants when they are born in a non-natural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The necessary cause is that the midwife knows the natural figure of the infant at the beginning by smelling the air, and when you see the woman expelling the parts before and desiring to smell the air, and above it is removed by what is on her, and quickly the position of the infant, then you know that this position is the second natural figure, and its position is on its own head, and the second child is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, carefully press the patient's abdomen to prevent the fetus from moving too much, as it may cause discomfort when lifted from its position, and the second sign is that the secondina is present, which is a good indication of pregnancy.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If this other part is not natural and unusable, because when the fetus is on its feet and the body of the patient is facing its head, and the hands of the patient are raised, or the feet of the patient are raised, or the head of the patient is raised and the hands of the patient are on its abdomen, or the feet of the patient are raised, and it is strongly converted to its own back, and similar to the figures of the patient unusable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all these causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you should show all the figures of those, and what engine is in those so that it is significant for that and remains on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain is felt on one's own head due to natural dryness, and it is severe on the temples and is made at that difficult part, and sometimes its virtue is already weakened, then do that seer, or what the temples need, and evaporate the heat from the body with fenugreek tea and cold oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the tube between her two legs and pierce that second skin, or dry it with a cloth until that moisture is removed from it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly until the child is born.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then cover the woman with a mixture of pillows and a mixture of fenugreek and comfrey.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, and the midwife, that she be comforted and do that coughing to expel the afterbirth; and give her a mouthful of water and a nasal spray for an hour, so that the afterbirth is expelled soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the patient's hands are forgotten at the beginning, then gradually reduce them to their natural position.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if they do not obey the instrument, then place your hand on their chest and lift their feet off the ground; and gradually bring the chest down to the ground; and the hand should be held so that it does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not returned and the patient dies, then insert those and remove the remaining part of the body or place the corpse in the arms of the patient and remove that which was forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the patient is on its feet, then gradually raise those and turn the patient small, and gradually make it equal to that, and take one of its legs and extend them gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	And if they are still inside the thighs, then command them to express themselves, and do that which is appropriate, because it was forgotten if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if that which we have recommended is not forgotten, then gradually return the small foot into the second natural figure, which will be forgotten by the patient at that moment.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to use everything we have recommended, then take a mixture of aloe and dissolved gum, grind it well in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that mixture to the woman's navel, at the lowest part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that ointment in warm water until it reaches the desired consistency.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts placed on the patient are no longer needed, then give them a sublimation of mint and place that underneath.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sublimation of mint has been used for an hour, then make that into a powder and apply it to the patient's mouth, remove it from there, and press the lowest part of the patient's abdomen gently, as the patient will soon forget.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The symptoms of a child over its mother and its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child is born in this form, then gradually move your hands to hold it; place your hand on its back, and its feet should be down, and those should be on the ground, and complete its hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually place your hand on its belly, and remove that which is between its feet and the thighs before it is prepared in the place where it was placed.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not expelled, then grasp its feet and move them vigorously, and gradually place your hand on its hypochondriac region until the child can be placed above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually move its hands and support the child little by little, and command the woman to expel it until the child is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The symptoms of a child lying down with one hand extended.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If it is not possible to reduce its arm, then raise the woman and let her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If the patient cannot move, then perform the jazzer on the left side, and shake the cushions vigorously, and then administer oils that are recommended for massages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the child has arrived, then perform that suture on the skull, and study the reduction of the wound, and equalize the shape according to nature, and make the flesh harden and command it to know whether it is healed.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The child is placed on its back, with its arms expanded and the surface of its feet facing downwards.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife holds the child's hand and gently turns it little by little, and that is helpful.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it grows and when it is equalized, then pause over the wound with that which we have recommended for oil and massages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command it to open its mouth little by little, and when you have done that, perform that suture on a skull, and command it to be inclined on the right side, and then command it to be comfortable; and make that flesh harden in condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the second finger of the right hand is inserted into the vagina in this manner, consider, and then you scrape it with your nail to remove the moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you insert it into the abdomen to prevent it from being held and rotting.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then gently push the fetus into the parts that are closed until you reach the second rib, and tell the woman to understand some signs, and if the man is willing, let him help as well, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that the signs of twins or many fetuses are not always clear, and sometimes they can be three or four, but that is strange and difficult to understand; but it is a natural cause, and not something alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are multiplied, one at a time, and they are separated by the navel of each of those, and some signs are not always clear, like a fetus that is naturally alive, and its presence is indicated by some signs that are not always reliable, as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if it is difficult to remove them from their position and reach what we have said about the unnatural figures, then cure those as we have reported.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the woman is subtle and makes something that causes facilitation and subtlety, and delay, and if she is intelligent according to all the figures prepared by the engineer, then lead her to salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women give birth to twins, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and it is necessary for me to verify that one woman has aborted six times, and another all of them, the cause of which is made by the glorious saints.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all such knowledge that is in the science of the woman that is very useful for that similar thing, and therefore pause to that which is useful.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	About the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are treating a dead fetus that has been mentioned in the division of medicine and is not deformed, and you have the opportunity to use an operation with your hand, then consider whether the woman is of healthy virtue and not of any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed on her left side, with her head inclined slightly and her legs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold the woman's hands or be placed on her right side to prevent the child from extending out during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and a mixture of garlic, fenugreek, and sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then insert her hand in the mother to facilitate the birth, and then surround the area where the umbilical cord is in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In such cases: Then you consider whether the child is prepared to breathe on its own, and then you place the umbilical cord in its neck, or in its collarbone, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or behind its beard, or in its shoulder blades, or in the locations appropriate for the ribs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the discharge is on his feet, then in the penitenary, or in the middle of the sides.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And he should hold the nail on the palm of his hand, and place the curve of his hand in that place between the fingers of his other hand, and insert his hand with facility and feel the nail in any of those places which we have said, until he reaches the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another nail or the third if necessary, so that it is equally attached, and not extended beyond its straightness, only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be done carefully at all parts, so that the discharge of his is relieved as it is done in teeth for its eradication.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then place the midwife's finger on those fingers and insert those experiments and rotate those which are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the joints will be moved into a place that is too narrow; and make sure that the entire fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is stretched out towards the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by its own force, then cover that area with a cloth; and remove it from there so that everything is forgotten, and insert it in the joint of the hand or in the hollow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And make sure you do this in the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or there is an injury to its neck, or it is stuck in the exit, then make sure you insert between these spines and saw the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be shown in the capital, which is appropriate for this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, make sure you insert this if the fetus is naturally large: and then cover it with an instrument called "algematu", or use the instrument we have mentioned; and remove the bones using forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is lying flat and restrained by the wishbone, then cut through it to remove the moisture that has accumulated in the chest.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If there is no complication or obesity, then you can gently insert the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the side of the abdomen is abscessed or in hydropsy, then pierce it to remove the moisture that is inside.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the foot is over the other feet, then the direction of the leg is towards the mouth of the mother.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and chest are restrained, then remove the cloth that has been wrapped around your hand and pierce the abdomen and chest to remove what is inside.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still attached and the head returns, then insert your hand on the right side; but if the mouth of the mother is blocked, then insert your hand in the throat, surround the head, and pull that rope into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that occurs to her, then do not force it upon her; in front of her, then administer an infusion of heavy humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on its side, then if possible, it should be sharp: and it should be administered that which we have said in the live wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of intestinal perforation.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer that which we have said about the cure in abscesses that occur to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if blood flow occurs, then administer stanching waters and the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was made dead, and then another witch undertaken, and then the dead fire the other was made.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A long time ago, the man developed an abscess in his abdomen; and when fire was brought in, he began to groan loudly.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	He was called for care and treated for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then he was placed on his side due to some causes of strong attraction, and an object was placed under him, and after several days, another object was placed under him; and he was very surprised because there were no bones in his abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then he thought that they were the bones of a dead baby.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then he followed the wound and extracted small bones from him, which were in his abdomen in various positions, and had been there for a long time, causing him pain.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	He did not think it was strange, but rather that in this case there was knowledge and help for him from the doctor who was administering treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are needed to extract the baby.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertigo that affects the major joint:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strength in which the free parts are affected, to which affectation there are two vertigos in two opposite limbs of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this vertigo can be more subtle than restriction, and can be made of either wood or bone.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the length of each bone should be two of those and the width of each other one should be one of those, and the length of each is a palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two bones there are two adjustments of that measure bone, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two of those, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the major joint so that it can be affected by those when you turn the two prescribed vertigos.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form of that more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make a traction using a pair of forceps or a second-hand tool.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of his two fingers, there is sometimes an addition with veins, and the length of those veins is about a palm, and the width of each is two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the largest one, first place your hand on the side of the patient's feet hanging down, and then insert what is between his thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then raise your hand with the tool that is like forceps, according to the amount of the appreciation of the mouth of the largest vein until the midwife makes her incision where you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the vertical line that the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The shape of the tool that is pushed against the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The shape of the tool that holds the large head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at the end, sometimes, and some of these veins are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes, which has teeth at the end that are sharpened and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of administration for a few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of one ounce having a spike:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of one ounce having two spikes:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with which the closing jaw has a hook that holds the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of scissors having two extremities, with which the head is amputated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two long scissors:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more they multiply the species of that and prepare them for the artists, as it is more suitable to their operation and more necessary for the men by their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And no works of those instruments should be lacking, for the need of those is not excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	For extraction of the second tooth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is held, then command the patient to hold their own tongue, and immediately perform that sternutation condition, and place your hand over the mouth of the patient and over their nostrils, and if it is deformed and does not come out, well.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take an olive oil and pour it on the surface of the skin and place it in those herbs that are burning at the mouth of the mare, such as calamint, rue, anet, camomile, Arabic cinnamon, and cassia lignea and santolaria.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the oil, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a cannula of canewood in the mouth of the mare, and hold that inside until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mare.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that blowing as we have said, and the second time it is to be done quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment is not effective, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and place it on the chest and rub it quickly as we have said, and when that has been found, then take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the prepuce of the mare, then place her second hand after we have recommended, and when she finds the second one, extract it slowly and correctly so that the mare does not suffer from the violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	To move the patient's body easily from side to side.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust it in the amount of attraction that it will obey and avoid sticking.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is covered, we have already recommended the cure by sneezing and the medication of the oil with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	However, if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then keep in mind that whatever is necessary from him to the mouth of the mother should be placed on the pillow of the woman, and then anoint it with oil and tetrafarmacon; because this will make it soften and dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when it softens, raise the patient's head and stomach, and this will help the patient; and then make sure that they are administered sub-fumigations and appropriate to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, in ancient times, it was already used for fumigation of nitre and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument by which a woman is fumigated to prevent menstruation and the second flow:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of wool or linen.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And its delicate end should be placed under the belly and its wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that in which that fumigation is consumed and repeat another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the treatment of the unbroken child's buttocks.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When newborn babies and their buttocks are not broken, which are already thin and soft.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then ask the midwife who will pierce that thin part; and if not, pierce that with a sharp needle, and make sure it does not touch the skin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place that wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and then treat that with the ointment inside which is not expired.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is too soft, then place a catheter in the anus for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it has happened that the swelling of the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; therefore, if that consolidation is not incised, and then cured with what we have said about the treatment and the plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of the fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the buttocks, their location and size, which occur near the anus or in the space between the thighs.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that location is old and comes from the moisture of white or thin pus, and some wounds penetrate those fistulas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating wounds are known by the fact that they come from those that occur during egress and from ventilation; and some use the patient's mouth for egress, and often it is from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some wounds are known to occur in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some penetrating wounds into the joint and into the back of the thigh.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And when it is known as a penetrating or non-penetrating fistula, you should insert your finger into the anus, and then gently insert a thin wire or iron rod into the fistula when it does not have turgescence.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turgescence in that area, then gently insert a thin wire or straw into that fistula until you feel the wire or straw in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel the wire or straw at all and there is no cause for constipation, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said, then you should know that it is non-penetrating, and then you should treat it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meatus of the urethra, then the meaning of that is urine from that place and prohibition of that so that the location be solidly healed with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then the meaning of that is that the wire should be inserted into this area if there is no turgescence into the bone, and pain in the circulation of the part; and that from there it does not persist immediately; and that it is not valid in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with oil.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is difficult and depends on the skill of the doctors over which they are held.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, the cure is delayed according to what I advise you, and that which has already been done.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands above his stomach and raises the cushions of him underneath, the cushions are inclined towards the patient's belly, and then insert a probe, or if it is in the fistula turgidity, until you know the location where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the belly, then cover that you insert your finger into the belly.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already inserted deeply discovered to penetrate, another thing that you feel between your finger and that siphon or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and therefore do not trouble in that, because it is not in that cure, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May it be said that this ailment is common in some men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine for which it is hoped to be greatly effective in this case, you should use a thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and introduce that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the bottom; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the adjacent tissues affected by the fistula have been well cauterized, resembling a piece of feather from a quill.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then care should be taken to keep those bandages wet until all the affected tissues have been healed, and then care should be taken to apply medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, then it is well; but if not, it may become healed at some time by other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the bottom of the wound, which is in the bottom, and between the probe and the tent that is covered with flesh or cicatrix, and the fistula is in that place where the surface of the wound is, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see that the probe becomes dry in the fistula, and it is placed inside the fistula until the drying process reaches the location where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is released and catheterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated parts that are assembled with a pen-like instrument and do not have any known cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If blood flows between you and your operation when you incise those parts, then milk the blood out and use the less painful instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because a cauterizing iron adjusts well to those parts, and it removes the blood from the excessive drainage of the humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then care for those parts that are covered with callosities in the border or in the cause of three-sided before the place becomes soft, and then care for the wound by removing the hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And those medicines that have stiptic and draining properties; when they are restored, it is healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already passed into the prostate and is elongated from there to the surface of the body, then enter it with your finger and examine that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the tent is placed between you and her and it is made of silk or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, at that time it is not an operation on her but a second way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	There are three ways to administer this: either to cauterize that area as we have said; or to dry up that area so that you can easily enter the cavity and perform the intended treatment, without causing any harm by incision so that you do not injure the contents of the abdomen, and what happens on the patient is according to their will; and then cure that with the method we have said which is very beneficial for healing; or to lengthen that cloth and remove that which dries up that area as we have said, or use another sharp instrument, and then crush those fistulas that are in the section of the abdomen where you can perform the intended treatment; and then exert effort to restore the entire area, and if the opening does not consolidate, and remains open in the part of the abdomen, it is very harmful for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is closed according to this method: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is around the side of the buttocks on the surface of the skin and on the edge of the buttocks, then take a perforated extremity, which is like an awl for preparing the wound in this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And enter the tent into that fold of skin or around those; and then insert the tent into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into the edge of the buttocks nearby, then you remove the skin from that part where you introduced the tent into the anus; and extract the end of the skin and adjust both ends, and let that lie for a day or two, and when more skin is inserted into the flesh, then cut those parts that are between the two ends of the skin and which can be removed.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula do not penetrate, then make them penetrate in some way that is suitable for you, but make sure it is not too sharp to injure the skin; and then apply something to heal it.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spongy needle used to puncture the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so that it does not injure what is not necessary, as sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suturing of hernias where the intestine protrudes at their beginning.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hernias can occur in two ways, either between the buttocks like this (depicted with a cross-section of a body), or they can be similar to a sausage.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the intestine protrudes from them immediately and is one, and its matter, and its back-to-back, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that protrude from the back of the body follow the months of less humidity, and they have a yellowish or small intestine with continuous continuity, and their color is like that.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the stomach is that you command the patient to lie down and expel what is inside before it appears and causes harm to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you place your thumb on the area and make an incision along their ribs.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the incisions cannot be made in those areas due to their moisture and softness, then take those areas with dry cloth or cotton or wool, and remove them from those areas, and make an incision along them, and powder some charcoal at the incision, so that it is like a cauterization; or cauterize them as prescribed in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then care for those areas with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the wound does not allow for exit, then cross-stitch the patient with a thread that is thin and sharp, and wash it with the water that is in the stomach and that causes the wound to open more easily when the patient expels.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the abdomen is distorted and deformed, the cause is likely to be feces, so you should remove them with your finger or a spoon, scrape them out, and then care for those areas until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever is first should administer the second suture in this manner: take a needle and insert it into the wound, then extract the feces from the upper parts, and make the needle penetrate into the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread on the side away from the needle, and lengthwise; and tightly tie the feces to the structure, and then remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this for all of them, and leave one unstitched, so that the excess blood from that one flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or carron oil on the abdomen; and place that on the wound and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that person in that room; and when they are cured, apply some ointment or other remedy to heal them.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas are often caused by dryness of the flesh or by constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if you do not have those remedies in that medicine, then make a point with a needle or your nail into which you can apply moisture and hold the scar tissue above, which prevents them from becoming solid; and then cure those that are already solid.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And then apply a more violent purgative than the first into which the wound is not excoriated; and then cure those that are already healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of almsgiving, it is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that almsgiving is clear, and not because it is not redone according to the color of the body like a candle, and it is done throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the mentioned ones, and it is done for those who are afflicted with pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut that which is in the circle of the nail, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second as it is preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are small, hard, round, and painful sores on the surface of the body, and they often occur in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	Treatment of it is that you stretch and cut that one, or that you remove it with forceps or tweezers.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now they are removed in both directions, and the tool that I said is used.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Ants are small, furry or large sores on the surface of the body, and when they bite that area, it becomes red and swollen like an ant bite, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is to take a needle of bone or iron, and it should be strong, and place it on the part where the worm is contained within the circle of the needle; and then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circuit of the worm, and place it in front of the flesh, and remove the worm from its position.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a needle of copper or iron in this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part above the needle should be thin, not pierced (it is not perforated), wrapped by whoever has the knowledge of its location and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the worm according to what is called in the cauterization of atherosclerosis in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are used to give cristers (medicinal plasters).
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some wounds are made into medicinal plasters of silver or lead or tin foil or malleable; and some wounds are made from those instruments small and large according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and from those of which the sores are foul or painful, the plasters of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The large and small intestines:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the catheter in which the bag is attached should be wide according to this method, and at the distance where the bag is attached, it should be as follows:
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The end of the catheter, which is inserted into the anus, should be thin (not sharp) like a lion's tongue; and on one side of it, two holes, and on the other side, one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	The bag in which the medicines for the bladder of an animal or lamb's wool are placed should be one palm wide.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with holes as it is turned; and if the space between the holes is the largest, then:
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And insert the tip of a thin, sharp needle into those holes, or around them; and adjust the bag to it; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the intestine between two distinct, strong folds, and stitch each hole: May the quality of stitching that one fills the bag with medicine, which should be boiled according to the tolerance of the patient; and remember not to be too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and their legs raised up and held by someone or a blanket; and then a cloth with warm oil or albumen of egg or fenugreek or similar should be inserted into their anus to facilitate the process, and the assistant should hold a basin and express it in two doses until it is all evacuated from the intestine; and then remove the cister and the patient can lower their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if that remedy does not work, hold it for as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps all night, it is better to do it later in the day.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you clean the patient in the bath of a solution of vinegar and the remedy, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are wounds or abscesses in the anus, then use a soft and lion-like bath of baths that children are usually bathed with.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	It has already been said in the division of the treatment of wounds that what was suitable for free men, and thus the treatment of those who are not free is according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of and where the wounds occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which wounds are made include cuts with a sharp object, such as a knife or sword, or by being struck with a stick, a fist, or a similar object to those caused by falling.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the wounds that are in the parts of the body such as the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or groin, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And thus, some wounds are treated according to that reasoning and rule for the other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And thus, some wounds of the head are simple, and the memory of the compound ones will come in the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When a headache occurs without fracture in the skull, consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and has been soaked for a long time and is very painful, you should first apply a fleam to the temples, and do not delay; then extract it according to the amount of its power, if no cause prevents fleamotomy, especially if the stone that exists in the pain is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if the fleamotomy is on the opposite side of the affected part; then keep the patient away from food and drink, and give him coarse foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if any cause prevents the ministration; then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place on the pain, if an abscess has formed, a poultice of bread soaked in rose oil or in wine that is styptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of an abscess, then place on the pain, if the stone is its own and the air has not changed to that which I will recommend to apply a little powder.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed there, then pause over the wound with healing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or caused by sharp objects and the lips are not adjusted by fingers, then adjust them according to what I will recommend about the suture of theirs.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound is already discovered from the bone and flesh, and not retained by a small suspension, then scrape that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and form coytes and similar things until it is completed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the wound rots in the bone and does not adhere to it, then scrape all of that and clean it, and care for that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not cut by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that unscratched, then scrape it with a spatula or tie it; and if necessity causes you to do what we have said does not work, then cauterize until that blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these wounds are simple and small, the cause of their healing is easy; therefore, sprinkle this powder on those wounds, which will consolidate them so that air cannot move them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of broken olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix all three thoroughly, and fill the wound with it, and strengthen it by good compression until a scab forms on top of it, and coagulate it with the dragon's blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then press it down with the powder and leave it there until it is not inflamed, because the medicine cannot be removed from there while it is not healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Sometimes, that alone can be used as cauterization, when not in your presence and with olive oil and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place them over those and straighten them, and their recent wounds are covered with the same blood, which has not been altered by air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has altered them, and especially when it is summer time, then do not understand this powder position, but rather cure those with that which we have said, unless you place it on those foul-smelling herbs of digustius, or unless you place it on those feet of the flour of the bread with water and honey inside that has been pounded; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the fracture of the bone occurs in the back, and it is small, then you remove that which we have said.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will tell you the cure for the fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the backs of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the fracture occurs in the back of the neck, then it is not different in medicine, and between the back of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the back of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, do not use the cure of that which makes vehement stipticitat, such as ziniar and zegi that is vetriol and similar to their four that does not harm the nerves and contracts that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place your hand on any part of the body without a specific reason, as the substance of nerves is sensitive and its continuity is connected to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that one is cured by unusual medicines, as when washed with warm water, some infused in rose oil or not, and then when washed with warm water and the other stones are minced according to this manner, and found to be humid.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer sutures or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or accidents occur in the lower part of it, then pierce that in the most distant place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is already incised in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary to prevent that from happening.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the ribs of the belly have already been incised, and the veins of the collarbone have been saved, then adjust the lips of the coda's abdomen with a suture on the edge of the belly, but do not touch that one; equalize that and reduce it to its natural figure, and strengthen that with a decent structure, and leave that for several days; and care for that with ointments in which there is astringency and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the fracture has already been made in the bones, then strike that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from it; and whatever is not apparent to you, leave that until the fracture heals, and it should be separated and the cavity of it should be cleaned.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the fracture is recent, then powder that with the powder that was recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the fracture has been made into a sinus, then care for that with the water of which the memory will come close to its capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	When there are plaques or similar conditions on the neck or back, and they are made with a scalpel, scissors, knife, or similar instruments.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion with a scalpel or scissors, and sometimes you measure its depth, then consider if the wound bleeds when the patient moves; then know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth and the wound is recent and close to the bone, then place some powder on the first hour of the wound, and do not strengthen that so that the bone does not remain in the depth of it and that it returns to the body, but rather pause in that attractive area, and remove those days of wounds.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the wound is not in your presence, then place it on the outlet of the wound with a clean cloth to draw out that which is from the moisture; and make the patient lie on the wound so that the liquid that is in it flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the pain has lasted for three days or more without causing spasms, trembling of the heart, or stricture of the breath, and sometimes other good dispositions of the patient, then know that the pain is saved; and then cure the one with blisters and the other with other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the patient is excused and has always been opened, then know that it is time to make an incision; cure therefore through its own capital.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the pain is caused by an incision of space or of a hole, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then cure that one with what is preceded by sutures, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already been performed in the bones, and it is known that those incisions are open, then twist the pain and take to extract those incisions, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them inside until the pain is able to be extracted, which extraction is welcome.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other injuries in the other members, the treatment in cure is the same as that which we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the injuries of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great ones, some veins and nerves of the belly, so that they are inserted into them and their suture is to be done more forcefully and more subtly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And disruption of small ones is done differently, and if the reduction of them is more difficult, then do not wait to insert them into their place as soon as possible, because it opens and swells so that the instrument of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the belly, as it is difficult in those two special cases mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suture of the belly is according to four methods, but two sutures are common which are suitable for sutures of the other injuries of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures properly communicate with the other wounds, but more particularly in the abdominal suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend you to each one an explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then in one of two ways: either by perforation of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And then when that is the case, cover that with a cloth that you submerge a sponge in warm water alone, or that you boil in water with cyperus, and spike, and embrocates at that intestine inside that the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some say that it is done in the one that has stipticity, and it is better than the water alone in resolution of the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And then when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is covered high and sweet, because for that the instrument of it is good for a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the instrument is approached to the patient's body for this cure, then divide the disruption a little with a small sharp instrument that is not inserted into the flesh.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure is best when it is properly applied and does not cause drying or unnecessary occupation of the necessary and deficient parts.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, its shape is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the instrument is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly blunt edge.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then it is best to return its reduction to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on that spot.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is large and in the lower part of the belly, then place the patient on their back, with their knees drawn up to their chest; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place your hand on their head and the other on their chest.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	When the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then quickly place your understanding and consideration on the side where the affected area is further away from the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And in cases where you administer this in large wounds and minor wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, place the prepared substance between your most clean hands, holding the disruption entirely on your palm and adjusting its lips, and from one to another, if there is a cause for stitching, then another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of stitching: take an needle, or count of needle according to the quantity of the wound's width; and leave from the end of the disruption of that ring, and strengthen the needle one, or do not put it in the two ends of the thread that are left over from the other part of the thread that is left out, enter that you make that penetrate from that part to another; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the cipher, and so made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Approach the wound with a strong, double-edged needle, and some stitches of different sizes together, and then add the two lips and the wound by aggregation of decency; and then leave the largest of them and put another needle in that place, and hold it as you held the first one; and do not stop doing this until the wound is completely closed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The needles should be of medium size, because thin needles easily pierce the flesh; and large needles are difficult to pass through the tissue, therefore it is better that they be of medium size.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	Do not let the needle be left at the ends of the wound, because the flesh should not be pierced too much and so that the wound does not heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	Do not extend the stitches too much so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the tips of the needles so that they do not descend into the patient's body; and place pulverized substances expanded from all parts over the stitches, which held the tips of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these special types of stitches with needles in skilled hands are best used on small wounds, where in their stitching there is one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second stitch is common: and it is that you administer the stitch to the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the finger, in a row, with a needle that is evenly wrapped in thinness and size.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that part of the thread that began, so that the true return of the thread that was divided at the wound will not rise again to the wound, so that the stitch will be the second stitch of cloth in which the cloths are strong.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each stitch the amount of the thickness of the said thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch I sewed the wound that happened to a man in his abdomen which was wounded by a knife, and it was the rupture of the wound of one palm, and it was located around two palms of the intestine from the middle part of the body; and then I reduced that because the intestine had been through the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the pain was consolidated in the space for fifteen days or so, and it healed him; and then that liquid was used for many years, and it was converted into its positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by a miracle, fire, which he did not cure that wound, which was in a place where the wound was not atrophied or any medicine, but placed over the wound close to two weeks and frequent bathing with melted honey until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	He said that there were two special types of sutures according to the story of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the chain, and insert the needle from the beginning to the end.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates the chain and the thread is inserted correctly and throughout the entire length, and leave the end of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make the other end of the needle from the beginning to the end in the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that incision, then make another incision in the other extreme part of the thigh from the back to the front; and lay the external skin on this side, and make an incision with the needle in the other extreme part of the thigh from the back to the front.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that incision with your own incision, which is made in the skin at the extreme part of the thigh where all that incision is.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side and pull that one at the extreme part of the skin on the other side, and extract the needle from the incision, and return it to that incision and cover the extreme part of the skin on the other side with this external skin; and extract that from the incision which is on the other side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do that again and another, and do that another way near to where you have finished all that which is on the back according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you suture the pellicies with a thread that covers the hairs, so that you cover one end of the thread with a piece of the part of the tail, and leave the other end inside until the wound is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second special type of suture, which is called the "Gualia" suture, and this is how it is done and how it should be recommended, is that you suture that part with a thread that all doctors suture in that way; so that they add all the parts to their corresponding part at the appropriate place by nature; and apply the end of another thread to the other end of it, and this is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	So that you insert the needle at the end of the thread at your own discretion in that part, and make it penetrate into the wound through that hole, and leave two ends of the thread; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate through the hole into the two ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those thighs, and make each one penetrate the part of the thigh into two opposite parts of the mirror, which are on the other side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than the common lacing, and is the stitching of which the previous reminder was made.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Guilia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And moreover, the stitches of the belly are rectified with two needles, so that you insert each one in these, and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you must do, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the second stitch of those which sew the hearts equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching of it is more difficult than of the other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And moreover, the judgment of medicine of plague is judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of which is that when you obtain the plague recently from its own source denying that the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and sew it at that place and prepare it decently, then pause over that fleshy powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that place with ointments made from ingredients that are present and can make a hard stone and crush bones, and consolidate it and watch; and then cure that area as is the cure for other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have those medicines present, then pause over that area for a while, as soon as it begins to swell, become red, and change color, and exchange those two dressings daily, as you have been taught, until it is healed, as you do not need other medicine in case of simple wounds.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal members, then cover that area with lion's wool dipped in high-quality oil, or in oiled oil, and pause over that area in the circuit of the places that are between the thighs and leave the dressings on.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in those intestines, as soon as that dressing is changed, then apply a black stiptic cautery, and more so if the perforation has reached the intestine and has been made penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the cure for the large intestine is more difficult than the cure for the small intestine.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to cure the intestine called "gout" because it receives no relief from any remedy; this is due to the large number of veins in it, its size, its complexity, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the remedy comes from the gout, then reduce it according to your right judgment, and reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed through the space and is now white or black, then apply the remedy on the spot where the intestine was damaged, to prevent blood from flowing out, because there are veins and arteries in the gout.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert another remedy that is different from the first, and place it on both ends of the cut part of the skin above the gout, so that the attraction of the intestine can be held in the cavity of the gout and prevent its emission.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the diseases that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is sometimes possible to restore it in some people, by percussion of the lance and it was the disease of the right side of the stomach, and the disease was an old and made fistula, and it was handled and ventosities.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then he continued the treatment of it as if it was not confirmed in its cure, but he subtly worked on that until it was healed and the area was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And then he saw that the area was consolidated, he placed on the patient that he had over the accident of evil in his stomach; and not anyone for that evil accident and remained in his milky dispositions eating and drinking, and then entered into bath and was exercised in his said.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And now some experienced people say that when disease occurs in the intestine, and it is small, it is sometimes possible to cure it by this method: and it is that you take a large needle; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those needles with its mouth open over the two lips of the wound; so when you press on those and strengthen your mouth, cut the head of it, which adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another sponge next to the first one, and continue to do so until all the wound is covered with sponges.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and cover the wound; and those caps should be kept inside the intestine until it is healed, without causing any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is also possible that the intestine can be tied with a fine thread made from animal gut, rather than using needles; and you should take the end of this thread, which should be unwoven, and place it on the end of the intestine, wrapped around it, and then insert the thread into needles and use them to tie the intestine together.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing is only second to faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	However, if the wound is large and extensive, especially in one of the thin intestines, then it cannot be sewn up, but only reduced, and not healed from all sides.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of fistulas and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all ulcers and abscesses that become swollen and old, and are not consolidated and do not heal completely and constantly, in any part of the body, are generally called fistulas, and we call them fistulae.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula in reality is a hard, white, painless tumor that exists in the same way as a bone does; and because of this, it is called a sinus, that is, a bone.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in a wet ulcer, which heals slowly, the moisture is removed in several hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is thin, thick, and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already said in the division, as I said about ulcers, that all ulcer that is not healed or is not in its original flesh is not by one of these causes: one of which is because of a lack of blood in the tissue; or because of malice of the body; or because between the body and the lips there is hard flesh that prevents the formation of new flesh; or because of the movement of the leg; or because the ulcer itself is poisoned and the matter that is in it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or because of the nature of the region, as in the case of Saragossa, where digestion of evils is difficult, and healing of abscesses by nature is slow; or because there are bones, or because of their movement.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	After showing all those causes, their symptoms, and the treatment of those diseases in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now I will tell you how to treat fistulas, which are caused by surgical operations.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; among those, there are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spleen, or the intestine, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints formed by composition as when the hand and foot are joined; and among those, there are fistulas that are close to the main member and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among those, the one that follows this method is difficult to cure, does not receive treatment, and requires much work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if some fistulas have a depth that does not reach those locations, and you expect and trust in their treatment, and you want to reach knowledge of them, then take trial with iron or fire, and if the fistula goes straight, and you can see it from there.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate with a thin probe, as the weight of their body is relieved and straightens the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrible openings, it is not possible to insert the thin probe into it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cauterize the openings with a caustic substance, as the moisture by which you cauterize that one also penetrates the other openings and enters them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then carefully investigate, according to which method you are able to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or propdana is in its cavity, or whether it is a fistula with many openings and all of it is on top of your strength, your investigation, which investigates the patient, and the invention of the pain due to your compression of the hand over the area, and similar to the meanings and causes of accidents to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all of those causes in detail, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and it is whether you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long from joint, or of nerves, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula after it is opened and remove what is in that filter and rotten meat, and also what is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the gums and similar parts, and cure that before it becomes healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	However, if the fistula is of long and deep depth, and is straight, then cut it as much as you can from the front, and remove all the rotten meat; and then administer cotton soaked in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is inside the cavity of the fistula of the decay.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh before it becomes healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	However, if it does not heal by that, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and seal the second one as we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member present as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is yours to discover and it is in any corruption or blackness, then remove that within which the corruption is held entirely; and cure that with which the flesh within is to be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and there is no wound as it used to be, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again and very carefully perform the reason of it and the purification of it with the strongest fortification, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore you cannot enter into that but only lay it open.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have the strength to remove all of them, and none of them are held in place by any reason, then carefully extract them all.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If there is any cause of moisture that is contrary to you, and if there is no fear or mistake at the beginning, then insert those ligaments or flesh that are nearby, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you do not have the preparation of bones to remove the bones from your hour, then place something that can harden the area where those bones of flesh and ligaments are nearby, and keep the area from being consolidated and strengthened the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you are afraid, then place something that can harden the area where those ligaments and bones are separated from each other, such as oil, Egyptian anointing oil, or any of the ointments that can help, because when they harden, the bones will be separated from each other, and the attraction of those bones will be alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large bone like the bones of the leg or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then remove that residue as much as possible behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the place where the corruption reaches, and then cure that before it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you have someone who has experience and assistance on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around the age of 30, who experiences pain in his thigh, and from the parts that are decayed is spread over the matter of the body within which the matter reaches the thigh, and that matter is great pus, and not an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then he extended the time with that for the error of the doctors until the pus is formed, and after that matter moved, and his cure was postponed until the leg became fistulized, and the points in those orifices all turned black and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the care of doctors was often around two years, and not in those times but in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the bed of that man and the materials that were running from him, those orifices for great body; and his condition was entirely stable and the color of him was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the tent into one of those orifices and reached the tent to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I quickly examined all the orifices and found those that reached from all parts of the bed.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I showed and inserted into one of the orifices those that entered where I described a part of the bone, and at the same time I found that corroded, and it was already rotten and corrupted and decayed; and it was already rotten a part of the bed where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I repaired that which was discovered and prepared from the bone discovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I found that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had divided and repaired, and it had already decayed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then, to restore the recovery of the pain with solidifying medicine for a long time, and it is not solidified.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then, you should repeat and inspect again on the second bone, following the initial inspection, and continue to corrupt the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then, you should repair that which appears from that corruption, and then you should perform the cure for it and restore it, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then, you should inspect it again and do not stop incising the bone little by little, particularly for the restoration of it, and it is not restored within that you incise around a palm of it, and that extracted from its marrow, and then you should restore it with medicine, and it is solidified better and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for repetition in the operation of it and its section, but rather for the disposition of the bleeding of it and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because at all hours due to excessive evacuation of bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore, the cure is for complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to position him in his own body and return his strength to him; and he is positioned in his positions and does not do him harm in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is broken in the body, then follow this method: and it is that you take the ligament and strength of that at the end of that broken bone, and command whoever extends it; and place that wool thread thicker than the first thread; and bring it over the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it so that it pulls the flesh to the parts behind, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to suture so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place the table underneath the bone incorrectly, because when you do that, it is not forbidden to stitch so that it does not rot the flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And stitch over the rotten part gradually, because if it is in the hollow of the rotten bone and does not appear on its surface to the touch, and force another way of stitching.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are rotten and not eminent, if they are continuous from one part to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of them, then you should remove all the flesh from all parts; and place a bandage behind, and press the first part where the corruption is before continuing the stitching of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the stitching is in the location of the corruption, then do it a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and press the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then do not do it in the reason but rather in a different way.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is quite difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and remove that, and wash it according to each possible disposition, and when no contrary wind or nerve comes out, then it should be corrected to you.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and parity of those, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare all kinds of operation tools suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that that operation requires the specific tool for which you need; when you have great study and length and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of diseases, then you already have what is suitable for you in all tools for that disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should know the number of tools that you will use with simplicity, and which you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Its head is in the form of a star-shaped crown, and its points are in the form of stars.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not advisable to apply it only to the heads of joints when they are corrupted or very wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another well-made saw: make the arc of it as wide as possible and the sharpness of its teeth, and the handle of it from wood.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor with concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another delicate razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another curved-end razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an instrument that can cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller cutter:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its tip is curved, and it is displayed in certain places in the ratio of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a ray that is suitable for the ratio of those that are pierced through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its tip is triangular and has a sharp end.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have said about razors and incisors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the tips of incisors and the cutting of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The tips can be sharp either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or if you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not occur, sometimes the corruption causes death to the member that is not cut by any cause, then cover that member within that wound, so that the patient escapes through that wound from death or harm that is greater than the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the member of that person who was injured, is that the limb is made black inside before the fire burns it, or if it is wet, then the blackness enters inside before the wound enters that limb and takes over the whole body; and therefore, you should start by removing that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if it is caused by corruption due to some poisonous causes such as a scorpion marine or of vulture or of rattle-snake and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the poisoning is at the end of that limb, then you should insert it and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the main body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if it reaches the main body, then you should insert that of the tip of the fire-tool, and not give space to the corruption until it takes over the firearm of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you insert that, then insert the arm into the cavity at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption and the time surrounds the cavity, then in that case the patient dies; and administering another cause or that in cure is of quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When corruption causes the foot to rot, then you insert that into one of the bones.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take the sole of the foot, then you insert the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter into the ankle, then you insert the thigh bone into the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the ankle, then there is nothing to be done, and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of inserting the limb or cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part behind where you want to insert it, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and extend the assistant a ligament to the parts behind, and extend the assistant another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments at least an inch apart so that all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover it with a cloth of all parts so that it does not touch the area, and bring the patient's injury and abscess close.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If blood flows when you work, then consistently cauterize the area, or place some restricting powders on the wound; and then return to your medical practice before it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the injured member in a suitable bandage, and cure it within the time it becomes healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And you should also recommend to that man who has such an accident in his foot, this method which you and I have recommended, which occurs when the black part of his foot is similar to a burn caused by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurs within his own toe before it spreads throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for such severe pains and burns that the cure would go to his member, and the uncut foot at the joint, and it became healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the same toe of the patient.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it happened to me, and I also experienced the repetition of that excess in the other direction of medicines, with the purification of the body; and the excess was not repeated, and it began to go to the other toe.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise the wound of the patient, and I did not want to do so, fearing the repercussions of such an unnecessary intervention, and more than that, I feared for the life of the patient, as the skill of the surgeon was limited.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he was displeased with me, he returned to his own land and eventually reached me, saying that that man had prepared and incised his entire wound, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not included this narrative except to be helpful in this matter of this illness, and to indicate the meaning by which it is signified and the second by which it is done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the care of the intestines and the quality of the enema with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in a carcinomatous member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains as if it were a vessel, and the codena that is above it is covered with fine cloth, and it does not reach the back corruption, and it is not impressed in the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	If the space is prolonged before corruption occurs in any member, it is called a fistula and not a wound.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment of it is to insert the entire suture with the same twist as it was turned, and more so when it is thinned and made with cloth, and comforts that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the suture sticks and that the corruption has not occurred due to previous consequences, and there is a gap in the suture, then you treat it with a poultice.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the liquid that comes out has a strong odor, then use the Egyptian poultice which is made of oil and wine and equal parts of honey and spices, adjusted in a vessel, and covered with hot ashes until the medicament becomes thick and reaches the consistency of melted honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take that liquid which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; apply the poultice to the sinus, strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine on for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then remove that specific bone; and do so for several days until the sinus is healed and the wound remains clean.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Sometimes the wound is cleansed with ash water, when you are not present with this medicament; and you take the ashes of vine, and put them on the water; and then apply that to the wound and cleanse it until you confirm that the sinus has healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicament or ash water, then cleanse that wound with water and honey mixed in a ratio of three to one, and cleanse it with honey, because honey cleanses and washes, and it makes the sinus stick together, and more so when there is an excess of stinging and dryness in the wound.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do that for several days and confirm that the sinus has healed, then cleanse it with water that makes flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you should take some dental wax and dissolve that with some rose oil and vinegar; or you should make a clyster with some medicines and other oils that have the properties written in the treatise on waxes.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the clyster needle, then you should gradually widen it with a small iron, and cover it with Egyptian wax or basilicon wax until it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the orifice is wide, then you should add the lips of that wax to suture and leave as much quantity as the amount in which the clyster is added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of which the intestine passes is raised to the parts above, then you should dry that in the lowest place where it is in order for the intestine to pass through it; because when the intestine is constricted in the sinus, the flesh will be in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to dry the sinus within the environment of the lower jaw bone, then prepare the limb for the procedure by removing the bracelet according to your discretion and ensuring that no cause of the bracelet is retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidative medicines that are placed on the sinus appropriately for the area you want to extend over cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The cloth should be of such an amount that it covers the entire sinus; and then insert the forceps into the opening of the sinus in a tract somewhat wider than the opening, and extend over another cloth from the mouth of the leons according to the amount of the tract, and place it over the other cloth for a long position of the sinus opening so that the secretion of the bracelet is not retained but only a small amount of cloth is left.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The cloth over the sinus opening should remain in place throughout the entire hour to ensure that what is placed inside the bracelet remains there.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether this that flows from his arm is much or little, or digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And if you consider the location of that sinus, whether there is pain in it or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if your treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is secreted over the orifice of the sinus already adhering, or it begins to adhere, then remove it or scrape it off on the third day, and when you remove the plaque, change the dressing and renew the poultice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus there is already a subtle space, then do not despair of the adherence of it, because the healing of it will approach, because in some people in which the generation of flesh in those plaques takes a long time, and in others in which it is done the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus there is already some days of undigested flesh, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and is the cause of prolonged treatment, then adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their effect, they are dried as with a poultice when they are adjusted with excess of sawdust.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most rear part that is cured, you should take some oil and dissolve it in rosewater, and place it on the wound as an ointment, and apply it to the affected area.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And you should do the same in that action, when there is no breeze, oil and honey, when it is thickened, use it; or take mirra and aloe and make a paste, and spread it all over the honey when it is on the fire, and then apply that to a cloth and strengthen that over the wound; and apply that which you have cooked inside when it is thickened, and powder it on a cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some of those remedies should be administered to the patient along with the long-lasting and reasonably priced lily celesti (and it is the lily celesti) and flour of errors and centaury, and use those simple or adjusted remedies, crush and powder them over the honey that I have recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew is not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in its own bone, and already make an investigation in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; then treat it with a fistular cure, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the treatment of broken nails and toes, and incision of the finger, and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Nails are abscesses that do not come from the nail of the big toe or foot, and they often occur in other called abscesses, and when it is prolonged and its treatment is highly valued, it is a cauterized abscess, or it is corrupted, and quickly enters the bone, and soon corrupts the entire bone, and soon perforates the bone until it reaches the odor of decay, and the end of the said nail is formed, and its color is made dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that which we have said in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cut off all the excess that remains from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound with a pointed cautery, because this cautery is useful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is healthy and the nail is healed, and the surrounding tissues of the nail have already begun to grow back, and the pain and swelling have subsided, then place your finger under the angle of the nail that is causing pain, and gently push it towards the nail, and insert a sharp instrument into the flesh to facilitate healing, and pause over that area until it has completely healed; then cure it with ointments that are commonly used for burns.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then remove that bone and the surrounding tissue, because there is no time to heal if the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption spread to that area, then insert it into one of the bones according to its memory, and cure it until it has healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail has been hammered or torn, and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning of the treatment, you should perform a lumbar puncture on the patient, and quickly remove the nail with sharp scissors at a transverse angle above the skin, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is behind the nail, because this will cause severe pain and may cause damage to the underlying tissue; then cure that area with ointments that reduce pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May it be adjusted, which is not in the meat of most men, but very fleshy and very bony, or very much in the bones, or very much in the joints.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And most men are not at the location of the joint, or it is the origin of the bone in most men.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Those who are not at the location of the joints of the said one do not have any evil, and those who are not at the joints are very good.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you insert that devise at its location with a flat space.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May it be from those who are not at the location of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore keep away from its abscission.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be from those who are not at the said location of the joints, cover that you insert at the beginning of the meat of the bone with a round incision within the bone, and then use one of those suitable saws for that, and then cure that while it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	When the consolidation occurs between their ribs, either due to birth defects of the person who was born that way, or due to consolidation of plague, or due to burning from fire, or due to similar causes, then it is said that the consolidation breaks down until they return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their clothes a piece of thin lead to prevent them from being consolidated unevenly, and separate between those, or place between those a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated according to what is said.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if the consolidation occurs in the hand of those mentioned, then you should separate that consolidation according to what is prepared and fit it to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	At the beginning of the vice, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come from the members of the body, and the greatest event of them is in the abdomen, and more so in the abdomens of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer a black bowel purge to the patient with some strong expulsive agents, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure for their fever can be done in two ways: one is to cut it and throw away the black bile, and the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	This section of the patient is done in this way: first, apply warm water cauda to the abdomen so that the thick bile is resolved, which is found in the abdomen, and then strengthen the patient's abdomen to the highest part of the cushion under the bed, and place a bandage on the part where the intestine comes out. Then dry the vein in one or two or three places, and then elevate the black bile to the highest part of the patient's abdomen above and below the bandage, and remove it when the desired amount has been extracted, and the patient tolerates it.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then approach that one, and command her to refrain from consuming foods that generate black bile causing gout.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that is noticed in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of the bed is done in this way: if there are moths on the patient's cushion, remove them and place it under the bed and rub the patient's back with hot water until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or if it cannot be done by exercise at that moment, until the member is sweated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then apply the cupping glass on the right side of the vein for section in the long or back of the patient's thigh, or at the bottom of the patient's calf.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply the cupping glass with one or two needles and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears at the sensation, and it is necessary to know which of those times the patient has declined to black bile.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you remove the cupping glass, tie that white thread that is rope.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then approach that leg which is raised and bend it at the hip, and support it with an iron hook.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then approach another section close to that section for three fingers, and remove the skin from the part above the vein that appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then lift that one and insert it behind the other section of the thigh, and then remove it and lift it inside where it is on the second section, and then remove it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then do that inside where it is extracted from the section that is most superior or most distant from all the sections, where everything is inserted; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and lift it, then insert a strong double-bladed needle and tie it and remove it, or insert it behind the leg and rotate your hand at every part where it is bent.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it is difficult to lift that one and it comes over the patient for that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that area has been exposed, pause over the location of the wool submerged in vinegar and oil, both rotted and not rotted, and cure that which is diseased within it.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vine is twisted and has a curved shape that does not follow the straight line as we have said, then cut it at all points of its curve and in the locations of its wrapping, and suspend it with ropes into which you have raised it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to pierce the vein and do not place that which is difficult for you to raise it; use your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made on the vine that has been cut:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be like those that are sharp at the tip so that it does not pierce the vein; it should be of great flexibility, lion, because if it is too thin, it will pierce the vein due to its thinness; having enough thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the buttocks, in low lands as well as in Africa and in the dry and barren lands of India, where there is little vegetation.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is often generated in other parts of the body besides the buttocks.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the condition of it is a putrefaction that comes from leaving the wound open, as if by poisonous dew that enters the body and causes serpents, worms, and other vermin to breed between the wound and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is due to it happening in the buttock, where there is intense inflammation; and then the place is blistered; and then the vein is drawn from that place, which seems reasonable from a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when it appears at the end, you should wrap it around that with a plaster of lead, which is the weight of one drag; enter two drachms, and leave that and let the lead hang from the buttock.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And many times, due to some cause, the parts are deformed, wrap it in plaster and place that on it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if a part is prolonged, then you insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that of the reason until it is outside and dry, because if you insert that, it will contract and enter the flesh and cause abscess and pus in the place and ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it can be treated appropriately and removed piece by piece, until it is completely removed from the back of it and there remains none in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it is said that some men have been in ulcers for the length of their palm and fingers, and I have heard that one was for 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted during the time of its treatment, then introduce the ray into the throat of it and pierce that along the long throat in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has some obstructions, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it causes pain there, and it is removed from which orifice it comes.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called cow disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is not called in any land by cow disease because it is caused by many obstructions in the belly and it is a worm that is not between the gut and flesh, and it goes through all the body and falls down, and it is shown at the touch of its own skin from member to member until the gut breaks and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is by the putrefaction of some humors that happen with the accident of worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarides in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes into the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then a great deal of pain comes in it and enters and destroys the brain, and that is caused by many obstructions.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless you first move its position and appearance to the side, and then tightly bind what is on top of it and what is behind it with a cloth and strongly tie it, and then dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is found in the flesh and not exposed, then place a hot cautery over the area where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts the surrounding area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that it has reached the top of the skull, then tightly tie over the crown with a strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use medicines that evacuate bad humors from his body, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of section over painfulness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is not named in our land, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have also seen another one that I will tell you about later.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of her arm, and it had been there for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away as if by magic, much more quickly than it should have been, as if it were live silver when it moved from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain went away from that place and remained in the muscle, and it stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it corrected itself in the other body before it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I told you that it was turning around in her whole body after I saw it; and it was too wonderful for the change of it and the speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen that happening in the other joints after that manner, but I had not seen any words that would make it clear how pain can be changed from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have not seen that among the women in this way.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I have not thought that this was the case unless it was because the woman was old, with dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this situation, the sensation of warmth is mutated.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are delicate and have bodies humidified by constricted veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you wish to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, do not show the wound there as we have said, but strengthen it over that and loosen it from the other side and dry it through that until it is inside that covered warmth, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see that among the wounds, then you cure that with the exclusion of the body and that which expels warmth, and carminatives those bad pills and those of serapi and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of herbs.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Herbs are diverse according to their species, and according to the locations of the body where they are found, because of their diversity is that some have large points, and small, concave, and deaf, and solid; and some have three angles, and some of those have tongues; and some have stalks.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the second part of the body where the second method is used: when the main members or their main parts cause pain, such as the brain, heart, lung, and similar organs, and when pain occurs in any of these members and appears to you as a sign of death, the cause should be removed immediately, and then cover that area with bandages in the best possible way, and when you do not see these symptoms and the affected part is not hidden deep within the member, then extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When symptoms occur in the servant's body and pass through the bone, and are above the cyphac which is over the brain, such as severe pain, scotomia, vertigo, pain in the neck, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms and mixing of understanding and vomiting of anger, and great weakness and destruction of speech, and the affected area is white like pollen, and has a similar appearance to the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you are not skilled in these matters, then refrain from the treatment and extraction of the splinter, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the splinter is close to the heart, and it is on the left side, and it feels like it has been embedded in a hard cause, and it is not a cause of pain; and its movement is similar to the movement of the arm, and it comes from the black plague, and that frigidity of the extremities, and sweating, and shivering; and then you know that death is approaching.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the splinter has pierced the lung almost completely from black foam of the plague, and the vessels that are near the neck have become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they breathe their last with great difficulty, and demand for air is increased.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the splinter pierces the membrane that is in the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it causes great violent pain and sighs, and does not spare any of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the spleen is pressed in the stomach, it often causes great pain and some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the spleen is pressed in the abdomen and remains there, some pain or tear in the intestine, or intestine, which is torn, and no hope for healing without its removal.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the spleen is pressed in the bladder, and it causes urine to be discharged, and some cause of the discharge is from the parts, and it often causes great pain on the patient, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	As the other members have with the face, neck, and shoulder, and spallas and helper, and the scapulas of the back, and the furcula, and the coysa, and the camba and its similar parts of the body, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the spleen does not pierce vein or artery and is not a venomous spleen.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you what I have seen of these spleens, so that you know how to treat them.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is that in a man, a sharp object enters the lacrimal duct of his eye in the corner of his nose, and they extract it from the other side, after the gray matter of his eyeball, and he is healed, and does not cause harm to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And they extracted another sharp object from a Jew who had it in his eye, after the gray matter of his eyeball, and the sharp object was already hidden and could not be removed except for a small part that adhered to his cheek, and it was a very sharp object among the sharp objects of the Turks, with no eyes.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and did not cause harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And they extracted another sharp object from a Christian who had it in his intestine, and it was an Arabic sharp object, and it was the one that caused harm to his eye; and then they inserted it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his intestine; and then they removed it with great skill, and he was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another surgeon was called to a man who had fallen and was believed to be dead; and after thirty days had passed and he did not move at all due to his condition, the surgeon inserted a probe into the wound and removed it, and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And then another man was seen who had been stabbed in his back, and the wound had healed over him, and after seven years, the probe was found in the back of the cushion.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And then a woman was seen who had been stabbed in her belly, and the wound had healed into her body, and she did not change in her condition, and the woman was not harmed in some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And then another man was seen who had been stabbed in his face, and the wound had healed into his face, and he did not feel much pain, and similar symptoms to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the probe was extracted from the prince of the king who had been stabbed in the middle of his nose and had already begun to decline to the direct part, and the entire wound was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to heal him near the house of the sage within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I again applied the plague of the sage; and then I inquired about that thing with subtle questions, but I did not feel that thing; rather, he felt it at the tip of his right ear, and then I suspected that that point was for the sage.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied an ointment in the location that has both attraction and digestive properties, convinced that this location would help me to find the location of the sage, so that it could be removed from there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no accident occurred in that significant location that the sage had reached there; and I continued to apply the ointment on it for several days, and no accident occurred; and the plague remained steady, and the patient's condition improved over several days until one day the sage felt pain in his nose and told me about it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine on the plague for several days until fire was poured; and with the tent I pushed that, and again I applied it subtly to the tip of the sage, which adhered to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then approach the affected area with sharp medicine until I see the end of the thorn, and pass through it for several months within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then approach the affected area when the pain is amplified, and insert the forceps into it, and keep doing that until one day you can hang the thorn with the forceps descended, according to the shape of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then restore the affected area.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And according to doctors' judgment, the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you restore it and the affected area is consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and never in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some thorns for which you can follow that rule and meaning on that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration or not comprehend them.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artists know how to compare pain with motion; and they also know that which is present is better than that which is absent; and in new operations and new instruments, you must descend from foreign causes when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore it is said that sagittal sections are not forgotten in the members in which they are fixed, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they intersect, or by the opposite part of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is drawn by the place in which they intersect, or comes from the same side, is a sagittal section proceeding in the flesh, and is drawn and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the instruction of the hour in which it is catched, then wait for several days until the flesh that is around it decays, and be attracted to it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is fixed in bone and you do not obey its instruction, then wait for several days and repeat that which is drawn and moved in each day, and it is forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey your master's command to approach those days, then carefully cut through the circle of the flesh around that bone in all parts until the area is expanded by the flesh, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the flesh is stuck to the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the abdominal cavities of the brain, and it appears in the patient with those accidents that I have mentioned, then stop the extraction of the flesh and leave it inside until it is equal to the time of the command; because if the flesh reaches the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the flesh is not stuck to the bone of the head but only to the body of the bone and does not pass into the brain, and the patient remains alive for several days, and no accident occurs due to those causes, then you engage in the attraction of the flesh and the attraction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is stuck and you do not obey the command to extract it, then administer thin needles in the circle of the flesh as we have recommended, and cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the root of the problem is already in its place in the body's cavity, and it is also hidden from sensation, then you should inquire about that with an assistant, and if you feel it, then apply those remedies that are suitable for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constraint of the wound and its length, and there are no nerves or veins, then perform surgery on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the root.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you find it in the gold (i.e., the wound), then remove the flesh in which it is embedded from all parts, and design a plan to do everything that can be done; and if you cannot avoid the escape of the flesh through the fracture of the gold and its twisting, then...
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the root in any place where it is, then use your hand with forceps to all parts until it makes that obedience; and subtly perform the subtlety that the root is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attraction of it and that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot do it at that moment, wait until the parts that are in the circuit of the patient can be united, and then repeat that which is usually done.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is opposition to the flow of bile, then administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in the incision of veins or nerves or cords, and administer it in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the poison; and do this gently, with tranquility, delay, and firmness, as if you were loving and following your recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so that you can make the poison contrary to the patient's figure according to which you should catch the poison in him, because it is more useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible through the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But if the poisons that are expelled by the other part are not possible, or if any part of the other part has already processed some parts to the parts of the outside, or if it causes gilbositat the extramitat of the poison by the sense of the part that is above the codena proposed and sometimes that eminent; then you should cut over that; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then first you should turn the blade against the second direction before the saw enters the bone, and widen it as you insert it, and then remove that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then insert it when it is possible.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the saw is in that, then push it against that.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If it has fallen out and you want to administer an impact, then insert it into that, if it is hard, use a hammer to hit the concavity of it into the blade of the saw and then push it against that.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the saw is concave, then push it against that with a strong blow entering into that, because the saw is adjusted for that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the saw is poisoned, then cover that you hollow out all the flesh in which it is located, if it is possible to do so, and then cure that with that which is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the saw catches in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is near that you touch that with the tent, and it is possible to cut over that, then cut over that and guard yourself from the beginning of a vein or nerve, and then remove that, and then cover the wound if necessary, and cure that before it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps that are attached to the handles:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	With sharp ends like a beak that are made like a clamp when placed on the handle to prevent it from being released:
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those, special types are made, large, few, and variable, according to the quantity of the greatness of the handle and its narrowness, and the width of the opening, and the construction of it:
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of concave impeller with this end, like a beak, in order to facilitate the instrument of the handle in it, and to push that deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of deaf end impeller:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a ray, in order to facilitate the instrument in it and push that one:
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to bleed, of which there are sixteen in the head, two pulsating veins that are located at the temples, called alhasisain; two herbs that are on both sides; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyelids, called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are the veins called algelic —; and there are two veins that are on the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are punctured in the arms are visible, one of them is cephalic, and it is called wild by the people; they call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a ram from the basilica, and another ram from the cephalic; and the people call that vein "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that is punctured in the domestic thigh, and it is called "citillar", and they call that vein "vena del ventre" to the common people; and the vein of the arm, and it is punctured over the fire, and it is the vein that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest ear, and it is in the two humps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is called "the vein of the curvature of the wild thigh"; and the second is "sophena", and its location is on the thigh of the domestic thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its location is on the thigh of the wild thigh; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The inflammation of the veins that are close to the armpits is an ancient and contagious disease, causing swelling and ulcers on the head and neck.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of sand for those is as follows: it should be applied to the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed in the occipital region where the veins are close together with a wide cloth and good friction; then strongly bind the patient's neck with a band that covers both places where the two veins and their locations are close to the armpits; and if you feel pain in those places, here is a remedy.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the cuttlefish knife, and it is the one that is incisive, and introduce it behind the vein in the neck where the jugular vein meets the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand with the vein and the neck to the parts above and incise the vein at its incisive point.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be approximately twice the width of your thumb; and make it as deep as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply strong powder and let it remain where it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And you have already begun at the beginning of the book, the incision and cauterization of those places.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	May the two veins and arteries that are at the temples be removed by the ancient method of phlebotomy, which is evil and should be avoided, as it causes excessive bleeding at the temples.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those places is as follows: strengthen the patient by applying pressure through the incision where the two veins appear at the temple, and demonstrate their pulses behind the neck; and then you should feel them.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you should raise the catheter above the vein at the parts indicated by the patient, and insert the phlebotomy incision behind it, and raise the vein; and make an incision in that place as you did in the two veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Approach the patient's clothing and place your hand over their vein for an hour, and then place it on that spot and press firmly to relieve the strong constriction, and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And before that, they had remembered those and the beginning of this book, and its attraction at the beginning of the free.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the venous phlebotomy of the frontal vein is approached by the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein to the ancient maladies of the face and to emigration and rogations and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of that phlebotomy is second to what I recommend to you; so it is that the patient strengthens their neck with a band around which appears the vein; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is this form of it:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the pointed part of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a hammer or another cause in the manner of it, and leave it there so that the blood runs according to the quantity you want; and then approach the perforation of the patient and strengthen that place until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some vegetables are opened with a flat bottomed spoon, but not that the flat bottomed spoon has an acute extremity like the other flat bottomed spoons, in front of the extremity, and the flat bottomed spoon is placed along the transverse, where the bone is prop and very thin to cut through it when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the swelling of the two veins that are at the lacrimal of two eyes because of the scalp of the eye and the inflammation in the eyes, and to the sicknesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the flat bottomed spoon is that the patient holds their head with a bend, and then place the flat bottomed spoon there, and you should stand over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the flat bottomed spoon is made along the transverse a little bit longer than the flat bottomed spoon, where there is no meat; and if the flat bottomed spoon is subtle, very thinly cut through it.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood run out as much as is necessary for you, and place your hand over those places, and hold them firmly with a new cloth, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	When the glands of the nose are swollen and inflamed with acute fever, and with strong vehemence, and with facial maladies such as migraines and redness that occur on the face, and especially when they become chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the gland swelling is that the patient strongly presses their neck and brings their own nose to your left hand, and takes a fine needle long and places it in the middle of the second straight part of the bridge of the nose, where the vein does not appear to the touch here, and where the sinus begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	While you gradually move your hand with the needle along the sinus according to your need; and after that, apply pressure there with a tissue, because it is restored more.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	When the swelling of the glands of the armpits is caused by constriction of the lymphatic vessels and the beginning of leprosy and other maladies and persistent and painful ulcerous sores, as with herpetic inflammation.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the fleam lancet is that the patient should hold each one in their own neck; and the craftsmen are on the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a pillow.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then the fleam lancet is inserted into the long vein little by little; and then extract the blood in the second temperate amount or the second amount that is needed, and do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the bandage and tighten both veins with a middle-sized ligature to prevent the patient from being frightened, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The use of the fleam lancet on the veins is like small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the fleam lancet is that you should hold the patient down, and tighten their neck with a band, and then rotate their lips and look at both veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of those, and that which is more is when there are small black veins around them; and then insert each one from the beginning.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you are still uncertain, then examine the most prominent one of those, and the most obvious one of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the upper lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	If it is customary to cut the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	If it is not customary to cut the two veins that are on the lower lip, then use the cephalic vein at the pre-focacions that are in the throat, near the uvula, and other parts of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of puncturing those veins is that you should feel the patient's pulse between your fingers, and raise their tongue, and look behind the tongue, from one side of the vein to the other, and the color of each is becoming darker.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then puncture each one; and be careful that you do not cut your hand in puncturing those veins, because they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are punctured in the groin are those in which blood flows in all men, and the puncturing of their veins is done in two ways, either by inserting a lanceberry or olive oil at a slight decline; or by cutting the veins with a small knife, and applying pressure to stop the bleeding, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this pressure is what is appropriate for incision and of those that are special, thin, and according to the width of the veins and according to their structure.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of lanceberry puncture:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	If the thickness of it is as follows, and it is appropriate to open convex veins full of blood coming from apparent thick ones, and those that contain large amounts of thick blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil puncture:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this is of smaller thickness and more subtle tip, and it is appropriate for the puncturing of thin veins that contain small amounts of thin blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the incision of the femoral vein, which is one of three veins: four extracts the sand from the patient's body and head, and from that which causes pain in the chest and stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is recommended to the femoral vein incisionist, when making that incision, to be careful in that area, where there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the femoral vein, he will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so that it does not happen that the femoral vein incisionist pierces the artery, before slicing with a blade.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear manifestly, then it is recommended that you leave that and move to another, or that you encircle some other part; or that you make the incision in the place of that, which is manifest, and cut that artery as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May you also want the femoral vein incision in the popliteal, then it is recommended that you know the location of the knee joint before touching the place, and then place your hand on it; and then lift the arm and cut the vein with a concave cut of the fleubotomi as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion does not cause any damage to the space of the artery location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see, as you stretch the membrane, inflation in the place where you should feel touch, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the sinew flowing in the fleam as with the ear of an infant, and the sinew is thin and red, then know that it is from the sinew of the artery; and then cover and press the wound with your hand for a long time; and remove the wound, and if the sinew is removed, then move your arm away from there.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the mouth of the wound, and be overly cautious of it and do not touch that for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the sinew is not removed, and you see that you must not present medicine to it, then incise the artery, if it appears to you; for its end is contracted, and the sinew is removed; or take some scissors and cut that, and take one hand and press that over the place of the vein at stricture descent above the membrane and the powders inside the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bone is amputated, it is healed; and if not, then cure that part with the same method as mentioned in the previous chapter about the removal of bones.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The amputation of the bone is difficult due to the small space in the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the dark vein is punctured, the craniotomy is greatly helpful in removing the bone from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for this reason, it is composed of basilar and cephalic branches, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the puncturist should be aware that there is a nerve above the craniotomy; and if he adjusts the needle in the puncture of the craniotomy and hits the nerve, it will cause pain to the patient, and it is difficult to heal this, and often it is not healed at all. And this nerve appears with sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, then you should be aware that you are puncturing the craniotomy in the same place as the previous section, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and alleviates the symptoms of the humps.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is done in this way, if you want the venipuncture to be performed with an olive needle or a grooved needle; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not touch the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is important to note that the venipuncture should be done in such a way that the needle does not puncture the back of the elbow only, and rather around the least painful area, and not at that spot, but rather at the first percussion point that is above the location of the venipuncture.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is important to note that in some men, if it is not done at the first percussion point, then they may not notice any abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the venipuncture in that area and its consequences, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is from the vein that you know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and hope of it, and that it should be done by phlebotomy in one of the veins that are in the body, such as: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of primevera, after breakfast in primevera and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be done and on the third day or the first after three hours have passed since dawn.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More phlebotomy should be done when it is administered, either by night or by day, at all hours and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is known that phlebotomy should not be done until the age of twelve, and women should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month before the seventh, and the old ones who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should have their veins punctured by a skilled physician, who will hold the needle in place, so that the veins do not spill over and cause excessive bleeding, which is harmful to the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And they should not be phlebotomized if they are suffering from nausea, drunkenness, or malaria, nor if they have recently recovered from any illness, nor if they are suffering from hydropsy. However, phlebotomy is beneficial for abdominal pain and vomiting, and for causes of excessive hunger, work, exercise, or fasting, or any other cause that dissolves the strength, whether it be physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider the thinning of humors in this case if the swelling is large, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then bathe in water if no cause prevents it, or exercise to thin the swelling.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	Pause the lancet in the wrist of the day, which is around the hour of noon, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And prick that wrist of that person so that it is kept in that day for all animal misfortunes, as we have said, including anguish, irritation, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor and excessive pain and sweat and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at their side, make sure to present the causes in the use of the one that usually men like for its aromatic nature and smell and balsam and similar to those according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the lancet on a cushion that is put or that of the one who should be lanced.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the arm, and wipe that with a cloth and tighten the bandage around it and wrap those two or three times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the bandage is too tight, as it is not equal, or the bandage is too loose, then prevent the flow of the blood; or if it is too soft, and then prevent the body from moving.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if it is necessary to approach the stricture, that person who should be a fléubotomist applies pressure on their hands simultaneously between their fingers and toes, so that the veins are inflamed and declared to the sense.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if it is necessary to approach the stricture, the fléubotomist applies a small amount of ancient oil properly on their finger; and places their hand over the index finger of their left hand on that vein, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set aside from the veins that are in the place where the fléubotomy is being done, and from those that are full of venosity, and when the fléubotomi places it over that area, they should contract their finger, and the fléubotomador should descend; and if the fléubotomi does not press on the vein, or if they do, that is a tight spot.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, so that the fléubotomador should be stopped and be careful in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if the fléubotomi pauses, but if the vein is in a vein, then it is good; and if not, you repeat that other way nearby that place a little, or over the inflammation, if the place is not apostemat.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the area is abscessed or the patient becomes feverish, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, as this would cause more infection or not let it drain.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And if necessary, repeat the lancing and drainage if needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and heals gradually, and you are concerned that it will not heal completely, then repeat the lancing in the same direction and place a small dressing on the wound to prevent the area from becoming abscessed, as abscesses often form in such cases.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that it has already abscessed, then do not lance it again, as this would not be helpful; instead, place some oil on the wound to help with healing.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is best in this case to use olive oil and other types of oil.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, apply oil to the lancing wound to help with healing and prevent infection, as this will help to reduce inflammation and swelling when placed on the affected area.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If in the location of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which is caused by clotted blood, and especially to that one who has not been bled but only clotted blood, or in the insertion of the vein few, and then you take, and place over the location sponge infuse with water and salt, a little warm, and strengthen that for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that you do that close to the opening of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is in the location for several days some black or greenish color, do not do that; and if you want, place over that some cause of aloe and of mint dissolved, or some cause of suc de mentha or of camomile or a similar one of that.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And more clotted blood abscesses and swellings due to phlebotomy of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over that, and if then you apply soft compression over that, then that swelling is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you place over that some cause of that which we have said, because it strongly flows from the opening of the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a remedy in that place where there is hemostasis, so that the wound will be endured, and then cure that one with the other cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover that which has come out of the wound to all men according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color of the remaining part of the wound, as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the wound is black, then leave it uncovered until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it swollen, then leave it uncovered until it becomes soft; and similarly, if it is sharp, keep its sharpness until it is healed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And cover that which is flat and strong and has a need for extraction of blood from a vein in a certain way, which should be amplified by phlebotomy of the vein and the phlebotomist should be late.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is thin, do the opposite of that, and cover that which comes out in thin strips, and that the thread should be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best method used in vein tapping is that it should be sectional, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of vein tapping saves from blood flow and from the beginning of nerves, and it is more useful and safer than second latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And when a syncope occurs during vein tapping, you should cure that person with a small amount of infusion in the form of milk or simple oximel; and extract the blood from the vein in three or four stages.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if the complexity of the case is increased, then during vein tapping, take infusion in essence of myrrh or in essence of honey aromatized with such spices as cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in aromatized essence and an additional odorant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if a syncope occurs during vein tapping due to the sudden release of some blood, then you should cure that person with a small amount of water of flesh and an aromatic odorant subtly; and use the aromaticity of alcohol, and let it lie on their chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the chapter on cataract for drainage.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	Whoever wants to perform the operation on their own arm and dissolve their second sinew, they should do it from the elbow downwards, as the fleam is used for forced evacuation, and its virtue is free, which evacuates the sinew little by little, according to the amount of its virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If someone wants to perform the operation on their own arm, and their body is strong, they should do it seven hours or nine in the morning of the first fleamotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	If someone wants to draw out the sinew of their own body in the opposite direction from the part that hangs down, it should be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	If that body in which there is much sinew already sharp and acute and causes severe fever, it should be drawn out of the sinew in one stroke and drawn out a large quantity and amplified the incision before the cataract occurs, so that you have preserved all the conditions of fleamotomy; and that your hand is placed on the sides of the body of the sinew, to prevent it from dying in the place of cataract, because many strokes can cause such a thing when the fleamotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you wish to pull out the arm and evacuate the second stool, as the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to remove the stool, which you press with great force and bend it unnaturally, that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	If they have the layssa inside, then perform second-degree lumbar puncture; or remove that which is coagulated in the orifice of the vein by the sharpness of the lumbar puncture needle; or place something over that de tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and press it against it until the stool comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is abscessed, then do not touch it until the abscess has been settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary for you to evacuate the stool again, and there is no excuse, then you should sign it on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "funis del bras" is punctured in the location of the fusca or basilica, when it is not found or hidden, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the foot bath for him is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the fire cools and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply strong pressure on the affected area with a stricture of the migratory type; and apply foot bath second in a transverse small way, not laterally or according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And the incision should be wide and your foot bath should be applied on the joint of the arm with a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of pus is prohibited, then move your arm in hot water and let the pus run into the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from moving your arm in hot water, and the same applies to placing the body of the pus in hot water in winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the foot bath of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it has not been pulsated or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The surgical procedure of the hoof of the patient's foot is similar to the afflictions of the leg.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the surgical procedure is that you strengthen the patient's leg or your own, so that it is not bent at the ankle, while the vein is inflamed and demonstrated at once; and then perform a transverse incision; and if you do not see anything in return.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember that you do not remove your hand from the surgical procedure, as you leave it to expose the nerves of those exposed parts of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the procedure in the ankle, as if you do not repeat it in the ankle, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as the blood is extracted according to the amount of necessity, then you place salt and oil over the vein, so that it does not consolidate completely; similarly, cover what you do in all straight parts.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The pain in the joint of the left arm is similar to that of the right arm.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same in the joint of the other arm as you did on the other side.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The pain in the vein of the elbow joint is similar to that of the abdomen, and also to menstrual retention, and to the pains of hernias and ulcers of thighs and chest, and their similarities to other diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the elbow joint is that the patient inserts their finger into the water and makes friction on the area where the veins appear; and he applies a bandage over the junction of the hand; and the location of the vein is taken from the palm of the hand, and from there its branches extend on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then make the largest branch or behind the hernia from the location of the vein, which is better and more salutary.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you are going to make an incision on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to cut the nerves that are located on the surface of the foot, and place your fleam over the area where you want to make the incision, as if you wanted to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the fleam be yours.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	However, if the discharge of pus is prohibited, then you should wash the patient's foot in warm water and let the pus run out through the incision that has been made.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the fleam erroneously enters the first vein, then place the fleam on a cloth that has been placed on the wound, and do not be afraid of the malpractice, as long as you guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same on the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is behind the tailbone of the sacrum.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the pain of the incision in that place is due to the ankle when it is affected by pus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the foot bath for him is that the patient enters in the water, and quickly and strongly massages the sole of his foot from the side of the wide entrance under the ankle above four such a long, subtle band, which does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you should massage that second part of his foot in each way that is possible and in a transverse manner, which is better; or insert it at the beginning or remove it by sectioning, because the area of his foot is salted.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the form of men, not too narrow; and if you press that, and it does not appear to the touch of all, then massage some part of his foot, and that which appears on the back of the foot, the one that is called the auricular and the annual.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then remove the constraint and place your hand over the area of the foot bath, pressing strongly on the location, because it is usually healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of the symptoms and how to use those remedies.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Symptoms are of the head, or of the eyes, or of the veins.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Symptoms are made in two ways: one is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is by scarification alone.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this symptom that is by scarification alone, is in two ways, either by fire or by heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the symptoms that are administered by scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, one of which is where the pain is located in the nape of the neck, and the last part is the back of the head; and the middle part is two-thirds of the collarbone; and symptoms of the chin below the jaw, below the mouth; and symptoms of two spoons; and symptoms of a lancet, and it is on the top of the coccyx; and symptoms of two tongs, and they are on two ribs; and symptoms of two combs; and symptoms of two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And do not remove the sanction from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, no virtue is achieved for those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor should one expect that ventozacio should be made with fire or hot irons in any malady to cause inflammation within the body before the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if it is necessary to cause ventozacio due to illness or continuously, administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	These are the causes of men in which the sanction is multiplied before extraction by ventozacio and atroba in their own head gravely and sorely; and of those who atroba inflammation and redness in their face and in their own head, and in their own neck; and of those who atroba pruritus in their face and in their own forehead, darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those whose location of their ventozacio is changed; and of those whose ris is multiplied; and of those who have a taste of sanction in their mouth, or that their tongue is swollen and filled with sanction; and of those whose sleep is multiplied, and of those who suffer from sanction in their sleep, nightmares, plagues, and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	When in certain cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then command a warm foot bath to be made because they have passed two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is recommended to apply the warm foot bath because when that occurs, it confers gravity to the head and causes it to be poured into the veins; however, it is better that this be close to the evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this warm bath is at the location of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good to use that which is of simple complexity, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, it is not good to use those which are old, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	However, it is good that the one who continues on that is made forgetful; and for that reason, it is recommended that you command the bath attendant to place their hand a little under the warm water at the parts behind, lest there be the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	When the ventilation of alcohol is in the place of fleubotomy of the femoral vein and the basilica: and for that reason it causes asthma, and constriction of the lungs, and the opening of the sternum, and coughing, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the ventilation of alcohol is placed on a small wound, and if it is left there, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation of alhagdahan causes accidental pain in the head and abdomen, and emaciation, and prefocal vision, and pain in the teeth; and it is in the place of fleubotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the ventilator not to press his hand during incision so that he does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation of the mouth causes alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleubotomy of the heretic that is in the lower lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	When the ventilation that is made with two spoons is compared to a cap, it is done for the purpose of warming up.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two parts taken from the forks is greatly useful in the exploration of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalic, which are all those veins that are closest to the skin, and those small veins that branch out from the larger veins until they reach the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the incisor not to proceed too much in incision, because the area is exposed to flesh, and then its nerves and arteries are left.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And there is a ventilation that is blown on the buttocks and compared to the emerods of the buttocks and those ulcers that are left.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And make sure that the incisor is a large one, and of iron, because the area requires strong section; and it is necessary to have subtle ventilations and be sharp in incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	When the patient's bed is raised too high, it pulls the body's weight, causing pain in the lower back, hips, and bladder; it provokes menstrual pain, and causes bloating and constipation; it is similar to lumbar puncture, hydrocephalus, and enemas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it weakens the entire body and causes syncope in some men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the raised bed, the patient's weight is propelled against the raised bed of other chambers.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the raised bed position is that it pauses the raised bed at the beginning and gradually lowers it, not prolonging the raised bed position, but rather pausing it occasionally and maintaining it constantly, so that the humors come to the location evenly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease repeating that and continue until you see the location already reddened and inflamed, and when the pain of the back appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should slowly shave and repeat the lowering, and then consider the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that man who has flesh of raw meat due to his illness, cover the wound with a bandage and do not remove it, so that the wound does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fan to blow on the incision and produce a breeze, and simultaneously suck the wound to facilitate healing.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the swelling in the wound is large, then cover it with two bandages, because in the first bandage there is an opening for drainage of the wound and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second, for the inspection acquired during the extraction of the swelling.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is very dirty, then make a thorough incision in the clean bandage so that it can be cleaned.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the swelling little by little or in small pieces, use an incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large swelling, make a large incision; and if we know that the swelling is large, then cover it with an incision made for extraction.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the depth of the incision in which is the profoundness of the bone only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the bone is thick, hard, dark, and its porous, then it is recommended that the incision locations of the windows be more gentle, wider, and more resolved; if it is in summer, use oil of aloe or oil of violin, or oil of lavender or coconut; and if it is in winter, then use oil of narcissus or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or of sandalwood, and similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is thick and frothy, then use oil of ambergris or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the ventozador is of wide pores due to thin flesh, then it is recommended that oil be prohibited from these locations of the windows, and that instead they use water of salt or fresh water of solatrum, or water of coconut, or water of bordelaise, and similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the person's skin is of moist humidity, wash their armpits with warm water or water mixed with vinegar, myrtle, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the person has thick excessive sweat, wash their armpits with warm water or water mixed with sage, mint, aniseed, or camomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And keep in mind that the armpit should be guarded from bathing; having been kept away from bathing for a while, it should be administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and it should be kept close to the armpit.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is the reason why the armpit should be guarded before phlebotomy?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider this at the beginning: if the person who is to be phlebotomized or the one who is to perform the phlebotomy is angry and sweats over their skin, which is sharp and inflamed, then consider causing cooling causes, such as cold acetic acid, warm water with vinegar, layturgas, secanabin, and julep, and similar substances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Pause their heads with pillows, and meat of chickens cooked with herbs, and cooked vegetables, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	Of that which has a complexion that is sour, take a little vinegar or verjuice of olives, and sumac, and some other fragrant spice between old and new; and it is recommended that it be used with little vinegar and food, and place the dishes of it on pillows and cans and plates and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And the vinegar should be more than the food on days of fasting and Eucharist.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given in vinegar to some people with Tiresias' disease, or medicaments of musk, which is musked, or alcelita for fasting or Eucharist or near, so that the main members are strengthened and that the sickness is subtilized; and it should not be taken by those who are weak.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	When the incisions are made on the parts of the body where they are placed, such as the legs, the melon and gout, the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the armpit, which these members do not suffer incision upon.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not used for those who have a member that is drawn back, such as a bandage on the breast in case of bleeding from the wound of the navel; and we use that which dissolves the viscous fluid around the member, such as a bandage on the abdomen and umbilicus; for that one thickens the member and causes pain when it resolves the viscous fluid.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed on the ribs when they are dislocated or broken, because by the virtue of bandaging it greatly helps to heal the dislocation and eradicate the broken bone from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed on the leg and thigh, it helps to dissolve the viscous fluid in those places.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these remedies are administered views with success only; and some remedies are administered by fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some remedies are administered full of clear water in the diseases of the mouth.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the water is full and large, because it is pure water or water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable for it.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of remedy administered by fire: the width of the orifice of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the remedy is the greatest of a palm; and it is on the side of the wound, in the place that is in the circuit, the greatest of the wound, the trauma should be small according to the quantity that enters into it an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of wool or cotton, with thick edges, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not harm the member in its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be at the side of the wound, a transverse bandage of wool or iron, on which is placed the candle in the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And now let us examine this great wind that we have recommended, and the lesser one that is suitable for the second stage of the disease and the condition of the patient who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The winds of children and the exhausting ones are different from the winds of young people and fat people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of placing this wind on the member is that it extends the muscle with the heat of a decent-sized piece of wood and a small candle of wax, and place it on the middle of the transverse vertebra in the middle of the wind opening, so that the fire is lit around the part where it is not burned, so as not to burn the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place it on the member of the patient and say the incantation that we have said, until you feel that when you have the winds and do not indicate that you should open it and that the steam should be over that opening, then the wind will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then apply it according to your method, and repeat it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In cases where a damp cloth is administered for the patient's pleasure, it should not have any horizontal or vertical lines, and it should not be administered unless it is filled with water and placed only on the affected limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is how it should be done: The larger the cloth, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodstained bandages should not be applied to any limbs, but only to those in which it is impossible to place wet cloths, such as the gums and similar parts; or on a bare limb, such as the nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that have been found to be bloodstained bandages is that they should be placed in clean water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be laid aside during the day and night in clean water, so that no cause of foulness is found in those bandages; and the body should be drained at the beginning with the use of leeches and wet cloths; and the limb of the patient should be washed before it becomes red; and they should be placed on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When they are full and in labor.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to remove the object from the wound with wind, it is better to do so gently.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash the wound with warm water and vinegar, and apply pressure and extract it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the patient's condition is prolonged and they are bleeding profusely, then place a cloth soaked in cold water under their back, and hold it in place to stop the bleeding.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the wound is multiplied, then powder vitriol or similar substances that are stanching agents over it until the wound has closed; or place the most ripe beans on the wound, and hold them in place until the beans adhere to the wound, and the wound has closed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the extraction of blood until it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the wounds are not allowed to be suspended, then apply pressure to the wound with recent blood or place a needle in the wound until it stops bleeding; and hold them in place, so that the wounds do not start bleeding again soon.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want them to spit, sprinkle a little tri-leaved aloe, salt, or ash on those places, and they will soon spit it out.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And now begins the second part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental displacement of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, know that many foolish doctors and common people and those who sometimes do not read the books of the Ancients or understand one letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this method of the sciences in our land is kept secret; and I have not done so out of any obligation, but because of the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct yourself to experiment and study in the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described everything that concerns the greatest science and on which I have passed my best experiment; because I also want to open it to you others and deliver it from this occupation of length; and I also want to explain it in the end of explanation; and I want to show it in the end of declaration; and I want to form it in those forms of tools that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter First.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the causes of bone fractures, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin the remembrance of the different types of fractured limbs and their various forms.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Let us then say what is said in the preface of this chapter, and the chapters to which they refer, so that the craftsmen and those who know or learn this noble art from others may understand them.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when something happens to someone with a fracture or dislocation or torsion or injury, it is necessary to begin with the examination of the pulse or the removal of the cause, if no cause is prohibited, as if it has weakened the strength, or it is the one who has been affected, or is elderly and in decrepitude, or it is a time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with eating fresh herbs and the flesh of young birds and crabs; and prohibit large meats and filling up with foods and all food that fills the veins with pus, until you are sure of an abscess, and if you do not fear the escape of matter to the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first usual state.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And as the bone begins to be restored, it is customary for the patient to be fed nutritious foods that are heavy and difficult to digest, such as their food made from wheat flour, water, rice, peas, cow stomachs, and fresh meat, and similar heavy and large foods, and this diet is made by coagulation of fracture more commonly and milk.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that bones do not heal when they are in men who are in the first youth and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and consolidate according to their nature due to the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are healed and continued according to their nature at all times due to the drying of those members, and they continue and consolidate those that are from them at the end of the leniency, such as the bones of the small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	May it be noted however that nature adjusts and anoints over the broken bone of any part, some cause similar to glue in which it grows and strengthens that which is inside that it congeals and sticks together, through which venomous and firm matter comes out, like fire at the beginning, through which no cause prevents its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this cause it is necessary to place the bandages on the patient's legs, bandages in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Great variety of fracture according to the variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the species of fracture are different according to the variety of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and likewise all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have remembered all the species of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great variety of fracture in such a small space.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are various types of bone fractures in their spaces; some are curved fractures, others are star-shaped fractures, and some are longitudinal fractures. Some fractures occur in the skull, ribs, and other bones, as well as those that do not occur, such as those in the pen when it is prepared to write, and small fissure fractures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	For each type of fracture, there is a specific pain in its restoration after it has been remembered in its different locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Great length of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	For that, the bone fracture is known by its tortuosity, and the elevation and appreciation of the pain at the touch, and also when it is felt in your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, if there is no tortuosity in the location and it is not caused by touching the bone with movement and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is tortuosity or a small fissure, in which case you should gently press it with your hand and apply compression to the entire area; place something over it from the medicines of which you remember at that moment, which is appropriate for the location; and keep it straight through a subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	You should know that the location when it is curved and does not split into two or another, as it remains completely separate from its surroundings, then you should start from your hour to correct the hand that occurs at that location, which is apostema caut.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if there is an apostema caut at that location, then leave it for several days until the apostema ceases; and then apply whatever method you can of elevation and compression.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You should know that the restoration of it and its sharpness is more important than the bone in which the injury occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then apply whatever method comes to your memory for it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the injury occurs in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this member broken into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or if the member is small, then apply your hand; or two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And position your hand in the same way as you would place it when holding a member, while the parts of the body are stretched out, then pierce those additions that extend from the member and return them to their places one by one as you can.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful not to cause any harm to the patient during your operation or its injury; and pierce according to your power, applying one bone against the other as they are companions in the best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And cover that in that hour you touch your hand at that time, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as it is customary for foolish doctors to perform operations that cause abscesses or contractions in the member, as we have seen in their foolish operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, equilibrium and proper operation and structure of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about that and make him understand that he should not move it during his waking hours and sleep, and observe its rotation and agitation, and deal with its excretion, and deal with all its movements in total virtue; and wait until the position of the member is a position in which pain is secure, which causes the reason why when in the disposition of the position of the member or injury; then cover that to another disposition of that in which he does not feel pain; and guard that that position of his is straight and equal, so that the member will not suffer tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the fracture in the limb depends on which one I recommend, because you know that broken limbs vary in their location, size, and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, like the arm and the finger and similar to those, it is customary to use a very fine cloth wrapping.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large, like the buttock or the chest, it is customary to use a thick and durable wrapping, because the softness of the cloth connects the limb strongly and strenuously to all parts of the fracture, so that no macula enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, after the proper evacuation of the equilibrium, place a suitable bandage over that fracture at three or four times the thickness of the limb, and strongly press your hand against the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then, approach that to the most prominent part of the location of the fracture, and strongly press your hand against the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then approach the wound with a bandage, gradually softening the structure little by little until you reach a large part of the wound.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other wound, covering the previous bandage, and approach your operation to the structure of the bandage and the softening of the second one that we mentioned in the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place your hand between the bandages of a lion or cloth that is equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not place your hand on it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand on the other bandage, and gently cover it with these pointed bandages as soon as possible if there is no inflammation or abscess in the wound; and later place your hand on that which secretes the abscess and that which has the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then strengthen it with those bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the cannula of the catheter is made of lead, and well formed; or of wood; or of palm fronds; and its width should be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the star that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and shorter than the others, and its length should be according to the length of the member in magnitude and proportion; and strengthen the other end with another band according to your first structure; and lower the field decently according to what we have said about structure, and it is that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and as it is longer from the fracture, the structure is less.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is advised that the threads should be thick and subtle, and they should be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of closing wounds with thick cords of silk, and it is a great error when the structure is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	It is not advisable to use very thin needles, because you will not be able to insert them strictly into the parts that you want, and it is not desirable that there should be any space between them.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is leaning on the ends of the stirrups near the stricture in those places, then place a leather or woolen cloth under them to prevent harm from that.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some broken bones are caused by blows, and accidental disruptions in the spine, and you will find memory in that second singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that not all broken bones are straightened on the first day; this is because the limb, when it is large, does not allow that they be placed on the stirrups for more than five or seven days, according to your security of the risk of abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of plaster bandages that the ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	A manicure brush suitable for the restoration of fractures, convenient for various complexions and mainly for women and children, where it is placed over which there is no heat or moisture: and you should take powder from milled grain, and this is the medulla of the flour that prevents the movement of the molar in the teeth of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if it is like that, do not cripple that person who has it, but crumble that album of dough, and place the condition of the non-sugary and subtle; and use it from there.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another brush for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, of lavender, of acacia, of enula, and myrrh, which is made from one part of honey, and all the other parts of aloe. x; of marjoram and aloe. v; alochil. xx; all its three times and crumbled and mixed with water or with dough if the complexion of the patient is scaly; and use this brush, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones more easily, and confers a better appearance to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plastering that is helpful for fractures and torsions: Take marjoram, white manna, dragon's blood, and Armenian bole. Mix them in the following proportions: 10 parts of marjoram, 5 parts of white manna, 6 parts of dragon's blood, and 20 parts of Armenian bole.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with contrition, and their crumbs, and their powders with water or egg white, and administer it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering for joints and separated bones from these places, and for accidental pain in those and in fissures and fractures: Take a piece of linen cloth and immerse it in a mixture of equal parts of vinegar and oil, and place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, but rather to prevent abscesses and to expel pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores the broken: Take fig leaves and wild poppy flowers, grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	The application of a plaster remedy is administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want to resolve the present abscess: take equal parts of aloe, camomile, violet flowers, flour of eggs, all mixed together and applied as a poultice, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then use a wet colchicum or wet water and apply it to the member.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger plaster remedy for the resolution of this first one, when a long-standing abscess occurs for the restoration of the member: take equal parts of aloe, seeds of lime, balm, borage, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all mixed together and applied as a poultice, with wet salt water or warm water or milk, according to the quality of the member and to relieve its redness.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	If you do not have Ypocras (a type of wine), do not place it on the member's wound, but make a cerot (a type of plaster) with beeswax and oil, and no other cause; and recommend that it be changed between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	In Guyana, it is said that they are placed on the limb that is broken for the restoration of it and its causes, in which exsiccation is small of heat so it has with mirror, like and similar to their from those causes that we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A plaster that alleviates the injury and pain: recipe migat, of cezes, of skins of a man without hair or pennyroyal, and altea, and salt, divided equally; triturate and sift it, and make plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If the amount is according to the kind of wound that has occurred and it is not dislocated, and if it does not cause pain or swelling and the bone is not broken, then you should not apply it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain, swelling or inflammation occurs at the location, then you should apply or remove it in that hour, and place the plaster on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take cloth and sea sponge lion wet, and submerge it in cold water, and let it soak in that water until the swelling stops and the pain is settled; and leave it to rest the limb for an hour; and place a warm cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil over it for one hour until you are sure of the abscess being caut, and that the inflammation of the limb is reduced, and that the pain of it is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gently apply that thin structure and use a small, not too strong, plaster for your first construction, and gradually heal that area.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the pus and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and if it is necessary to apply plaster and structure, then gradually do the same as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm has happened to the member from those that we have said, then do not remove it, but wait three days or four or five or six; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days after you have appeared through the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it settles to the coagulation of the flesh on that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the structure more than in your first structure, and adjust in the increase of the food of the patient, after it is preceded by the remembrance of him.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more extensive than it should be, then you know that the nourishment cannot reach that place; therefore, apply a thin layer of cold water to the entire affected area every day for three days; and gradually loosen the bandage, so that the nourishment can reach the member and it is healed properly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If that which is done by the foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb is another way when it is not restored to its original state, according to its swelling, and if it is restored according to its tortuosity, that is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if that were done correctly, it would enlarge the ancient fractures in their freedom and aggravate the injury.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are different, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a space, and the impact goes through the entire bone, which is then joined to the bone, as it does in the staff, and for that reason this type is called "ascial"; or the space penetrates a part of the bone, and penetrates the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the back of it; and this type of fracture is called "levatio absolute.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The severity of these fractures is great or small, and the type of fracture is whether it is contracted or displaced; the cause of this is a blow from a pole or a fall on stone, and similar circumstances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is penetrating and approaches the periosteum, which is located behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	If the fracture is inside the bone, in the thinness of the hair-like structure, and for this reason, this special type of fracture is called a hairline fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This fracture is caused by a fall or blow from a stone, and similar circumstances, which causes some of the bone's plates to split apart, and it is made in the concave location where the ribs are when they are struck and split apart into the parts inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This happens more often in the bodies of humans, such as their skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these special fractures are treated as if they were separated by sharp instruments.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I would like to see the removal of all that in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And all these special fractures are detected over those and by investigation of their attempts and the rotten flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special capillary is known by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is wiped away, and applied to the attempt, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the initial symptoms of the patient, and if you see through the symptoms that indicate clearly by manifest signs such as vomiting from colera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the throat, fever, and sweating of those, and similarities to their symptoms in the major dispositions, these are not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of this is that if it comes to your back and you feel pain there, especially in the days of winter, then you should study the remedy of the bone that gives birth to the day of the fourth, entirely according to its disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study the remedy of the bone that gives birth to the day of the seventh, having understood that what is left after the bone is corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents occur due to these reasons.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and black, then you should study the remedy of the cut and black part, according to what I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you raise the head of the patient and discover over the bone according to custom and your possible method, according to the figure of the pain, and that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you accidentally detect the bone, pus or abscess cautiously, then you should stop at the patient's place and apply that which is appropriate, and fill the space of cloths infused in vinegar and oiled rose, and make a pause in the pain until the abscess is sedated, and be sure not to let out the pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two surgical methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the other; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the wider incisor than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have different incisors of various widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and sharp at the ends of their extremities, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them to facilitate the impact on the incisor so that it does not hit the skull and cause damage.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then pierce it in its circumference, giving that you administer the incisor with the shallow-grooved grooves, which are called shallow grooves.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called anything else but those that do not penetrate the end of the bone at which it is approached, so that the groove has a rounded extremity or margin on that which is left of the sharp edge, similar to a margin or small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a large number of these needles that suit the size of each bone, until it is present in all tests of the brain, with the sharp end facing outwards, the quantity in length and breadth being according to the quantity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three kinds of needles: The quality of piercing through the circumference of the bone broken is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it against its thighs until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then permit the needle to another location, and place that which is between all the thickness of the ray or around that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the thinnest possible forceps that you can over that in the direction of levity, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for stilling the forces that have appeared at that, as well as fine tweezers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to guard against any cause of the cyphac with the forceps.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have circled the bone perforation, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and that extracted, cover it with a material that is similar to the roughness of that which is on the bone, but rather more thin and more delicate than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any small fragment of the bones, then take that which you should use from your instruments; and approach it to cure the wound with linen and find those that we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is longer, and very frightening; and this is the word about it: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you discover the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and light scalpel, the form of which is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the lenticular fragment is sharp and does not cause any injury, and the sharp fragment is in two directions in front of it in length, as often; because the lenticular fragment should be adjusted to the bone at the face of the sharp fragment incised into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then use a sharp instrument to make an incision on one side of the bone, and insert a small saw between them where you can easily rotate the bone as if it were unfolded, and be sure that the periosteum does not get injured in this operation, and if the doctor was the most skilled of all men and the most ignorant of their patients; certainly,
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if there is any cause of attachment to the periosteum in other places of the bone, make an incision at the end of the saw that is lenticular, and remove it with ease, which is removed from its harm and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and that which is cut or stuck to the bone is the surface of it, and it is rough and has subtle sharp points, then carefully remove that roughness and eliminate those subtle points with a fine razor that you have prepared for this purpose, in different quantities so that you can administer them in the most convenient places of theirs and the right one of which you used to find your operation when you broke that bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when you administer the medicine in your reason, which you use to thin the bones at the beginning of those razors, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, and do not stop doing this until you reach administering the thinner and most subtle part of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small fractures and subtle fracture, you should administer treatment according to what you have lost for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is not caused by all those that have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pancreas is removed when you remove the bones, then you should take a cloth of the second quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rosy oil, and place it over the orifices of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in warm rosy oil and place it over the first cloth, and do this as lightly as possible without causing pain to the patient; and then administer a thin layer of it, and do not press it except for the quantity that the wound has, only enough to cover it.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that patient to this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess being healed; then remove it and administer medicines that increase moisture, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of ensis and aristolochia, and similar ones to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And if you make these medicines into powder that is ground over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property of which is to remove and not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself from the second that the wound in your cure is not infected; and it is not in the darkness of putridity or other; nor do you allow to add virulence to it; for when it is adjusted on the dura mater of the brain, corrupts that and poisons that, and accidents occur on the patient with that evil malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And accidents occur in the skull, as from there the bone is formed and more when it is pressed on its cure, and it is blackened on its surface; and therefore consider now if accidents occur to the patient with those that we have said, know that it is a dangerous sign.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If no black medicine is applied above the remedy that is placed on top, and it is due to the power of that medicine that causes the black medicine, then you should take a piece of honey and four pieces of olive oil, and cover those lines with a cloth, and place that over the affected area; and cure that with the appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken into two parts equally, but rather one of those parts is slightly wider, as there are two bones in it, and the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it does not break, only bends and becomes twisted and swollen.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	However, if one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce the small bone back into its place in the nose, and match that fracture with the other small bone, and with the other pieces, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if it is necessary for you to do this for your own convenience, and remember that you should not cause any harm to the patient during the operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not recover, then cover it with a small bandage.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And cover it with a bandage for the restoration of the patient on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, then apply the seventh or tenth day to relieve the abscess.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two small pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, and it should be enough to fill the passage of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say to the ancient restorers that the pieces should be wrapped in bread, and moved around in the day, but I do not know if this is true; having covered the cloth with powdered myrrh; and then leave it until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some splints should be inserted into the nose, in place of a gag, or else covered with a cloth from lion's mane; and that the fracture of the nose is more violent and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to do it, do so, and if you want to make gags.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another splint accidentally causes an abscess in the nose, apply a plaster of ceruse or a poultice of bread soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If not, then cover that deformed part with a plaster of slippery elm powder and album of egg; and place your hand on the lion's mane, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken or crushed at a small fracture, then cover them with a plaster of appropriate instruments; and place this opening, and heal it with that which contains and consolidates, and with appropriate plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is a wound on the nose, then cover it with a bandage and administer a plaster of pumice stone through it to heal it completely.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken but the fracture does not bleed, look at whether the fracture is only deformed and not completely broken into two and curved to the parts inside, then it is unstable.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, introduce your index finger into the patient's mouth on the right side; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce your index finger into the left side of the mouth; and press it against the deformed part of the fracture to facilitate the movement of the deformed parts of the bone; and the other hand on the deformed part of the bone; and then gradually equalize them.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two, then cover it with a traction of two parts in a straight line as much as possible to equalize it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a dislocation of teeth to the point of disruption, then strengthen those that you hope will remain with gold or silver or cloth; and place a piece of wax on the broken jaw, and place a doubled cloth over it, and place a large flat stone decently on it, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and lift it up according to what you have prepared for its application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and place a lemon slice on their tongue.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should remove and discard it; and then correct what has been altered from it and apply it with powder of mulberry, album of honey, or flour of cinnamon, before you have removed the wax from it, and place a lion's wool over it.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then with this annex and adjust that plaster on it, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; because this fracture is usually cured in three months.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the medicine we mentioned for other complications in the treatment of that person, and that abscess will remain there.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is in the bone that has separated or is stuck, then carefully remove those stuck bones with the tool that is suitable for removing them from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the holes of the wound are narrow, then enlarge them with the forceps according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then, when you have removed those stuck bones and they do not remain there, enlarge the holes of the wound if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the suitable dressings on that area and cover it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the scapula when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Medicines are crushed the scapula from the part where it is broken, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When the bone is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than the usual ones; and it is more difficult for its restoration; or if there are any complications in the fracture, and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is in a complicated area.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is in a complicated area, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the broken furcula (wishbone) and the other extends the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with the ribs as it would be in its second shape, and not in an elevated or concave position.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then cover the patient's chest with cloth or wool, and make the size of it according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the furcula and cover the chest with your hand while aligning the fracture as it would be in its second shape.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the tip of the furcula to the parts forward, in order to reach the front, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a cushion over their neck, and another over their muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant elevates the muscle of the patient to the parts behind it, before the bone of the furcula is raised to its position in front, and then you correct the fracture and level it with those mentioned above.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel any movement of the furcula and its maugrades, then do so on that and remove those satagias for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, then use one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, as you have placed behind the furcula the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is a hammer or an iron of which this is the form of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a hammer of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the softness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the wound should be second to your ability in the operation; there should be two extremities with sometimes, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the bone tag is wide, and it is safe from pus, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear pus, then you fill the wound with gauze and powder according to the amount of the cut of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus occurs, then pour in gauze with warm oil and rose water, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the structure of the bone when it is wounded and cut, be that you place a poultice made of flour of wheat mixed with egg on it, and place it over that, and then place the sponge behind the tumor of the patient, if necessary for that, and then take humid water, which is tortured by the Saracens, that should be long enough, and its width should be one palm or around that; and then place powder doubled over the poultice and the paste; and then place a thin tablecloth of the same length as the width of the patient's body; and then wrap that in gauze, and then place that gauze on the tablecloth in the location of the fracture; and then place humid water there like it is being drained, and roll that over the back of the patient and behind the tumor of the patient, and reduce that over all parts, and when the structure of the fracture is descended, and that is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And even if the bone above the broken bone is not dislocated; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the ligament is softened or you see that the bone has become reunited, then you should straighten it again and strengthen the joint.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on the shoulder of the other, and place a small cushion under their head to support it; so that the assistant can raise the injured person's arm from the side of the other, and thus elevate the fracture of the clavicle to the elevation of the muscle; or place their arm on the shoulder of the other.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the ligament unless there is an abscess or swelling in the place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And if you have seen the wound on that part, renew the plaster and adjust it to the fracture, and leave it until it has been restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and supported according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some exercises are made in men of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a broken shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A splint is broken in the wrong place, not broken at the fracture but on its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place of the fracture is broken — and it is broken in the wrong place — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the splint and reduce it to its natural shape in any way possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place powdered chalk and stopper on the fracture; and then place pulverized cloth duplicat; and then place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the splint or more than one.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the layer is concave at any of the places of the splint, then level that concavity with stopper and make the layer even.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply strength above the layer with a long bandage and make it firmly fixed within it until it does not remain in its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament in each day; and whenever it is softened, apply another bandage and strengthen and equalize the leg if it remains in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Place the patient on their left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The splint is restored in 10 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and know that it is from the bones of which the beginning was not feared or their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the heel bone and place underneath the bandage, then you cut through it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of abscess cautious if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest is broken in some places and that ends here, but the extremities of it are not connected and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the bone is broken, it bends towards the fragments and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting, and severe swelling; and it is declared inside the cavity of the broken bone and does not remain hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the bone is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion between their shoulder blades; and then press on the muscles of the bone, adjust the ribs of the bone to two straight positions, and gradually perform the operation of the bone until it returns to its original shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a poultice and bandage over the broken bone, using a soft cloth or a calf's skin and similar materials; and gradually apply this to the bone so that it is not sore; and then apply some lotions to the back, and strengthen the fracture appropriately; and consider the wound in every hour, and when it becomes soft, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If necessary, cause the disintegration of that part of the wound or ulcer, pain, abscess that has occurred in that place, then you should remove and clean that area and eradicate the ointment and correct what has happened by applying a suitable remedy; and then return the ointment, if it is necessary to apply it again, and adjust the bandage until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	About the restoration of the ribs when they are crushed.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large places where they meet; and at their ends, which are near the spine, they do not occur with contractions but because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And that knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling of those who have investigated it and called it by its name.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it equals the fracture as described by the method possible, so that it is healed according to what is suitable, and then apply ointment and strengthen the broken bone in that place, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is declining towards the internal parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, similar to the puncture that occurs in one who has cried out, and because of this, the bones are covered with a bandage; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The ancients also used this method with large needles.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	They said that the cushion placed under the patient's belly causes inflammation and heat, so that the abdomen is swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	However, we do not use this method anymore because it is not the cause of the generation of an abscess, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, then we help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said that the cushion should be placed above the wound and pressed with force; and this seems to be a reasonable argument, but it is feared that the wound will attract excess fluids to the area due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said to him: cover that place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place powders between his ribs until it is filled, so that the length is equal to when you rolled the second time; and then heal the patient with the cure of pleurisy from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient suffers from severe constraint that he has not experienced before, and the bones puncture the linen slowly, then place it over the patient, cover the torn area, discover the broken rib, and place your hand on the instrument that keeps the cipher, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bones to facilitate its removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the loose lips of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, and heal it with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess bursts, then you should cover it and place powders in hot oil and place it over the wound, and heal the patient with that which covers the abscess burst.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him be laid on his left side while he is recovering.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of a fracture of the sacrum and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck and back, and they are attached to the spine, and similarly to the sacrum of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such an accident happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, consider this: if the bones are already softened and numb and dead and cannot move or strengthen those and when you press them with your fingers or with a needle they do not feel pain in those places, then you will know that they are not healed, and in such cases it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain in those places when you press them with your fingers or with a needle, then you will know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similarities in the sacrum of the neck and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider its feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that it has already become soft, if those things that happen to the muscles occur, and when you lie on its back, it becomes swollen and unable to urinate, and some people are rolled over on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is dead, and therefore do not attempt to cure it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If none of those things happen, the cause is better and more likely.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The cure of it is that you pierce the abscess with a needle or a sharp instrument, or with some medicine that is placed on the spondyloid bone greased with rose oil; place some bandages on it until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters on it, and apply some strength to that area; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the tissue of the bone is separated or some other cause that has already been separated from it occurs, then cover it with a bandage and splint that bone; and then adjust the edges of the wound, if it is large; and then cure it with some ointment, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the lower back of the spine is fractured, and it is at the end of the coccyx, then insert your left hand into their anus, and equalize the fractured bones as much as possible; and place a bandage and splint on it if necessary, and strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel that the fractures are not healing, then treat it with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are often fractured, and if they are, the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and they are inserted in length and decline to the parts intended; and the patient feels pain in that location and puncture, and the cushion is stupefied when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should equalize the second one that you have prepared for equality, entering between them as much as necessary to be similar to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is long or already declining to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach until they are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized it, place your hand on the plaster, and place another hand on that star of wood or of cod, and strengthen for structure on the one you do not fear puncture of fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the concavity with that which you placed on it so that the structure of the one you are holding is equal, and command the patient to lie on their stomach or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place another on that one which is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that which has a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If the bones in the spine are broken or fractured, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Adjutator.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori is that which is between the ribs and the back of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, the first of which is that you grasp it by its rough surface according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if it is attached to two ends of a bone, then suspended from the location and elevated.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a bed; and then draw out the broken arm through the opening in the middle of which is the curve of the bone.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over something heavy, or the nurse extend it to the parts behind; and then the doctor should place it in such a way that the fracture returns as it was before.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other servant is to place the patient on their side and support their neck with a cloth; then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the wound behind the patient; and each of them extends their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then press on the fracture with the cloth and on the other cloth, and each of the two ministers extends their part.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then place half of the cloth on the side and the other behind the fracture, holding it in place.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the body, then place the cloth on that spot and on the body.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize it with that and its work, and when it is equalized according to what is covered and applied properly, then press on it if there is no pus.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If a boil occurs, leave the stricture inside for seven days, and place a wool bandage on it in order to keep it warm and moist until the boil heals, and then remove it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The way to remove it is to place a poultice on the fracture, and then cover it with a piece of cloth; then adjust the arm on that supporter, and place your hand on their shoulder muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then cover the cloth and remove the arm from that supporter to prevent it from becoming stiff, unless there is some cause for the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place that splint on the fracture that is closer and stronger than the others; and between each splint, place the width of the broken part, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture plus three digits of each part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then adjust the splint on the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is necessary for your structure to be placed more straightly on the location of the fracture.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And if the fracture is more curved, then the structure should be smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you see the position of the pins and the structure as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its usual position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then leave the structure and the pins inside for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not occur in the location or inflammation; or it is prohibited for food to arrive at the member due to the disposition of superfluous structure; and therefore, correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that no cause of this will occur, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And place the patient's head on their own back, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Pause over the assistant's full body, evenly covered with wool, and consider in every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not melted or dissolved, or that the ligament has softened, then correct that entirely by your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Pause the food of the patient according to the order we have given before, unless the food is delicate at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; and then cover that with a cloth.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	According to the custom of the assistant and the servant of the patient, it is usually strengthened in fourteen days; and then cover that with a cloth, wash it, and administer medicine with the remedies that correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is delayed in healing, then do not remove the ligament and the splints within the days or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones, which are called two knuckles; one is small, and that is the one that is called the thumb, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed behind the small one, from the joint just below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	When the great or small intestine is severely cut, or both are cut at once, it is often severed altogether.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small intestine is cut above, its restoration is often difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the intestine is cut below the fracture of its, its healing is often bad, and its recovery is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	It is even worse when both bones are broken at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is cut above the small intestine, it is often necessary for the doctor to facilitate its healing by making a small incision to allow it to heal quickly.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large intestine is also cut, then a more forceful incision is needed to allow it to heal.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are cut at once, then a stronger incision is needed to allow them to heal.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And then, place the figure of the hand over the incision to allow it to heal and extend it on a cushion, and the arm of the patient should be raised above the level of the other parts, the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should be placed on a pillow that is tilted.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion under the patient's head or back, to prevent them from moving.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the assistant should extend their arm on the side further away from the patient's head or body, and another assistant should do the same on the other side.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor should straighten the bones as much as possible according to the best figure they can achieve.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are any spurs on the edge of the bone, then pierce them all with your skill to remove them from their place.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separate spur that pulls the chain and is not within your hope of restoration, then do something on it and apply the method we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is large, you have already done something about it, so take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should apply a linen cloth soaked in warm rose oil and white wax, and it should be thin but strong, and place it over the subtle structure until the abscess is healed; and then remove the cerot and apply a prepared plaster of powdered myrrh and clay, and let it rest.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You should know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in its major positions, or it is a fracture in one bone or two together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then place your hand firmly and forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when more of the restriction is above the fracture or below it, place the restriction a little more moist second than it was preceded by the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that can be moved between being thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the ligament close to those days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs of which correction is necessary, as it has previously occurred to the member, and then cover that you enter the member with a warm tail until that problem ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not force the member until it relaxes, and then return the restriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the contraction has already been softened and the bone has been realigned and similar to those, then adjust all of that with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, then gradually soften that one and lay it aside for several days until the nourishment can reach it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	However, if the patient has not experienced any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not let it be dislodged within approximately 20 days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then suspend the hand of the patient over them for their skill in moving them, and let that one sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in approximately 30 days or 32 days, or if it is strong, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the constitution of the body and the disposition of skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	When the back and neck are pinched and the joints of the mentioned tart are broken, do not cause any harm to them, but only apply gentle movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the patient has a fracture or dislocation, make sure that the patient lies flat and extends their arms evenly, and place your hand on them to support them.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the nurse extends the broken bones and the doctor adjusts them evenly, making sure they are properly aligned.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then make sure to apply a poultice and bandage, but be careful not to cause an abscess. And place your hand on it according to the size of the wound, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the puncture is in the parts of the abdomen, make it similar to a bandage, and command the patient to hold that part of their belly tight; then stretch the cloth long.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the strap of cloth should be in the one that is lifted, so that the wound can be applied to the belly; and strengthen it according to what is needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the parts of the forearm, then place your hand on top of it and another underneath the part, so that the skin is open and ready; and then place the structure, as if the hand is being turned over between the mentioned bones.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture occurs in one of the bones of the mentioned joints, then if it is possible, place the hand on top of it and gently press on the palm and if you wish, place a small straight object to elevate the fracture and not make it worse.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other mentioned joints, such as the elbow, wrist, ear, or ring finger, then place your hand on top of it and gently press on the palm; or all of them continuously, which is better; or place a small straight object over that area, as we have said in the elbow.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and apply that, the disposition of abscess cautery and opposition — against the operation — against that which covers when any cause of those occurs, as it is repeated in the narrative of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a broken bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are broken and are considered to have turned into the lower part and the most distal.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of it is done by applying a bandage over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the doctor extends the bandage to its full length according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is located at the top of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the bottom to the side of the femur, so that the extension can reach it, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is located at the top of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the top to the side of the femur, and the extension should be applied to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should gently push the bones back into their original position, as they were before reducing the second bone by natural means and the bone is joined together by a good joint; then cover with an ointment and bandage, if no infection has occurred in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an infection has occurred in the wound, then leave that member for several days until the infection subsides, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging of the wound should be done like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then cover the area where it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long felt between the thigh and the bandage in front of the knee, and let the ends of the felt extend from the two parts of the wound, and then roll it up over the bandage and thigh whatever is left of the felt.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand on the thigh in the area of that fracture, and place a splint on the bone of the bandage.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty spaces between the bed and the cushion with multiple folded cloths, to prevent the wound from being disrupted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the strong bandage from above the location of the fracture with three or four turns, and as much as you are able to stretch the bandage over the location of the fracture, your bandage should be narrower and looser and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend both ends of the strip to the parts behind until it reaches the hollow of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the strips on the other side to prevent the bandage from slipping from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then lay the bandage over that, so that it does not cause harm to the member with corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things to those; and if any of those causes occurs, then count on removing the bandage, and rectify what has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone there is a bone fragment that you can place, then cover it as much as possible; and if not, make a hole on it and remove that, and cure the one that precedes the remembrance until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some splints are strengthened for this fracture of the ribs or others that are adjusted to its ribs, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of this fracture, such a thing should not happen to the patient that they become paralyzed; and if it is restored alone, another cushion should be applied on the other leg, as it is necessary for the one who is immediately affected.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the rib is strengthened in 10 days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the shoulder blade often occurs, but it does not affect the surrounding ribs.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	However, if it affects the fracture, it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and that is called a sprain or strain, and over that all depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the patient's body should be equal to what was broken from its parts, and it should be reassembled and joined as much as possible for equality, convenience, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a poultice and place it over that round stone, if necessary for that one; and strengthen above the stricture to that convenience.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, such as the abscess cautery and similar to those, so that it opposes all accidents that are suitable for that one until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large, and is called the rib; and the other is thin, and is called the costal.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And depending on the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the same restoration is made as the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are broken at once, the cushion is turned to all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if a more delicate bone is broken, the cushion is turned to the parts of the mouth.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if a larger bone is broken, take that away, and it is one of those causes that you are not familiar with.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and equality and ligaments of the stars according to that equality.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the fracture of the cushion is not healed within a short time, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help you.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the cushion there is some reason for operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the stars and that completes the whole operation, then you will take weights of iron that is placed next to the causes that are placed in solids, and its made entirely of white palm branches; attach those to the ones that have small grooves, and not from the hands, and it is the longest of those according to the longest of the cushion, and the denol closest to the most.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one in a blanket of two layers according to its length, and place one on the side of the bed of one part and the other on the other part, and let it descend to the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the three blankets in three locations of the extremities and at the middle, where this structure the bed is prohibited from tilting to the right and left, and it is good for a safe position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a pillow is administered according to the length of the bed; and place it on the bed to maintain its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially note that you do this in fracture, and when it is properly placed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the bed in each day and study what is behind it, and guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when something happens to those, then pause at the bed that you have studied so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those mentioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus did not suffer a complete fracture; rather, some fractures occurred in the bones of the foot; and in those of the toes, few fractures occurred, and none affected them except in the case of their position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffered fracture and sometimes those bones were raised above themselves between them, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared as if walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on that which was raised from those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place plaster and a splint above, and place a small table under the foot of the patient with two flat tops.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that bandage with the foot and structure descending, since you have covered it with cloth and other causes of which it is in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And during the next three or four days, then you will remove the bandage, where you will find the bones equalized, or broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is like this with these.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If the patient's teeth are broken, then repair those, and equalize them as they were before, and recommend to you in the restoration of such teeth from the mouth.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place your hand along the length of the broken tooth, and place a cushion next to it; then move your foot away from this table that is recommended for you, and strengthen that area with a proper constraint.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If that tooth is broken off from the bone by two or three or more, then you place your hand over each tooth covered in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and have one of the caps of the table on the belly of the foot to hold it well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes that have been told to you in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at every accident, what covers it.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone of the woman and the femur of the penis and the vertebra of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's cervix is broken, then perform a caesarean section in the lower abdomen, and then slightly incline it to the back of the spine, and hold it there.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should pull the cervix out of the vagina, and do so with the same hope; and then the woman should be gently shaken, and her back raised little by little, until all of that is done and the broken bone returns to its place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place cushions on her back, and when she needs to urinate, remove them gently and let her urinate, then return and replace the second one according to the method by which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to the first cushion.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or around those days, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take one catheter of the same size as the patient's urethra; and insert the entire catheter into the woman's vagina, and then blow through the catheter until the bladder is filled with urine, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with cotton and covered with a bandage for several days until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of the thighbone of a man or woman are fractured, then administer that remedy which we have recommended for the bone of the leg in healing and setting it.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	This remedy is not hidden in these close fractures and that it does not happen often, especially to those who have some knowledge and use of this my book; for that fracture means that you should apply the remedy in the most suitable way in healing and setting it.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the arm of a man is fractured, take wool and place it on the fracture; then cover it with a cloth and wrap it up, and let it be laid on for three days or until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the healing of bone fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is suitable for the one who has suffered a fracture, especially if the bone is large and similar to the bones of the thigh or shoulder, or similar to those, that you should be careful and use the methods of reduction that are appropriate for your condition, as we have previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the fracture does not heal, then you should be careful to retain it in place, as we have previously mentioned, by applying threefold powder on it, unless there is another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture in that place on the following day, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should leave the restoration of the fracture until the ninth day, before the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the fractured bone is elevated above the skin, then you should carefully reduce it and place it back in its position with your hands, as gently and quickly as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not at your disposal and in the equilibrium of the patient's body, then reduce it to your own strength, and use this instrument; which is made of iron, its length being seven or eight palms, and its width according to the extent of the wound; and for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of these instruments according to the quantity needed in the treatment in all cases of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if it is broken, and if it is in the pocket of the patient's clothing, then place the instrument over it at the time of the operation to prevent it from being bent.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And if it is sharp at the end that has the margin in its extremities; and if it is on the underside of it, then it should be applied to the largest tendon, and from there into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "voluntary screw" in Greek, and it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the cover that is placed on the end of it should be raised above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And insert that in a vessel that returns the bone, and it is equal to some equality.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then effort to equal the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of that is subtle, and you do not take it with the instrument for good exception, then cover that you insert the extremity of that bone into where the instrument has power of it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to all that we have recommended, then insert that into the hole of the scissors that we have said; or saw that with one of the saws in any way that is possible to you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove that which is in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and if the patient has severe pain in the joint, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you consult with the patient greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is completed which you do to the bone, and then submerge in a bandage of black stitching, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the wound or other cause in which it is oil, so that it does not make in the accident prolongation and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer splints during the time of the bone's complement of restoration, and leave the wound open to expose it to the air that is inserted by the tongs and used according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to stretch the wound over the fracture, as this is what the wise doctors have made, and they make incisions over their thighs dead or rotten or decayed, so it is said.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient's fracture is loose, soft, and different from the fracture of the others, then it is said.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that those evil accidents which we have recommended might happen, and it causes great pain in that area, then do not place splints on it, but rather make an envelope of stiff cloth in place of splints and stretch them over those parts.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to close after one or two days, as it will generate pus, then remove the cloth that you placed over it and administer poultices, using those that we use to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient for you to remove the bandage and consider the pain on each day at morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and that the member be prepared in such a way that the pressure runs from it to the parts behind to facilitate.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or abscessed from it, then you should know that here are remedies for the small ones so that you can inquire about the pain and try them.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those remedies, those that are separated by remaining and being extracted, those that are not separated and put the member and make it accumulate pain, pierce you to insert those that are second to you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain becomes severe or unbearable, it is a sign of some kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should know that you have placed one of those that are suitable for that cure which is preceded by narration in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you should know that the best practice is and you make present your hand: when the large ones are cut, raise over the member that is there with the bones of the body and those of the helper and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor its extraction which occurs after several days of death; having left that inside which can cause, for it is very heavy to carry for 20 or 30 days; and then cure the pain if you see it, and if not leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of a node that occurs at the site of a certain fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Nodes occurring at the site of a certain fracture are most commonly found near joints and are shaped like a member; and they strongly prevent the member from performing its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore consider whether the node is recent and administered in those medicines that have stopped bleeding with aloes, and wormwood, and mirabilis, and serecollo, and acrasia, and similar to those; taking some or all of them, and apply them to those wounds as a stop-bleeding ointment, or album of honey, or vinegar, and place it on the node in a cloth, and bind them over it for good binding.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And the tight bandage that does not leave it for several days; and then remove it and apply another, until the node is reduced; or strengthen it over that plate of plaster, which has the property of retaining everything that is applied to the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the joint has already become hard and stiff, and it is necessary to provoke a bone breakage in that way, then cut it through the most suitable part of it, and scrape off the excess and unnecessary, or remove that with an alcohol resector before it becomes rotten; and cure it within that time when it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the bone breakage is restored and the limb becomes thin and weak, it does not return to its original nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone breakage is restored, and the limb becomes thin and weak, this is not done without reason: one of which is the solution of the ligaments and tendons of that joint not being made according to its own nature; or because of excessive stricture of the ligaments before the nutrient can reach the limb; or because of excessive embrocation; or because of superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or because of weakness in the body of the patient and because of its debilitation.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for that is to give the patient garlic to chew and make them swallow it before their heart becomes multiplied in it; and administer a bath; and apply gauze and lettuce on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a poultice on the member, so that the poultice draws out the remaining nutrient or continued inflammation of the sick water, until the nutrient comes out and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	About the treatment of broken bones when they are healing improperly and preventing their surgery due to this.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an injury occurs to the already healed member and the bone is bent and knotted, and it is formed in the shape of the member, but however the member is not prohibited from its natural surgery, at that time do not receive the word of that person who exists that that member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our land; and this operation is so vile that it causes great fear of the death which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the swelling and stiffness are recent, then apply a poultice made of hot water with softening herbs such as elderflowers and mint, and similar to those; and make it into a plaster with honey that is well-made; or use a decoction of mint and lettuce, and spread it on the affected area; or use figs that are crushed and mixed with fat from pork, and similar to those used in medicines called amber consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some of these substances are dissolved in frequent rubbing with a light oil that is very moist, and applied to move the limb throughout all its parts in every hour.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the twisting has already become chronic and is strong and hardened into bone and causes the need for treatment with iron, then apply a pus from under the scar and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and cut away any excess from the swelling of that area to the bone with small surgical saws, and administer relief in that area due to its sensitivity and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an essential part of some of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, distorts the figure of the limb, and causes severe pain and injuries on the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an injury occurs in any dislocation, it is important to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and at that time, it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And in order not to be swollen or stretched at the time of inflammation, because it causes spasms and dull pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When that happens, it is important to approach the patient's flank, and not let the abscess form; then the limb should be treated with hot water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the whole limb should be treated with that which will bring its memory back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the capital of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder, enter into the part that has been left behind.
Capitol .xxiiii.	24th chapter.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the jaws are dislocated and not torn; and the dislocation of the others is made in one of two ways: that they are moved slightly from their places, and are slightly molded; or they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are molded at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows out and which cannot hold that nor can close their mouth, and their tongue is wrapped in their palate.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is slight, then return it to its place with some slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and completed, then apply reduction of it carefully, and not be delayed for a long time.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor's fingers of one hand in the mouth of the patient, on the side of the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other two fingers on the patient's cheeks, and equalizes them; and commands the patient to stop his jaws and remove those from each part; and the doctor equalizes the jaw and pushes it back into place before it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both jaws is easy and does not delay the reduction of both jaws, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are returned and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place a poultice of cloth on those parts, and make it with wax and oil, and apply it to facilitate the movement of the jaws.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient's head should be between two cushions, so that it does not move to the right or left; and do not force anything without a cause; having the same view, let the lion's jaw be opened, until when the pains are relieved and the jaws are unclamped, then move that which you want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered with ease, and do not force it through the opening of the mouth for food, drink, and oral hygiene, until the jaw is unclamped and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in some hour and not converted to their normal positions, then use heated foments and constant heat, and often the stomach of the patient will be inflamed, and often the vomiting will be pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, then know that it is dangerous; and often those who are affected by that in several days will die.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from its attachment to the sternum; and some fractures are dislocated at the front, and that is called perception.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cover the wound with your hand with strong pressure, so it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place a poultice and powders on that, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the extremity of that which is bent and continues to that, is not dislocated on any day; then cover it as we have said and as it is in your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place a poultice, and powders, and compression, and command the patient to adhere to quietness and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its own place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the acromion to the shoulder.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and that is done by tearing; and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated below the neck by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and stuck behind the shoulder blade, and especially in those where the meat is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there is much fat, it is difficult to get out.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to many people by trauma or fall, and the muscle of which is filled with abscess, and it is swollen because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then carefully enter that into which you were previously assisting, and proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known as dislocation when the parts behind are deviant from their usual position; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, because there are manifest differences between them; and at the head of the concave muscle, beyond the tilt, you should touch the cap of the muscle as if with a hammer, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its usual position, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should press or grasp it, and you should immediately feel a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is often reduced when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the operator raises the hand of the patient above the parts, and places their fingers behind the tilt of the hand, and strengthens the joint in its usual position, and the operator raises the hand of the patient, and extends it to its usual place; and then pauses it where it returns naturally.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If it does not return, and since the beginning of the dislocation, days have passed, then let the patient be bathed in warm water and administered a decoction that softens and soothes, like if their joints were made of marble, with fenugreek, melilot in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then let the patient be placed on their back and supported by a cushion that is even between elevation and restriction, and let the doctor place their hand on the sacrum, elevate the head of the muscle to virtue, and pull the hand of the patient so that it does not become tangled in the parts behind, and another servant holds the head of the patient, so that it does not become tangled in the parts behind, because at this time it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of the other, and insert his muscle behind the titillus of the patient and raise the titillus of him above the parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from the parts behind his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is weak, then assume that another cause is suspended, so that the great one does not return quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And if it is reduced by another method: and it should be placed on the ground a long stick with a rounded head, as if with a pestle, which is not too thick or thin, and place it under the patient; then place a lion-shaped cloth over the head of the stick, and the patient should stand along the length of the stick, and extend your hand to the parts behind the other part; and extend the other parts from the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the joint by all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and you should take a stick of the length of two spans, and its width should be four fingers, and its thickness should be removed at the end of the tip according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a lion's mane cloth on their head to prevent them from moving the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place your hand or arm under the patient's chin, extend it over their body, and tie the patient's arms to the support and the arm and hand of your own.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place your arm on a ladder according to the latitude, extend your hand over their body, and the other thing should be suspended from the other side, because the joint is soon affected.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And if the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible method, and then cover it with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and place a prepared paste of powdered myrrh and album of cow's milk over the entire muscle, however, if it is rolled up above, and then strengthen it under the patient's chin with a proper support; and roll the bandage over the paste, and let the hand of the patient be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it be left, and do not make the hand of the patient dirty for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And the patient's food should be kept quiet and still until the member is comfortable, which is more beneficial for their healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the food should be given more frequently, around 7 or 8, and it should be exercised with some movement; if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated by moisture that has occurred to it or by another cause, then it should be administered an aqueous cautery three times, according to what is said in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if everything has been done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and splint have been reduced over it for some time, but it is not healed and cannot be raised to the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of which, which are at the top of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be healed in such a place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation of that which is made of the chest and breast or the parts behind, reduction is made by impulse and extension at the joints, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply it to the other structure, and cure it while it is being healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing of the member is delayed and slow, then use bandages wetted with warm water until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated at all parts, and especially at the part that goes from the front to the back, and the dislocation of which is not hidden from you when it occurs from the fall or from the touch according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, if it does not bend and touch its own muscle, this is a clear sign that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover the patient, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible until the abscess is reached, because if you see the abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and often it is not healed at all; and especially when it is in the back parts, because it is worse than all the other species of dislocation, and causes more pain, and more dangerous movements away from that place, which can lead to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended towards the two sides, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the back and below, and he should push the joint towards the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the back parts, then return as soon as possible to where you double your arm at the elbow, until it strikes the back and the palm of your hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants should extend the arm, and two assistants hold it in place so that it does not remain dislocated during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then rotate the arm in all directions, so that it is wrapped in a rolled-up cloth or bandage on your hand or chest.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to it so that these causes help in lubricating the joint and facilitate its movement; and then gently push the joint back into place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of the limb should be placed on that pad where there is astringency and execution with albumen of egg, and it should be extended downwards, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be removed; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you should remove the bandage from it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then you should repeat the ointment and bandage, and leave it for several days until it is extended; and then remove the bandage.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If the gravity of the joint is close to the reduction, and its position is in motion, then administer humidification in baths and gentle friction, and compress it, until it is released; or place a greased cloth over the joint, and leave it on the bone and the night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then place that in the bath; and when you are done, then rub the joint with prepared friction, and repeat over the greased cloth, which is a bandage of motion, once, twice, and three times.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	with a bathing instrument, until it is softened.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a wet and scalded cowhide bandage on that; and do some wraps with it, since that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the shoulder.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Sometimes the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is the other joints, but rather, it is important to be quick in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, because the joint may become frozen or something happens in the frozen joint.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and the minister extends the arm of that person, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back into its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But rather, it is important to consider whether the palm is already stuck to the shoulder, then the patient should place his back on the table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation has already occurred, then the position of that person's arm should be naturally on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be placed on the edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, good; and if not, then you should strongly push that arm to dislodge the abscess and leave that person; and do not repeat this, because otherwise, it will not be easy or possible to reduce the joint again.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	When the joint is affected by its tortuosity; and the patient does not know any cause, but the muscle is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are trapped or torn, and you should not engage in it, but rather strengthen it with a cauterizing tool for the joint of the patient and strongly apply that to the affected area.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the patient is returned, place your hand on the affected area, and let it be loose and strong for several days; and then remove it and let it be loose and exercise the muscle of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of the patient is stopped and there is some gravity in it, then apply heat with a wet cloth and friction for several days, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of the aforementioned dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these dislocations occur at any time.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of these joints is dislocated at the base of the thumb or in the abdomen, then strengthen the joint and push the dislocation back to its place, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the said patient, suspend the devil's claw to the dislocated part, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that one and extend it until it is equal to the other on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the injury is not new, apply the second method according to that narration, and do not cease to drain it during the day and exercise movement, and apply it at night; and do that for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient, and apply it to that part and do that first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do that when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an accident occurs to one of the dorsal vertebrae or neck, and it remains dislocated with some vertebrae from those places, in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	When that happens, the patient's bowel movement is out of their control, and they cannot hold it; and if softening agents are applied to their members or their legs or their arms or one of those, or if a sponge is placed on that spot, where the softening agents are applied and where the softening agents are made, the removal of those is done in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that spot is already in the back parts and it is not called gout anymore.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure of that is that you should consider whether the gout occurred due to puerperal fever, because in that case, neither the cure nor the healing of that is not possible at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that case where it comes from the bed or by percussion or by a similar cause to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure in that long speech, which is the most beneficial; however, I have already opened and exposed that of which little is known, because of its proximity to the understanding of that, which I have exposed and formed from various instruments of that, by which I will show that and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in the case of a fracture that occurs in the chest, there is no cure or healing for that part; and similarly in the one that is made at two times.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except by the one that occurs in the back, which I will recommend to you.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face, at an equal distance from the wall, and extended behind it with a wet instrument so that their chest is not lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And a pole should be placed, leaning against the ground at the end of the wall near the patient's head, and another pole in front of their feet at the other end of the wall.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the servant should hold the pole, and not be stationary in the ditch; and another servant should hold the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap the patient's head with the firm Leopard's tooth; and extend the end of the tooth to the pole that is supposed to support the patient's head, and tie it there; and strengthen the other bandage over the patient's ankles, and supporting their chest; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other pole that is supposed to support the patient's feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the assistant extends the bandage to the part of the wound, and does not remain untied the two bandages and the bandages of the places in which they were placed, but rather does not fasten them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his hands on the back of the patient between his shoulder blades, or places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table before he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return in this way, then take a table whose length or width is about three spans, and dig in the wall where we have said that the patient should be placed between the extremities of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the majority of the table on the back of the patient, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretches him inward until the back is covered and he returns to his place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the turn which is turned around the neck; and it is that you should stay on the ground with the head of the patient in the back of the two thighs, the length of which is about an arm, and the head of him in the back of the other two thighs; and the length between each thigh should be a palm, and it has been done in each thigh where the turn returns, and each one should be held in place on the ground so that it does not become untied.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be another rod in which it is the turn, and it should be rotated in the two grooves of the two rods.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a groove in which the rod is formed, its length being one palm and a quarter, which is also rotated; and on the other two rods, there is similarly one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the cords that you have strung in the chest of the patient in the groove that is to be placed on his head, and the cords that you have strung in the patient's thighs in the turn that is to be placed on his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn should have a servant who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor should hold the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is returned, and the area is covered, place some cotton on the wound, and stop it; and then place a flat table over the dressing, whose width is three fingers or about those, and its length is the amount that covers the area of the wound, and on the side of the spine, there.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the bandage that we have mentioned, and use the patient as a source of subtle nutrition until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any imminence in the location at the end of healing, then apply medicines that are both poisonous and liniments for their administration from the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that location, a layer of plaster.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some conditions occur in the back of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already immines for that reason, so that no harm should be done to you because of this medicine, which would certainly kill you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not end with dislocation alone, but also occur in those who have the same small removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, that it is dislocated at the partitions behind, or at the partitions forward, or at the partitions above, or at the partitions behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is more commonly dislocated at the parts of the inside, and less so at the parts in front or at the parts behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the reason for this dislocation at the inside parts is that when you adjust the bed of the healthy person to the sick person, it is longer and more inclined than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their leg, and this is where the bedsores form due to pressure, because the part of the mattress has already been reached.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the reason for this dislocation at the front parts is that those events of it are contrary to this event.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the reason for this dislocation at the front parts is that when the bed is raised to a second level, but does not bend towards that pain in the leg, and if it is perforated to go out and cannot be placed under those parts in front; and the urine of it is retained and the sitting position of it forms a bedsore, and you must place the ambulation of it on the thigh.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	When the person who has suffered dislocation at the back parts cannot extend their arm, nor bend the one that is bent, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the bent part is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed in that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been cured by having it in your hand, then you administer reduction according to its arrangement, and in that case, do not expect that in that cure there should be any prognosis.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case of the one in which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should do that which turns the joint and extends it to the back parts and the front parts, and on the right and left, and for this, the strong return does not need other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If not, then you should prepare strong medicine and extend the cushion of the part that is farthest from them, or hold their hands, or lay a cloth on the cushion above the arm; and another minister extends the hand of that one over the tips of their fingers; and strongly hold the lion's skin on the surface of the cushion, and have another minister clean the end of the cloth.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if the extension is from the shoulder to the part of the furcula, or from the back to the part of the backbone.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if the extension is of all those in a row when the patient is raised to his own side and hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is especially common in all four cases.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; and if not, then in each case it is necessary to direct the treatment according to its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, then make the patient lie on his back; and place your hand on the rim of the cushion in that place where the head of the cushion and the place that is left behind are close to each other; and extend the ligament from the side towards the part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister strongly grasps the arms of the patient, and presses the large part of the patient's back and extends it to the parts forward by strong extension, so that it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular treatment is the most effective cure for this member, which is reduced more than other treatments.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is not possible to apply this treatment at all, then bind the two feet of the patient together firmly with a strong, wide bandage over and under the ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be equal to four fingers, and let the patient's bed be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the patient should be suspended over the head of the bed, and let them hang lower; and the length of this should be equal to two armpits.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young man to apply pressure to the cushion, and let another young man suspend it from the patient, and the other young man should strengthen the application with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the part of the body, let the patient lie on their back as we have recommended in the previous chapter; and let the bandage be strengthened over the hernia and on the patient's chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then bring two chairs for them to sit on, one under their feet and the other under their head; and adjust the chair by the side of the bed where the patient is lying, so that the patient is not dampened by the chair being between their thighs, so that the extension is not pulled at the parts behind.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends their part, and the doctor places their hand over the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you follow the reduction, it is generally good; and otherwise, pause over it carefully and have what we have said in the booklet for that equalness.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May it be that the patient does not move their legs too much.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the parts behind, then it is important that the cushion is extended more widely, and according to this method described on page; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long axis of the patient, and the other hand covers that, and the hand that covers the extension should be placed at the part behind the dislocation.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the back parts, then do not let the patient be extended at the back parts, and elevated on the ground; having covered them with a soft cloth, as if it is the bed and the anchor of the patient is dislocated at the front parts, according to what we have said about the position of the patient on two anchors; and it is over their face and the bands are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And cover with a compressed cloth on the place where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed according to what we have covered — and the hand of the reduction of the patient is not pressed against you, and it is that you extend two cushions from the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends the other cushion and expands that side, then know that the member according to what we have covered has returned — and then you adjust two things and press and extend the band where the anchor is not damaged in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one arm and the other under the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those joints correctly in front of you, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and apply that, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and make that walk in an ambulatory for each person for several days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the thumb.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thumb is dislocated in three ways, namely it is dislocated at the joint in front, at the joint behind, and at the joint on the side; and at the joint inside it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of the thumb is that you command the patient to place their cushion on the side; then know that the thumb is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all the patient's limbs is done by placing the patient in a supine position, so that they can lie on it; holding their head with your hand, and placing their foot between your feet; and then making them hold your hands with their palms, and bending those towards the back of their neck to strengthen it, and another assistant extending their leg until the patient's foot returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The patient's bed should be made with a non-slip mattress.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then place that plaster on the mattress and make the bed with it, and then apply a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not use the patient's bed for any other purpose until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then in the treatment of the fracture described in the previous story, apply strong extension to the ligaments of which.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of talipes equinovarus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Sometimes the talus is slightly dislocated, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of this is made at the front or back parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus bulges out from the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of its dislocation is usually successful, and it is that it should be extended by the ease of the hands and be equalized until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the treatment of this dislocation when it is completely dislocated, make sure that the patient lies on his back, and hold one strong and skilled person behind the patient in the middle of the dislocated part.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you take the right hand of the patient and lift the most inferior part of the foot, and with your left hand in the location of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then bring the foot to your right hand, and with your left hand for two steps, and extend your left hand; and push the sole of the foot towards the right side of the thigh.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make two incisions according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then place the chest of the patient on the cushion, and you go to the chair.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, return in one incision or in two according to this method, and if the foot is equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation on it, until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a soft pillow under them, and put a blanket between the patient's thighs, and you have already covered them with a cloth so that they do not descend.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot towards their hands or the cloth that lies on the neck of the patient; and then extend each assistant according to the extension of their own part, and the pillow should be extended between the patient's thighs to retain that, so that the body of the patient is not thrown to the parts behind its extent.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor should approach the dislocation at its source, and another servant should hold a clean cloth to the parts behind it, as the dislocation returns to its ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the patient's health has been restored by its reduction, then pause to apply a strong bandage around it, and tie the foot to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to damage the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the bandage over that does not press too much and it is strong enough.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it like that for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to go through that space, do not do so until the dislocation has been completely resolved and cured, as it would cause more harm.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the pus in the abscess bursts, then carefully apply what we have described in our narrative, in another place for treatment and healing, until it is completely healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter thirty-four.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of the aforementioned foot dislocations.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	That which is dislocated should be moved gently and with a little extension of its tendons; and this is not difficult, beforehand.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the hinge joints of the back of the foot, then do so by placing the patient's foot on a level surface or table, and let him remain there as if he were lying down.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you should stand by the patient's foot, and place your hand on the area where the joints are, and gently press that area until it returns to its original position and does not appear in the elevated position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place a table under the patient's foot that holds the entire foot, with two caps, and strengthen that area with a proper and firm bandage for three days; and then remove it and let him walk around for several days, until it is strong and assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter thirty-five.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the special types of dislocation that are caused by strain or by fracture or by any other means.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occurs, and you perform the cure and restore it, certain complications may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason, you should not assume the cure of it, but rather follow the knowledge gained from long use, mercy and compassion, delayed, not hasty or presumptuous; and that in the beginning of medicine, they yield to abscesses only with caution, and leave the patient to divine judgment, not to any other, but to him for whom there is hope of salvation from perdition, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, you should first try to reduce it in the beginning of the cause, giving it time to form an abscess with caution.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the member returns after they wish, then administer a regimen that yields to abscesses with caution and cures the strain with what is appropriate for it from drying substances.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents occur in the bones that are separated, then puncture their joints, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that, in the locations of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid that second instrument in the ways of fear according to what I have previously preached; because that is better for you to leave to your own Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more salutary for your health, as you will see those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Here ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
