Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Here begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, if you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of its purpose, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, I consider that you have completed this treatise, which is part of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation of castration has been entirely neglected in our region and time, until recently the science of it was unknown, and its proof is still hidden; and no one knows about it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which are lost and have led to errors and uncertainty until the understanding of it is closed and its power is prolonged and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I see that you will live by this order of the treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cauterization and other instruments of the work as it is for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In ancient times, the reason why a skilled artist was not immediately recognized as such in our time is because the art of medicine is long and complicated, and it requires one to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was recently discovered by Galen before he knew the usefulness of the members and their forms; and also knowing the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the number of them, and their hardness; and the pulsating veins, quiet veins, and the locations of their emissions.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason, Hippocrates said that a name is not necessary, but in the work itself, and more so in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Moreover, we have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, will not be able to avoid error by which many men die, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When a doctor was folly enough to have incurred an abscess called phlegmon in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed into the woman, causing her to die between them.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And another doctor saw that the dragger had taken a stone from a man who had suffered from it in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and tried to remove that stone with a trocar, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And he had already called for someone to extract that, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, it was impossible to save him.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a very skilled blacksmith who was needed for the fracture in the joint of him; and because of his ignorance, he extracted the fracture, on the plate, with pulleys and levers of strong structure, and did not allow the plate to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then remove the bedclothes according to his desires, and remove the reins, and remove the leeches for several days and order that he be bled; and while the cushion and foot are infected with apostematous pus, and reach perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And then he was called to it, and prepared to remove the bandage, and thus obtained peace and relief from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, gangrene was already confirmed in the member, so it could not be restrained from that one, and did not cease to spread the gangrene in the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And another doctor came who pierced an apostematic cancer, and it became ulcerous after several days, until the fire magnified the evil of him and he died.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the cranium is cleansed of melancholic humor, so that it does not reach him with iron from all sides, but rather that the member that suffers be held from all sides.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For that reason, sons, it is necessary for you to divide the operation into two parts: one in which health is associated, and another in which the work is done in the best possible conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already seen that in all places where this book is found, in which the operation is performed with error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay aside that one, so that people do not come to speak badly of you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with success and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method for the grace of God to lead to salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and keep your weapons from that which makes you afraid, so that your faith and name do not abandon you: for more remains to your glory, and further in the world and behind in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	In some of his writings, he mentions:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	He does not mention the treatment of bad patients, because bad doctors do not remember.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The beginning of the division of the book, and the first of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered by the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of drying and perforation, and of ventilations, and of plasters, and of the extraction of worms and similar to those, all chapter ordered and arranged by the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of the cure of tortion and similar to those; chapter ordered by the foot, and by the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of a pointed cautery and sharp medicine and remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that part begins the treatise on all free.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That you know the quality of those joints of that cautery and of its handles, and in what condition it is prohibited to use the cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the speech about the quality of the joint of the cautery and of its handle is a long and prolix, and subtle for those who know, and secretly hidden; and from there they have spoken much about wisdoms, and of them they have disagreed, and to me it is a small part of their speeches, I fear for the length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that the cautery compares to all universal condition, which is matter or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions of the tail matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the condition of the tail and dry matter they disagree; for one said that the cautery is suitable for that, and the others said the contrary of that, which is not convenient in illness which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not convenient that illness tail and dry matter has that which is cauterized and dry is healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And say to that one who says the opposite of that one, that cauterization is greatly beneficial in all sickness and dryness that occurs in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man with the moisture of it to the appearance of the fire, the body of a man is wet.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the word of that one, that he has experimented this for me several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But he may not come over that one who has already been proven and exercised in the capital of cauterization by previous exercise, and who knows the diversity of the appearance of men and the disposition of their diseases in their members, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other appearances, you do not fear that one, and especially in diseases that are wet and moist, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the benefit of cauterization in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing by fire and its goodness is that by cauterization with fire, because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized and does not hurt the other member unless it is adjusted slightly without causing harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	When the action of medicine has reached those parts of the body that were previously affected, and it brings pain to the sick member, it is difficult to heal and often causes more harm.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	However, fire, due to its great power and good substance, does not cause this but rather an excess, and we have known this through experiment and the length of time it has been studied as an art over the truth of causes; and for this reason you are excused from the length of this speech. If not, if it is not read aloud in this pause, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, the philosophical demonstration of speech, which would be sharpened in your thoughts.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they should not be separated from the time in which it is appropriate to make a cautery and pause at the best time of primevera.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by time is submerged in the benefit of which the cautery is thrown, and more so if the cautery is for pain or necessary pain, quickly and firmly, which would not suffer delay because it is feared that those who come with malice are greater than small harm coming through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And if you do not catheterize in your feet, or, sons, that is only estimated by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is not always necessary to treat that malady with cauterization, and they stop that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not always present that they fear for that, because cauterization is only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries the moisture, which are the cause of why pain comes.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But however, cauterization is often used in medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his malady returns in some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his malady, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of the superfluities in him, and that which is obtained by him in his acquisition of foods and similar causes; but the malady in which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady of few superfluities and moisture, such as toothache for pain and similar to that, possible it does not return in him, but that which is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	More commonly, the pointed cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the correct term, not what I understand in it, because they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved by this medicine or by another cause to use a cauterizing needle.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is in the opposite; and they understand that the pointed cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines do not help, and at the end of the cause, they administer a cauterizing needle, and it helps to that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it is understood that the pointed cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not what they understand among the common people and too many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for cauterizing, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cauterizing does not hurt, because it is not absolutely true, since I have already seen that there are some people who do not feel pain from that which does not make them sick in other bodies, and cauterizing with gold is good and better than iron, but however when you make cauterizing with fire made of gold, it is not to your declaration, because it is determined according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the frost; and if you adjust over the fire, the gold melts by the heat, and in the fire some layers for which the craftsman cooks for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that, a pointed cautery of iron is made to us more lightly and more directly to the straightness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the second chapter of the cautery, and have ordered those who are in the head between the feet, so that they ask him what he wants from him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauteries for head pain due to cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization gives to the moisture and cold of the head, which are causes of many accidents, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the limbs and of the jaws fluent, and many of sleep, and of tooth pain and of gout, and universally of all illness that comes from cold, such as paralysis, sudden and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, commands the patient that he be evacuated by a laxative medicine to clean his head, for three or four nights, according to the patient's virtue and age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command the one who holds their head to shave it, and then make that person sit on a chair and place their hands on their chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor blade on the palm of your hand and hold it above the nose between their nostrils.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, since the location you mentioned is not reachable, mark that location and then use the pointed cautery of this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the location and apply pressure slowly, so that it is not too tight, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then slightly raise your hand and look at the location, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, in the same amount as the amount of hair, then raise your hand, and if it does not return to its place, then bring your hand back to that iron, or another one of those, if it is cold, before you can see that which I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand on the flat part of their back and hold it over the area where the bone of the fire is to be destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the four-ingredient ointment into the wound until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the plague is opened, as much milk as possible should be poured into it, so that it is better and more healing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that the spine should be cauterized into the bone, and it should be held with the cautery until some part of the bone is adhered to.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove that which has adhered to the bone, and then heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they said that others used the cautery to reach the back, until it strongly entered into the bone before it broke, and this is the way to make a small incision:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimated that from that wound, the vapors of the head escaped.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two types of cauteries in all men, but only in those who have had the second stage of fear; and if you leave that one, it is better for your health when it is, because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of it with what we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is more safe and better for me; and from that one, you should choose the one that is more beneficial for your health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the entire head is affected by chronic and long-lasting pain, and that is prolonged in the patient, and uses of garlic, of charcoal, of capicum, of purges, of ointments, of galbanum, of wax, and of similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that they have and not improved at all from those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and not fragile and easily broken, then that cautery should be applied again.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply a pointed cautery on the horn of his head inside where the bone is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and discover the amount of bone that we have found and cauterize that with a cautery on the part behind the head in the place where the pus is located - and that is the place where the pus is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And let your hand rest, and do not cut the bone, because the patient will suffer from that very great pain different from all other head cautery pains.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery is in this place, because it covers the horn of the head and the back of the head is a more subtle cautery than that which is cauterized at the middle of the head; and this is the shape of it.
Capitol ters.	Third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the ancient non-antiquated cautery of the eyebrow.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain occurs in the part of the head, or is felt inside the eye, remove the medicines that make the head clear, and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the treatises on diseases; and if it does not work, then cauterization is done in two ways: either with a sharp cautery or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May the pointed cautery be used as a medical tool to hold a painful object and scrape it with an open cap on its ends and cover its extremities with ointment.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then, incise the location of the pain in the temple with a blade that is inserted into its fitting place behind the ear, where it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then, strengthen it with a stopper due to constant compression, and leave it for three hours; then remove the alh, and let the wound rest for two or three days, and then place a bandage on the location where the pain occurs.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then, cure it with an ointment that is inserted into its fitting place when it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do that with some medical tools that I have written about in the other treatise on medical tools.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cauterization be done in this manner: light a cautery of this form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a clover-shaped cautery, where the head of it is shaped like a clover with some curvature, and in its middle part there is a small pinpoint.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and remove your hand — so that the wound is not closed prematurely — and slowly turn the small iron at speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that is stopped by the skill of the surgeon is such that it covers the entire body, and lift your hand to prevent the artery from being closed prematurely, so that no bleeding occurs.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a piece of saltwater cloth on that location, and leave it for three days; and then apply a warm compress, and then care for the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the tip of the lancet according to the cautery, and avoid injury to the artery in this unskilled manner.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Chapter
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the ancient method of cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the wound with the method we mentioned in the previous cure, and with the method we mentioned in the division of diseases, and if the cure does not improve, and you see that the disease does not respond to the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then wait until the cauterization is healed, so that it does not cover the location of the pain with a long line that covers the entire body, or that it does not penetrate the flesh. Then place your hand firmly and quickly enter the incision and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is often injured during chewing, and that the jaw does not become stuck and the nerves that are affected by it, and that it does not become spasmodic.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the guard and care of the flow of blood from the artery that is being blocked, where in its blockage there is fear and more so for those who do not know what to do and are not skilled; and leave the operation to begin.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you should remember the regimen of blood flow accidents of the artery according to its method, in its own location of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not allow this cautery and you feel the patient's pain tolerably, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you apply the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter of artery stretching, which has two points, and this cauterization is better and more suitable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	About the cauterization of the pains of gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the big toe occurs due to cold humors and is cured by laxatives and the other treatment mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not disappear, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has no puncture, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then approach the puncture with the ignition, and place it around the entire big toe as if it were rotated, or in the circumference of each one where the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Following the cautery, gradually move it around the base of the big toe until you have tried enough to reach the location.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points in the entire big toe, and it does not find it, and then cure the locations before they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six
De cauterizacio de turtura.	About the cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured and is not treated by cauterization except for the specific ones that come from inflammation, as we have said in the sections of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid the use of dry or spasm-inducing cautery on the affected area.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of torture caused by jerks and caprice and guarding, and you do not combine your treatment, then you should use three types of cautery: the first is the point of a gold needle, the second is a small one next to the temple, and the third is at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, as softening is only seen on the healthy side.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is to cauterize that one with the cautery on the right side of the gold needle, a small one above the little toe, and in the temple another, the longest of which should be second to the length of the said gold needle, and place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the most part of the species of the codex is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the cuttlefish, the form of which is given in the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	May it be, however, that there is less skill in that one; and cover the area with a cloth to prevent excessive grease from soiling it.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then carefully clean the area where the procedure was performed until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of ancient cautery for apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy is treated with the methods mentioned earlier and the patient does not have a fever, then apply four cautery points: on the entire surface of the head; and at the back of the head, as we have mentioned; and at the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of applying the cautery is done as described above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and more is done later; and then carefully clean the area where the procedure was performed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cautery for forgetfulness caused by flaccidity.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give large amounts of water and flatulent medicines to the patient at the beginning of the treatment.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then remove the cap from the patient's head and place it on the described plaster in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then place some bandages on that, which is the method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do the same as the previous method, which has already been mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If those methods do not work; then make three cautery points on the back part of his head, which should be placed between the most elevated part of the head and the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Place the largest amount of the mentioned remedy between each cautery, and then care for the cautery as it proceeds.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you feel pain and the patient tolerates it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you feel more pain, then make the cautery on both feet.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Care for that until it is healed; and if the cautery is made with olive oil, follow the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter Nine
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of the perineum and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You have already processed in the softening of the head and that which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then apply the cautery at the middle part of the head, and apply the cautery on all the corners of the head, and apply the cautery on the back part of it, and three cauteries on the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body for three people and the patients endure well and the illness is strong, then apply the cautery on four spines of the back, and afterwards apply the cautery through that which is covered by the collar of the patient, and lift the upper arm.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then care for that which is healed, and this be cautery olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter Ten
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy which is by flexibility.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, at the beginning of the illness and on the other side of the cure, which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is an infant who does not suffer the medicines, then administer ginger and mustard to those who are modifying, giving that for several days, good improvement of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer in the middle of the patient's forehead according to the previous method, and with another cauterizer on the back of their head, and over each corner of their head cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that with cauterizers which I have said, having paralyzed and softening of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cauterizer be olive oil as prescribed.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is an infant, then pause cauterizer subtle according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted by moisture and become flat and thick, then cauterize those parts with the cautery that we have called the paralytic.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and declines into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him water that cleanses his brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and make a proper incision on his head above the circle, and place your hand on that spot.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated, and be held in all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then place a liniment; and it is worthy of an ancient sheep's balm.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And scald that over the fire for warming, which the patient says hurts when it is too much in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then put that in the middle spot of his head above the circle, and let him feel it until it is dissolved.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give that sick person this medicine every week for the entire week until they are healed; or if you want, make small points with a pointed cautery according to the most appropriate place, but always have your hand on the patient's hand with a well-ordered cauterizer: this is a special cauterizer that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place your hand on that swollen part in green or gray wool.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the descent of hot water into the hip.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you that the beginning of hot water in the hip has started, then start and give the patient that which will make their head clear, and keep that away from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that sweat in the bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command the patient to shake their head, and make points with that cauterizer at the middle of their head; and then make points with two cauterizers on two temples if it is the beginning of hot water in two hips, or on one side if it is the beginning of hot water in one hip.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise all the veins and arteries that are located behind the kneecap; and place the cautery in that far place on the side of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Watch out for blood flow when it is being cauterized; and if you see blood flow from there, stop the bleeding with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find the knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and the puncturing of those and the precaution of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Some veins are cauterized in the neck behind two bones and two cautery devices are produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the wound are very old and through the veins and arteries that are in the place manifest of the head and it is verified that such is excessive fluidity, then cauterize that one with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water collection in the wounds, and with the cautery in the middle of the head and with two cautery devices in the neck behind two temples, and with two cautery devices in the neck behind two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the wound in the entire length of the hair on the side of the forehead with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization for bad breath.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person who we mentioned in the division and have not yet perfected your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three drops of laudanum; and after removing their head, cauterize the wound with a larger or smaller cautery made of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that wound with a clover-shaped cautery on the two temples below the hair, a small one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that person.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the clover-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization for relaxation of the eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is relaxed by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a crescent-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, using a pointed cautery, make points on the two superciliary ridges, extend them in all parts, and lengthen them from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the superciliary ridge.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too much against the cautery, but according to the quantity that the tense part of the eyelid is stuck.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the eyelid cautery when the eyelashes are converted to parts and poke the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelashes of the eyelid are converted to parts and poke the eye, cautery in those places according to two methods, either by fire or by medicine that burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use cautery by fire, command the patient to open his eyes with those that clean those eyelashes as those that remove them, until they are extended and equal; and if he pokes that eye, then strengthen the eyelids of that eye with one bandage so that it is not injured until the eyelashes have grown.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are born and weighed, pause the head of the patient in your hand, and then place your other hand on their eyelid, using a second finger to feel for the beginning of the pulse near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a gentle touch on the eyelid or in the mucus of the eye over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery that is used for this purpose.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the figure that you have placed, in small steps, using a curved instrument, until the surface of the wound is burned, appearing as a thin layer of charcoal.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And it is customary for health to be restored from the work of the eye, that you raise the eyelid already contracted and the hairs of the eye elevated from the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place your hand on the wound until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully cure that wound until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the eyelid returns to its original position and becomes soft again, then do the same with another pointed cautery as you did before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the eyelids are in their original position and are equal again, then cautery that wound where it is naturally located and do not let the eyelids press on it.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if the pointed cautery causes this pain that you command the patient to lift their eyelids and equalize them, then make a shape of folded cloth like a fan.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some warm, live earth and mix it with those causes, and make that into a poultice so that it is not dispersed; and then spread that poultice on the cloth that was made like a fan, and place that over one of the eyelids; and then place the other eyelid on a soft, warm album, and the head of the patient should be elevated.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Pause the remedy over the affected area and press it gently, but do not let the patient feel the bite of the remedy, as the bite is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore, if the initial bite is too strong, remove the remedy and apply a new one; when the bite stops, remove the remedy and wash the affected area with clean water; then consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as it was during the injury, due to fire or incision, as it is now; and if not, return to the previous remedy on the area where the remedy has not been applied and does not cause discomfort until your operation is complete and the wound is closed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then press over the wound and wait until the pus from the infection is completely drained, and then cure it with a definite or other remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to keep constant vigilance during your operation that the remedy does not fall out of the wound, and if the eyelid becomes soft and there is some cause of the hairs in the wound, then repeat the remedy on the area where the eyelid is soft, as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way to perform the operation of intubation.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the necks of men are varied according to their size and sensitivity, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not cover the correct way to that one who is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	About the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the neck.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula, do not confuse your treatment, then make sure that you cauterize it in this way: command the patient to place their chin on your shoulder, and hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is not too tight or agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a poultice of bread dough or of poppy seeds on their neck.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, like a cane or pen of wax, at one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it goes deeply into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to come out, do so with a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But it is better to leave those that are concave as they are in the work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and drain the pus and dry that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place your hand over the area where the cautery is burning hot, and take away that part of the cauteries from the side of the nose, so that your hand or the patient's hand is not burned, and then place the cauteries in the gray matter and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the cautery it goes through the bone, so be it; and if not, then repeat the cauteries once or twice, depending on the case; and leave that area for three days, and then place your hand over that area and surround it with a dry bandage until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been passed several days and has not healed, then pause the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in its own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method for cauterizing a fistula, which was first described: insert the needle into the location of the fistula and feel that and then place a cushion in that slight cavity where the shape of the needle is; and then put a quantity of one uncia of lead on it; and with your hand make a good retention, and do not let the patient be harmed by the lead so that it does not reach the bottom of that; and cover that over with album of egg or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with that which we have said about cauterization and healing, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a tract of snail and reduce the fistula to the body according to its own location when it comes.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the wound in the foot joint.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Ruptures often occur in the labia, and especially in the labia of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those ruptures with the method we have mentioned in the divisions and do not expand your cure, then ignite the small cauterizing iron of this form that arises:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And place it according to the subtlety of the spoon.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that pointed instrument carefully in those ruptures until the cauterizing iron reaches the edge of the ruptures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with the wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and then a blister forms, and then it bursts, and then it becomes old, and then you cure it with a cauterizing iron and it becomes a fistula, and then you cure it without expanding your cure, then cover that you ignite the cauterizing iron according to the amount that is reabsorbed in the fistula, and then put that ignited iron in the throat of the fistula, and then you place your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and then on the other side make a small cut or two; and then cure it with the method we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the wound is healed and cured, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the rotten bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cautery of teeth and the softening of jaws.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and those medicines do not cure them, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and hold the cauterizer in the shape that will come to you, as if you were holding a quill over the tooth and inserting it into the jaw, and you will feel the heat of the fire at the tip of the tooth when the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the cauterizer several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient opens his mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, and you can feel that, because the decayed tooth is closed, the softened jaw is strengthened, and the moisture that corrupts is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or in it there is frost or worms, and the cure does not work with medicine, then use a cautery in two ways: either with the edge of cows' horns, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Using the edge of cows' horns is that you take the edge of cows' horns and blow it into the hot iron, and then take a cotton and wrap it around the end of the tent, and then immerse that with the edge of the horn, and place it on the painful tooth quickly until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the edge above that, and place it on the painful tooth, and place it on that hot iron until the iron reaches the front of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May the cauterization with fire be done by waiting for the right moment of iron or fire, and if there is any grotesque appearance and the intensity of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the shape that will come, and place that on the tooth and your hand inside when the cautery is melted; and do some maneuvers so that the pain remains or on that day or on the other day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cover that because of the pressure of that cautery that the patient opens their mouth with good border and hold that for an hour and scrape it; and this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize where you want to extend according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are soft and humors infiltrate them and they are not obedient to digestion by medicines and you want to make them digestible, then ignite the cautery with the shape that is this following, having two extremities so that the smoke from the cautery can come out through the other extremity, and place that on the abscess a maneuver, and another if necessary of that, until it reaches the top of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it over the wound in boiled water until it has been completely burned by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wounded area and try to heal it with bandages until it is fully healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or cautery used in this case is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery for rabbit bites and constriction of veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes over the lower part of the lung, and especially when it is caused by coldness, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place where the pain is located.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to apply the cautery to the groin or burn the patient's skin, but a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And then cauterize that place with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the lower vertebra of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the pointed cautery of the foot should be used in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then care for that wound with the same thing before it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, the patient does not have fever or tisic, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that wound with two pointed cautery over the breastbone in the area where the ribs meet the sternum and costal cartilages; and another pointed cautery in the middle of the chest between two mamillary glands; and let the pointed cautery be used as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, your cauterization should be made with the pointed cautery called puncta, whose form precedes in the punctation of gout.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let your points enter those; and then care for that wound with the same thing before it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cautery has three prongs, then you can make three cauterizations in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	About the cauterization of the tonsils, which is the help of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the assistant's neck is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not stop at the time of its return, you must reduce its dislocation before it returns to that position, and with a small movement, it can be displaced as we have demonstrated, so first reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; and raise the tongue, which is in the part of the throat above the tonsils, to the parts above the mentioned parts of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the parts below.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then, with the cautery having two prongs, this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then, cauterize the tongue before it enters the other side; and the figure of cauterization will be as follows from four prongs.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and it should be done according to the amount of tension; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some cauteries are adjusted according to this count and for what reason they are the cauteries .viii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place your hand over the cauteries with salt, and make the patient comfortable, and the limb should not be painful for a while until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the parts above and below, then make that, and then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, so that the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and wet moisture in the stomach that multiplies rapidly, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confirm it, then cover the patient with two blankets, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that part with three cauteries: one cautery on the chest for the length of one pointed cautery, and two cauteries on the back of the cautery, forming a triangular figure; and adjust those that are not adjusted so that they do not cause harm.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery corresponds to the amount of the two thirds of the neck's goose.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the shape of the cautery is according to this form, it adds, and if you want, use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach is cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens him: and you should place your hand on the stomach according to the amount that you want to test, and then cauterize those points with a pointed cautery; and then care for that wound with the remedy that is prescribed before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the foot due to cold or moisture or heavy wind before its normal composition is restored by excessive discharge, and the patient is cured with the remedy that we have mentioned and does not compare it, then he should lie on his back, and place your hand on the patient's neck, and test three points on the foot below the hip bones, which is the position of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to its largest size, and the cautery according to the length of the body diagonally.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not understand the movement of the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is applied to the quantity of the most part of the patient's body, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then lift them, the one who has already extended his limbs, and raised his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to use this cautery as a pointed cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to proceed too quickly in the cauterization, and apply the amount of the entire body so that the whole body is burned and reaches inside the intestines, because the patient here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing abscess of the foot with a pointed cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an inflammation or abscess in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient feels increased heaviness and pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the foot, the pain is often very intense and has caused many doctors to lose their minds.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, turn the patient on their side; and then examine the location of the abscess; and then apply the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the form of which has been described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize that and apply the cautery until all the tendon is cooked through, until it reaches the bone, until it becomes pus.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that until it is healed, like the treatment of other abscesses.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery unless that one which is studied in the art of medicine and has been proven to cause fewer complications; but this one has been tried for some time on this operation, but it is better to leave it alone and choose another.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cauterization of the soles.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cautery of the feet, according to this method, is said to be a maker, and this is what you take from the longest dry stick that can be found, and it should be of the same thickness as the one mentioned.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and place it on the fire, and cauterize at that spot where it is between the connection of the scapula and the collar; and with two small cautery needles, one declining a little to the part where the beard was left, and two more in that place which declines between the fifth rib and the kidney, declining a little to the parts behind; and another cauterization at the middle of the chest; and three cautery needles on the back parts; and one cauterization at that spot where it is between the two scapulae, and two more on the two sides of the chest, behind the cauterization which is between the two scapulae.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the pointed cautery, but rather in the open part of the work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also said that ancient people who knew about men using cautery needles similar to iron and ignited them, and put them in the place between the ribs, until it reached that abscess and all the pus was drained, as we have mentioned in the abscess of the finger.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, in this puncture with the cautery, there is no fear, because it has already happened many times in the location of the fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the gallbladder.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the gallbladder with that which we have said about the cure in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cautery in it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three or four cautery needles according to the length of the gallbladder according to the figure of the cautery needles of the finger, the figure of which has been mentioned.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the thickness of each cautery should be about a finger's width or slightly less, and the handle of the cautery should be the same handle as the one used in the foot cautery equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another way to cauterize is to have the cautery with two tines, which causes the dislocation of the muscle, and lifts the ligament that is at the end of the bone, which holds the joint of the left patient's foot.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be the one that lifts the ligament according to the length of the body, so that the cautery points are made at the appropriate latitude.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both tines, ignite one, in that moment when the other ones penetrate the ligament of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four cautery points are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three tines.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not leave scars for too many days, which is more beneficial than the other previous causes in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	About the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery should not be used in dropsy, but rather in a proper place.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the dropsy, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, but rather use four cautery points around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the chest, and another cautery on the back, and two cautery points between the spines of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the abdomen, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery in place for a long time to prevent bleeding.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment close to the pointed cautery that heals by which they are attached to the two understanding, and serve them fastened to the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the pointed cautery that is cauterized the abdomen is like a claw according to the form above, and the one that is cauterized the two is like an olive according to what is previously to its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of the feet and the cushions.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydroptic water and filled with salt water, cover that you cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in no contact with that which is between the auricular and the annular, and raise your hand to the cautery and do not twist that; and raise your hand, and do not return to that at all, because the salt water is drained.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	And the cautery in this form: And make two cauteries on the two cushions, and in each cushion make a cautery at the end of the cautery cuticular.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be of the length of the cushion: and leave the donkey and the other below the middle of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some water can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then care for those causes that we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cauterization of wounds in the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When wounds in the abdomen are caused by friction and moisture entering through weaknesses, these are digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and they are cured by those methods of treatment and not by cauterization, and sometimes the patient suffers from a strong cauterization, then cauterize that area with a large cauterizer on their stomach according to what was previously done in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterizer of the circle and with four cauterizers in the delicate circumference of the abdomen, with the clavilh cauterizer; and with the cauterizer over the alcatin on alozis large, or with two cauterizers.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see the abundant humidity and the patient is bearing it well, then cauterize that above the stomach and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries near the stomach and near the inguinals, which will cure it greatly, do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter thirty-four.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are old hemorrhoids in nature or one of thick humors that have been infiltrated or corrupted by humidity, and they are cured by the method we have mentioned in the division, do not confuse it with another cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the lower spine of the back, and with two called "umbilical".
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach of the patient is infiltrated and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is puffed up, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cauteri as mentioned earlier; and with one cauteri on the chest, and with another cauteri on the belly of the patient with a clavilh, and leave the cauteri for some time under, and cure the patient before it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the use of cautery in the treatment of abscesses.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise the abscess, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then introduce that ignited cautery into the incised abscess, and finally push it until it reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus comes out.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make one or two incisions, so that if the wounds are too large, then cauterize each of them after you have drained them, and finally dress those wounds with what you give them from the ointment until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do it in a moment of anger.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the use of cautery in fistulas that are formed naturally in the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When a person has an abscess in the natural back, and it is old and drained, the rotting moisture is removed, and then that which is more suitable for covering is placed over it, and then the amount of its depth is determined by the front pinch.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then use a cautery that resembles a needle.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that lit cautery into this abscess, according to the amount in which it intersects the covering.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then repeat this process with the cautery every few days or three or four, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the abscess goes to the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not from him, then know that it is penetrating into his bones and corrupting them, or that is one of those causes from which he will remember the memory in his place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the tonsils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain occurs in the tonsils due to cold or excessive wind, and the patient's cough is blocked, then know that you should cauterize that one on the tonsils with a pointed cautery, and cauterize each tonsil with a clavilh of which you have remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if you cauterize it strongly, then do so a little later, so that three lines of cautery will come, and they will be more effective in the end.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder is weakened and softened by cold and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold his urine, then know that you should cauterize that one on the posterior part of the bladder, as soon as the pels of the pentenilh begin to grow, and cauterize with a pointed cautery in the middle part, and with another in the opposite side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the foot; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or use two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the nail cutter should be used as needed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the mouth.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the mouth is injured and becomes wet, and when pressure is not allowed, and the teeth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their presence, then it is necessary to cauterize that location with three cautery points around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cautery points, and use the nail cutter.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates in the joint of the elbow, and it becomes dislocated, and when the tendon is stretched over the other, as they are compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is often in the knee joint.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, you should use the pointed cautery to cauterize the patient on the corresponding part of their body, as if it were a circle, so that you can feel the edge of the wound with your hand, and so that the wound falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the pointed cautery should have the same shape as the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this pointed cautery is not available to you, then use three pointed cauteries or a large olive-wood cauterizing tool.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the pointed cautery should be made according to the thickness of the entire wound; and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the part of the body, and its cause is that it has been frozen and moistened, the patient is cured with the remedy we have mentioned, and this remedy is antiquated, then you should first lance the patient to remove the thick humors with foul or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And there are two types of cautery handles: one is a medical cautery, and the other is a fire cautery.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And the second type of handle is known as one that cauterizes the part above the ankle, with three triangular cautery tips in this form, and makes them at good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery is the thickness of the tip and if the cautery is olive oil or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some crevices are made on the cautery at the top of the ankle so that there are four cautery tips.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want to, cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the dislocation of the ankle, which contains and burns the entire sinew.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the cautery handle in situ when pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the space.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends into the space, then cauterize with two cautery tips on the space above the location where the patient's pain is; and with one cautery on the shoulder for a few days on the left side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the pointed cautery, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain extends to the area where the feet are located, then cauterize that spot with three or four points or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains that the pain is on the back of the knee, then cauterize that spot with a pointed cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful during the cauterization that you do not burn the nerves or cause great damage, and that for that reason you should not place it on the patient without proper caution or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen others who cauterize on the scalp and burn in the cauterization, and the bed is filled with fire until the tumor is achieved, and the fire pierces and corrupts the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then apply that.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men say in the cauterization of any cautery: make it similar to a circle of iron that encircles the entire palm; and its orifice should be according to the size of a date nut or about a finger's width.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And that circle should be another third; and the space between them should be according to the width of a thumb; and those circles should be placed from two parts; and the length of those wires should be a thumb or two thumbs, and make in those edges of iron decently covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red and gives off sparks, and then it should be placed on the part of the patient, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that part with three cauteries in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that for three days; apply ointment to that part and cover the wound for several days; and then care for that part until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Oh sons, of this kind of cauteries we have not used much because of the fear of its danger to the body, and because of the fact that we have found some that endanger it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	The places where they suffer from these cauteries, and eventually find the place of them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	The places where they stick the adhesive cauteries are that you make two circles without a needle in which the end of the iron gate of the door; its length is in the narrowness of their sides two nuts or those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between which the quantity of the thickness of the said; and its opened from below and above, and its contained between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the part of the patient's body that is on the left side, and cover the area with your hand; and then take water and pour it between two circles, and its quality should be like a small fire gradually, and suffer the patient for the quantity of an hour, and the bite and adhesion of it — that is, the bite has as if from fire — until the bite stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off the tail of all the water with the second water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then apply it for three days and pause over that border until the black spot of the abscess remains, and then apply it again after several days, and drain from there; this is also recommended.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with the ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or chest, place it in the state that contains water equal to the amount of water made in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of tail water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and not extinguished from the ashes of one part, and crushed it in a new wave of which the part left behind is perforated by a small hole, according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of another boiling wave on it, and pour over that alkali and living ash from two water which takes those by a certain amount, and put that in your hand for good compression, and apply the hot water that remains from the part behind to the boiling wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, which is very strong and sharp, the one that is administered in certain medical operations and in cauterizing other members, which operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines are applied widely, such as those made from tea and acetic acid and a cause that is not mentioned here, which are mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Guilielmus recorded from an ancient man the operation and cure for which he was cured of gout and sciatica pain, and praised it greatly because of that, and said that no other cure was necessary, and that it was healed by a remedy like this, which is very effective.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be placed near a certain herb, and if that herb is not available, then take fresh figs; and the one that is to be used should be crushed with a small amount of gray salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the cushion, or on the chest, and applied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it remain for the quantity of three hours or until the patient experiences a discharge of phlegm.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then apply that to the foot, and when the body of the patient is wrapped, enter that into the ground, where the pain ceases and is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you should know that no one can use this cautery for these remedies, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And it has been said that when the goat wound is cauterized, the vein stretches; and this is how the cautery should be made: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat dung and apply it to that with fire until it is made into charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not stop doing that until the sensation of pain reaches the ankle and the pain stops.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cauterization of two pains.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is in the two feet due to various causes, such as from walking or from impact or from excessive evacuation, and from causes similar to those, by the infusion of wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not used in this single species which is made by the infusion of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuation of the patient, he is given fetid and similar pills to them, which are made on both feet in which the pain is three lines wide according to the width of it, rather than trying to apply cauteries or more, according to the amount that the patient tolerates and the power of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And this cautery is made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cautery hooks according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cautery at the beginning of a swelling.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Swellings occur in this disease in small children; and from the beginning of it on them, it is customary to happen on their structure in the legs, the elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And often in the lower spine of the back and on the nape of it, which begins to overcome the other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see that and want to prevent it, then do so with this cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which holds the cautery on all part of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want to, cautery around the spine with the pointed cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then care for the place until it is healed by what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Remember that cautery should not be administered in swelling that is caused by spasms of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Chapter 44. On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, if gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not subside, then repeat the cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery in the area around the joint of the foot.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the cauterization is done with an oil from which this is made:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads to the other joints or to other parts of the body, and it does not subside, then cauterize each one with three or four points from this cauterization oil.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use a pointed cautery that is not yours, then use that one, and do not press your hand too much on the handle of the cautery before, only enough to hold it firmly.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain extends to the ankle and the foot, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the hands and it is called gout, then make points around the base of the fingers as they revolve, make points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the said places, then make points around the base of each nail and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain extends to other joints or muscles, then cauterize all the tendons of each part of the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient from good care and reception of medicines, because if good care is given and flatulence is evacuated, this cautery will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the wound is in the inguinal region and the intestines are pressing against the abdomen, and this begins to happen, then tell the patient to lie on their side and use gentle methods so that the opening from their stomach does not occur.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and tell them to hold their breath so that the opening from their abdomen is not made or the intestines come out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the patient's thighs and say, "hold your breath," and try to push the rupture on the outer side of the pelvis, holding the end of which is similar to the top of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape of it:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	so that it burns and makes sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that part of the body where your hand is, and insert the needle into the joint of the little finger through the middle of the thumb; and repeat that other technique if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine because it does not come out through the patient or cause other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the needle, do not press on the bones, and do not perform your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And remember that the needles for children should be thin according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the location of the cautery for three days until the scab from the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of those other wounds until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should lie on their back for four days before the wound is sealed and the infection is treated.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And cover the wound with a nutrient according to the length of time of its treatment, which should be placed on the patient's abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And after four days, when you want to remove it, then administer a clean bandage, and keep it for another four days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be careful of work and replenishment of food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when using this regimen of healing, the whole person is healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I direct the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and so that they do not move, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the coda is like the clean part of it; and then take care of that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And then the first doctors said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery of this form, rather than with a needle.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed on the side of the rupture that is closest to the latitude, and another line on the other side; and your hand with a claw-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is thinner and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cauterization of twisting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the pain in the limbs is caused by a blow or a blow, and persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery for each member should be according to its size, constitution, virtue, and location of twisting and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for according to the custom of those pains, they are points in a member that approach the one that approaches the joint, so that you can achieve those cauteries within that patient before he is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cautery of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers are sometimes burned with a cautery for great benefit, and if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of the flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize that one, consider if the leprosy is common and it has been cured by that which we have said in the division and not this, and do not fear over the patient that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his appearance, then cauterize that one on the forehead with a very sharp cautery: one at the middle of the forehead, and another behind it, keeping the face to the end of the hair; and two on both ears; and one behind, on the back or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And the last of your hand is to hold the cautery a little within the bone, and from there the scars are displaced, so that the expiration of large vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize on the sore according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the patient and is visible, then apply the cauteries mentioned in the previous chapter on those parts; and apply a pointed cautery to the tip of the nose, and two pointed cauteries on both ears, and two pointed cauteries on two spines of the neck, and two pointed cauteries on the spines of the back, and one large cauterizing iron near the collarbone, and one over the shoulder, and two over the elbows, and one over each elbow, and two over the hands, and one over each hand, and two over the arms, and two over the muscles, and two over the tendons of the patient's feet; and cauterize all the joints of the mentioned parts and the feet, and on each toe of their feet, and over the soles of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn those nerves that are above the ankle.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some of the veins are cauterized with one cautery on the duodenum and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you will know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and helpful it is; and you will know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with the others, so that the body of the patient is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you should know that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints, following the indications of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cautery that numb member with a pointed cautery according to the size of the member or its location.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And if it is necessary for the cautery to enter the tip of the finger a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that with a dressing until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes the stomach is cauterized by some means that causes pain to the body and feet, and to the spine of the back and the eyesight of the nerves that move that member, and it remains in a state of stupor.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume over that, but rather the one that is known in the anatomy of members and the exit of all the nerves that move the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cauterization of warts that are morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are persistent and do not respond to any of the medicines, then cauterize with a pointed cautery on that area according to the quantity of the specificity of the skin entering which remains white and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that powder made of flour of errors and of lentils with roasted oil and of arnica leaves, and of columbine or of iris, each one being a part and all are mixed, and then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of the skull.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and one wants to remove that tumor, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along its circumference as it is rolled up.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And it is said that it should be cauterized with the rear cautery in the middle area; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have already seen this in some cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is better to cauterize it along its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a moxa.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 10.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abdominal matter is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess or because of the patient's old age, weakness, or time, and you want to hasten its maturation; then cauterize it along its circumference with a small moxa cautery; and after that leave it alone so that it can mature.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to make a perforation with this cautery, then place it in the following form: and pause it at the middle point where it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed too deep, so that the flesh of the arm is injured; and then care must be taken to heal it.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 62
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cauterization of corrosive substances.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive substances are corrupting agents that move around in the body, which corrode those who have them as if they were fire consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that corrosive substance in the place where suffering from cautery with fire, then place small and large clavils according to what is convenient in the place where it is corroding.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that part completely until you eliminate all the corrosion and there is no cause left of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it rest for three days, and place olive oil mixed with three parts of honey on the cauterized places until all the scabs are eliminated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then carefully remove those meat scraps that are generating infection.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	However, if after three days the meat becomes healthy where there is no corruption, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on that part which remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And some sharp medical instruments are applied to those places, where it is like a cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, a pointed cautery of fire is not suitable for burning pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already told the cure of that part with sharp medical instruments in the division, and take that one which will be needed from there.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of claws and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	These are warts that arise from the parts of the foot, which is called claw, and it is a great cause, entering into which makes the foot; and cautery is applied in those two ways, either by fire or by a pointed cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cautery by fire is that the cautery cone is similar to a pen knife, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw of all part, and should be of sharp margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that hot iron on the nail, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it remain for three days until it begins to move.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that with wild marjoram, crushed and mixed with salt, and let it remain on that for a while until that creature is eliminated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the wound with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries some water, and you should take a syringe of iron or of steel or of a pen's nib, and place that on the nail; and then gradually add a few drops of water to the syringe, and place your hand, and rotate that with the compression of your hand from all sides, and press the edge of the syringe on the root of the nail, and find the water cauda flowing to the point of the root of the nail; and wait for the patient an hour for the bite of the water cauda, and then remove that, because the nail has its roots eliminated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if they are able to bear all of them on their bodies, then do so.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And if the tumors are not completely removed, then use those remedies that eliminate the mucus from the wounds where the flesh is generating them.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has trembling due to a disturbance in the nerves or fever from a similar cause, it is customarily advised that you cautery those parts with four cautery irons or with one over the spines of the back, between each spine, put a cautery; and on their chest, and above their stomach, use an olive oil cauterizer.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient is relieved and the healing of the sick person is accelerated.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cautery for accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are abscesses in the body that have formed from thick, corrupt matter, it is advised to begin with this remedy: cautery over the entire head of the fistula with a thin cautery iron, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with the long nozzle of an ear syringe; or with a round cauterizer.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes, the pointed cautery is applied at the beginning of the expulsion according to this method; and if not believed, it is disrupted by those who make excessive use of it, and heals from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is better to do this before the evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of fluxes of blood from a wound by incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too many people are applying the pointed cautery to the artery that should be incised, which causes defloration, or to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain in that state.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, if something happens to anyone, then place your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your palm over that area until it stops bleeding, and do not let it come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place your hand on the wound, and apply small and large numbers of cautery olives, and blow on them until they are slightly ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then approach the second location and place the probe on the area where the artery is ruptured, above the vein, quickly as possible so that the bleeding stops, and then apply the cautery through which the wound is closed and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And when the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery while you hold the bleeding and extend the cautery, then take another cautery constantly from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is closed.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that another evil comes over the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to close the wound in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either apply a cautery as mentioned above, or extract it when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of the artery are burned and the wound is closed, or it is tied with a strong bandage or a strong bandage, or it is placed on medicines that have the virtue of closing the wound; and they should be strengthened with a pillow at the construction of the wound.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who administers restriction of the bandage and the straitjacket or by position of causes that burn and of similar ones, does not compare but rather tart.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If that ends up with someone and is not the doctor present or medicine, then open the indicated point on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand to the great constriction of the patient until the swelling of the inflamed part is stopped, and over the arcery the indicated one should not remain; and over the arcery sprinkle with the water of a great coldness until it is congealed and swollen; and cover in which there is cauterization or medicine necessity.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and puncture and bleeding and of leeching and of wounds and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that all illness in which cauterization with fire is convenient and medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which it is necessary to have the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters of the subdivision of the head from the top to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who wants it may be relieved of that, regarding what he has asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And because I begin that, child, know that in this chapter is contained what was in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because of that, child, know that in the operation which is in this chapter mentioned as sucking out the pus, which is also called aspiration, incision of the abscess or extraction of the bone or incision of the stone and its like.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the midst of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that you should not fall into that in which there is doubt, because some evils are caused by human errors.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them there is some that you will go to your own illness and it will be caused by death, and you will suffer from the violence of your illness, and from the length of your illness, and from the fear of the illness which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you that which you have and say it is a remedy, you should wait for the health, and their sickness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not trust that which comes to you from the one who does it in this way; and your caution should be greater than what is customary, and your greed; and do not presume any cause about it unless you first obtain certain knowledge by which it verifies for you, and to which successful succession praises.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your sicknesses diagnosis and indication of that to which it is converted as salvation, because in that one there is for you help above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God gives you His own understanding and does not lead you in the wrong direction and protect you, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you should distinguish this chapter by chapters following the second chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is good for you to ask about that and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	About the cure of gout that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this disease often affects children during childhood, especially when the newborn's head is soft.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Sometimes it occurs due to an unknown cause.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have never seen this disease in adults; and to all those whom I have seen who had it, death was always the result, and for this reason it has been seen as an unfortunate work in those cases.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen a child whose head was full of water, and the child's head was always magnificently swollen until it could not be touched because of its size, and more than the water increased inside until it died from fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this water is added between the bone and the cartilage, or it is added behind the bone over the joint.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the water is between the bone and the cartilage and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the child's head at the level of the latitud, and the length of the incision should be two fingers deep until the water runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity increases even more and the abscess becomes larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity reaches the bone, then you should expose all the corners of the head and pour water into it when you understand that the wound is clean and not to your hand.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So that you make three incisions at the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then remove all the humidity through the incision; and strengthen the incisions with cloths and feathers; and apply hot water from above and olive oil for five days, and remove the scab and cure the wound with trials and remedies, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until that member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, as sometimes it appears in the back, or in the part downwards, or on the right, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do that which is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and engage it with a bandage, as this may cause the patient to die from blood loss due to the outflow of blood during the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	About the incision of the arteries that are close to the ears, called temple arteries.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Two.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a catarrh or swelling occurs in the throat or chest, and this is treated, and no cure is found in this treatment, then the cure should be sought in the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries that the patient holds in his hand, and you apply a rough cloth to the place so that the vessels appear, and you strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and the places of each one are close to the places that are close to the ears, which are hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then approach the arch with a probe, and then insert each one into the space of each part that is sharp and enters into the bone, and that is also for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the probe through the artery and cut that into the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is not adjusted to those two adjustments, when any vein is incised, the blood flows out in a pulsatile manner, which is often missed.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the arch does not appear at the circumference, then measure the amount of space from three adjustments, and then approach the probe, and enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which is taken from the blood is an amount of one unit, and very little does not take more or less, and all that is according to the amount that appears from the virtue of the patient and the expansion of the arch of that.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the cause, and if there is some reason for the phimosis, then incise that so that it does not become an abscess cautiously.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with feathers and strips of cloth, and then care for that area until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	About the extraction of stones that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or large stones migrate to the temples due to moisture and quality in the eyebrows, or violent and similar ones, and they are treated with medical methods and do not improve, we have shown in these diseases extraction of stones from the temples, or cauterization of those that we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient removes the hairs that are in the temples; and then he understands the stone that is apparent in the temple where it is shown by its size, and it is hidden only to a few people due to its violent nature.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then the area should be scraped with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the stone appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the shape of the tool you will use:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you will use the scissors to cut the thread that is in the way until you reach the archery; and then you will insert them into the wound and extract the threads that are above the surgical area until you remove the thread from the scissors and discover the threads of the tunics that were left there, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the end of the needle, and then cut one part according to the amount by which its ends were elongated and stretched, and not too much, because if they are not cut, the blood will not stop flowing.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove about one unit of blood every three minutes.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the wound is large, then you will sew it in two places with strong double thread of silk or with cord, and not cover it with the putrefaction that prevents the consolidation of the wound and does not stop the blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then, approach the excess that is between two ligaments; and do so at that hour or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that pointed cautery into the joint where the excess has been incised, and it will be in the place of that missing part.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or a scalded condition; because cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish moisture, and therefore it is better in young people.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the ribs that have collapsed in the old hollow, and place them on clean dust properly made, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and warmth inside until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working on another part of the ribs, at that time you should restrict that sinew, or cauterize it, or what fills the hollow place, and strengthen your hand until it is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If you do not have any of those present, then pause your finger over the spot where the swelling is connected, and apply cold water from a vehemently cold source until the inflammation subsides, and then strengthen it according to the convenience.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is used more in the extraction of tartar is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two prongs, because you have to feel both sides well, and pause as needed, moving it until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein into two parts, so that it is elongated between its extremities, which are not solidified at all by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two prongs is as follows.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the sharpness of two prongs is too great, it is better to have one with a slightly dulled edge, because if they are very sharp, they tend to cut the flesh at high speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	When there is an excess in those places, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be removed liberally.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than any other work and more thorough.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two ribs is equal to the amount of the mentioned excess.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of bodies with sharp and acidic wounds of the wounds.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the wounds are acidic, and the body is one of those veins that are above the forehead, and there is no cause of healing in medicine, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and feels pain in their forehead as if they were walking with ants, and the wounds of that one are exhausted, humid as if their fur was known, and their feathers are scratched by the acidity of the tears, the ancient remedies in the treatment of those of this operation, and not to call that treatment "spreading".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to raise their arms, which are on their forehead, and then insert three equal fissures along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two times: the first fissure should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second along the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are on the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And watch out for the arches that are in two layers, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each insertion is three times the quantity: adjust it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry cloth, moisten the parts that are dry.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then place the space of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the insertion:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples into the second insertion.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions above the bone, and then move it towards the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then step into this space and insert the first instrument, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side of the scalpel against the flesh attached to the tissue, and the dull side on the bone, and push it into that space until it reaches the second incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May the incision be continued along that edge of the tissue, and then move it into the second incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal amount has been removed, express the locations of the joints of the bone with a congealed substance.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place a piece of old cloth in each incision, and place your hand over those powders that are in a liquid and a dry state, and make sure they do not become infected.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for that area with an ointment made from basilicon, olive oil, and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of gravel and the stones that descend from the parts divided by the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When a person has frequent gravel and stones that descend from the parts divided by the head, and often the patient's eyes become weakened, and their eyelids ulcerated and the hairs fall out, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, you should know for these accidents that the materials and gravel do not come from any other veins than those from the parts divided by the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is to order the patient to raise their own forehead, and then insert a small incision at the middle of the forehead, on the left side (and begin the incision from the temple on the left into the right temple; and it should be incised through the bone; and extend your hand through the temple bones which are muddied by mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry the entire wound with a dry cloth or dry cloths and then stuff them between the two labia of the old man's crotch or with his clothes.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply a new dressing on the swollen part to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then cover the bone that begins in the nasal cavity with the drying regimen that makes the flesh, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colloidal flour and mix them, and from this make a plaster and administer it to these wounds to promote the healing of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of that which catches in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of that which catches in the ears is one of four kinds, either it is a mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and salt, or it is a plant cause such as celery or beans, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and similar things, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	When a painful bone spur or other similar cause occurs in the ear or elsewhere, and the ear is not adjusted or believed to be affected, and the ear is placed on the sunlight, and if you see the pain, then some cause of olive oil or sage is distilled into it, and administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze as a condition, and open the nostrils for the event of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, which are often forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not forgotten, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called the epicircular subtle gesture, which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten with the gesture, then good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with the subtle onchion, which has this form:
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not forgotten by that, then make a small aram needle and introduce the end of the needle into the ear canal and close the area around the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed out but the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then remove the strong-smelling cloth that has been placed on the patient's nose, as we have found it to be harmful.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	However, if this method is not forgotten, then take some lavender or old clothing that has been used to cover the patient's face, and place it on the end of the bed, and then cover the patient with it decently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert something into the patient's mouth to facilitate breathing, and then dry the mouth from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if all the causes that we have found are not forgotten, then you should cut away the part that has become abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut away that part is to first secure the patient's sephasic vein and then remove it according to the method of its virtue, and then place that wound between your hands and turn the patient's mouth to the parts above, and make a small incision in the roof of the mouth where the grey matter of the brain is located.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the lunar-shaped wound reaches the bone, and the bone is found, use appropriate instruments; then quickly close the wound at that time, and cure it before it becomes healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is in the elbow and it is one of the large glands that believe and swell, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not follow my advice, then take a thin spatula of this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and apply that abscission to the gland that fell into the elbow.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that the gland is already moistened by the vapor of the elbow, and pause it in small presses, and extract it with these tools or with a thin instrument, or ab initio have, which is praised for the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that enters the elbow, let the patient use a snuff to condition the start, and fill the elbow with a little old cloth, and apply it over the elbow where the water is, and if it is removed by that, it is good; and if not, then take many thin bones and lions according to the length of the said, and calf them in the fire for a short time, and let the patient insert one of those in the tract of his elbow and strike it with another bone on the bone inside the elbow.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then do not stop that stone until all the water is drained out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water is drained, you take a piece of paper or cotton, and place one end in the ear canal and extend the other end into the fire until it is burned completely.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another cotton and do that many times until all the water is drained out, and then remove that with a canula as it is called from below.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of beasts entering into that ear canal, if it is a small one, as it is said in the division; but if it is a large one, which causes pain to the side of the womb, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and oncis, and the cause of it is more likely than all other causes that occur in the ear canal.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms that are generated in the ear canal, when you treat that with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover that you regulate the ear canal to the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there appears here any cause of worms, then extract that thin or sharp instrument, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide needle of the following form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin end of the needle into the second ear, according to the amount that can be tolerated by the patient; then apply strong pressure with that, and make those movements until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey your instructions, then open and close the circuit of the needle with the following wax; then administer distillations that have been used in the past for treating worms, and find that in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your emission is the one that pours the medicinal oils into the second ear using this instrument of which the following is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or brass, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus, it should be done as it is in the cavity of the catheter for containment here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it in the end of the catheter decently, and then pour oil into the cavity of the auzenment, or some herb, or whatever liquid you want from these medicines in the catheter — and that is in the aurelha —, and then introduce the ray above and press your hand on it to compress the liquid temporarily until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the auzenment and the patient feels the oil dripping.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is in the aurelha should already be heated by fire a little bit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you will distill in the aurelha is not too cold, because the medicines of aurelha cannot bear it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of the opening of aurelhases.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some women have been born without the belly buttons of their mothers, and this has also happened in some men, opening of the aurelhase through plague or for no reason at all; and this opening is sometimes made in the front of the aurelha which does not know the excrement, and sometimes in the parts in front.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when an accident occurs at the front of the body, especially in the abdomen, it is often difficult to treat.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when the vomiting is successful, place the patient's head over the basin and observe that area.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an obvious swelling, use this thin spatula-shaped tool to remove it.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the part of it that is small in size has an acute edge on one side and a flat edge on the other, and the spatula is two and a half centimeters long so as not to harm the head.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is caused by flesh that has grown in the head or in the wound, then use this thin and sharp needle to cut it out before all the flesh has grown.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in front of the head, then take a thin and sharp needle and heat it over a flame for a short time, and then place it in the wound of the head.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if the patient has sensed that this position is causing them discomfort due to the heaviness of their body, then they try to relieve this pressure by moving; and be careful not to press the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a cloth of the second quantity, as wide as the opening of the ear canal, which you have wrapped around the elbow; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any pus and insert it into a vessel, grind it with salt, and use it on the wound; and if you see that the ear is already infected, then remove the infection and replace it with another, which you have wrapped in a cerote that is made of oiled rag, until the infection has safely passed; and then cure it within a few days until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a sudden flow of pus, then submerge a cloth or cloth in wet water and place it over the ear, and use the other cure that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of atheroma, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atheroma, which sometimes occurs in the eyelids of the eyes, is sometimes dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should hold these hot or cold compresses on their eyes, and then cut those spots from their eyelids, and place your hand over the areas as follows.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain from blood flow, then you should use a pointed cautery to cauterize those spots under the eyelids.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is to cut the spots and dry them when there is any cause of their eyelids; and when they are cauterized by fire, those eyelids are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Of the treatment of granuloma, which occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Some dry spots occur in the eyelids of the eyes, which is similar to granuloma in its strength and hardness, and because it grows, it is called a wart.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an accumulation of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the great swelling arises from that which appears on the eyelid and is contaminated throughout the entire part; and the cause of this is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision over that part with the fissure through the width, and then scrape off that part of all the parts to facilitate its escape, and then suspend that part and abscise it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if you are not equipped with the incision of this part and do not push it so that it penetrates the eyelid little by little, then in any case, this is not known.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and cure that part within which it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not be harmed by that which remains for this part of the ointment restores it and encases it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling declines to the parts of the eyelid from the surface, then open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an incision, another that you indicate of incision, and press that part of all, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, then this is not known in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then, approach the injury, wash it with salted water; and heal the area with that which is appropriate for it to be healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of eyelids above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is gray matter that arises from the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially in children, aggravates wounds to them and causes their catheters to fall out; and they cannot see the light of the sun because tears gather on those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you see them always on their cheeks, both when they are awake and when they sleep; and their eyelids are humid, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the appearance of pus is in the wound; and when you press the area with your fingers, you push the pus into them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And sometimes the operation is performed when the patient lies on his back and places his head on your hand, and then place cloth under him and around him, and make a circle according to the amount that contains all parts of the body, and then place that above this and press all around the area to push pus into the middle of the circle, and then put in the middle of that humidity with sponge in the incision through its length, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in fasciotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May you cut the cord completely until you reach the arch, as in the most favorable positions, the arch is achieved through a slit following the form of white lead.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those cloths that you have wrapped between the thighs, called parts of the foetus, and rotate them between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust in the slit so that the space does not reach the bone and the other.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May you adjust in the arch at the beginning of the slit, but if you do not appear in the arch, then adjust in the slit a small flat instrument until the process is complete; and then extract those that we have said; and then submerge cloths dipped in hot water and vinegar over them and place your hand on the area and stretch those flat instruments.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And know that they are sprinkled with salt and placed in the cavity of the slit to prevent that which is left from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that part until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	However, if an abscess occurs in that location, then treat it with healing ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	About the methods of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the lids of wounds are not adjusted by their natural hairs and their ancient ones, then those methods of maladies are used as if they were constant tears and softening of the eyelids and within that cause of destruction of the wound which is called tactinir of the wound, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suture; or by cannulas as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore you should cover the head of the patient with your left hand; then convert the eyelid to your left hand, and if it converts, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle in the part that is farthest from the eyelid behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the part below, and that is — close to the margin of the eyelid where there are no hairs, and close to the hairs, and pull the thread above the eyelid, and convert it to the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then insert a needle in the part of the eyelid just behind the eyelashes, into the lacrimal canal; and then remove the felt or cloth placed under the eyelid, and place your finger over the eyelid, and press gently, as if holding a reed.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But it is important to note that the figure should be adjusted according to the amount of eyelid elevation, as this varies among men, and those who need a large incision in the eyelid should have it made according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then insert the needle over the two lines that you have sown, and begin from the lacrimal canal into the lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onion in one of the two angles of the eyelid, and excoriate all of it, and adjust the stitch with two pieces of silk or wool thread, and remove any excess, and apply some causes enviscans, if you want to do so, and otherwise, don't worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And three or four days later, approach the stitches of the wounds and treat that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the stitches in place and treat that with a drying and constricting agent, which is applied to the eye and attached to the wound; however, it is better to remove the stitches after several days.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in their concern for the patient, and it is a good operation, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in taxanir, and it is that the figure of a fan is applied over the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid three fingers apart and bring them together according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, then hold the fingers apart and it is not equal, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle into the larger lacrimal canal, and the second needle into the smaller lacrimal canal, and adjust the needles so that they are equal, and then lift your hand up evenly, and raise the eyebrow over which it is recommended to be applied.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is not yet healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs on your skin or in a wound, cover that abscess with a plaster and the same ointment, and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some eyelid injuries are caused by the eyes being turned inward, so use the same ointment as we mentioned for wounds; but stitches in those cases are more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To bandage the legs is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and you should turn the eyelid and cut the shape according to what I have said; then use two thin strips of cloth of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their should be slightly narrower than the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each thread under the excess skin of the eyelid, and tightly tie the strips of each part, and leave it for several days, until the skin dies and is rejected and rots within that time if it does not fall off.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is too late, then break the bone at the joints, and cure the pain until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then, when it is solidified, raise the eyelid and do not prick the skin.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make needles that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	About raising the needles in the wound when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the needles are not natural, hard, sharp, and pierce the wounds, then the operation in it is that you take a thin needle and place it on a soft and lion's cedar, and when you adjust its extremities, do not nail them in a subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the cedar is the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you make another thin cedar next to it in a short time, and if you want, use the extremities of that one.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and be close to the sunlight so that your work is declared, because it is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that requires it, and make it penetrate into the eye quickly before it comes out of the eyelid naturally.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the eyelid inward and insert that into the axiliary, and keep the eyelids one to three or more but not too many.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand out and insert it into the axiliary in the eyelid that is not pushed out from the eyelid naturally.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is not pushed out, then push it into the parts behind that are not already composed by you, until it is pushed out from the wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then apply it to the wound with your vision, because as you push it into the wound and the wound, it groans and closes the wound, and leave it for two or three days until the eyelid adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the blanket is too short, then you adjust a longer blanket from among the natural ones, and lift it up so that it covers him completely, or until it reaches his chest, and then you lift it up.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the cure of ehrichia that is found in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When ehrichia is found in the eye socket and causes contraction of the eyelid when it turns upwards, on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the plague or dryness or cauterization, and this ehrichia is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of the plague or dryness or cauterization, or by similar causes.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the method of the operation in this be that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that space between them a piece of cloth soaked in oil, and tie them together before they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use remedies for this that cause dryness and constriction; for if you do, it may return worse than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use fenugreek with its mollifying properties, and apply it to the area that is high and semense with him, or use dyaquilon, which should be liquefied with some oils, and apply it under the affected part, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your cure is that you puncture all the tissue that is not solidified according to its original form after heating.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation, which we have mentioned, is only a correction of some imperfections that do not return the form of the area after heating.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of ehratic that is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ehratic that is made in the eyelid, which is not always called ehratic, is sometimes natural and sometimes an accident.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental ehratic is made by pressure or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of this operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal canal to the right lacrimal canal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the parts above the needle and press it with that, and insert it deeply with the space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the eyelid returns to its original shape, it is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it on the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two incisions on the side of the eyelid behind.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two incisions at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they converge, and make an angle with them so that when they gather together, a figure of them is made.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter alpha: a.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then stretch the flesh to that length, which is the width of the eyelid behind it, which is where the eyelid is.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and press them with that thread of wool; and then cure them with what we have said about softening medicines and ointments within which they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it is necessary to remove it by incision or suture or cauterization, then cut a flat incision on the eyelid according to what is prescribed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the calf between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of incisions when it is raised or lowered, that blood should flow in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of incisions, and that is in the form of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artists always prepare everything in every way that is possible for him to enter and make the figure return to its natural form, or near it, and the patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the tools in the best positions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion happens to some men who have their eyelid stuck above the white of the eye, and prohibited from easy movement and their natural works, then cut the extra skin below the eyelid, and lift it up to there, or extend it to the edge.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should gently insert a thin spatula between the adhesions, which should not be sharp to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation, and leave the spatula in place without causing any harm to their wound.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should gradually exfoliate that adhesion until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should apply saltwater to the wound; or pour it in with a syringe containing dissolved salt in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then you should separate the eyelid from the wound with gauze soaked in egg white, and place a bandage on the wound to promote healing over the next three days.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of a gland and the elevation of flesh from the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that a gland can be either nervous, which is similar to a thin, hard bone; or non-nervous, which is similar to white, congealed matter, which when touched, often forms an abscess and the abscess does not heal in its place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And the special instruments do not begin to be used until the large lacrimal duct is entered, which gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to work at the beginning of it is that the patient places their head in the chin on the table, and then lifts the eyelids with your hand, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the eyelash from under the upper eyelid and extends it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and enter it into the corner of the eye, or of a cow, or of a calf, or of a goat, or of a similar animal, or of strong iron, or double the tip of the needle gradually, and place it in the middle of the eyelash, and pierce it with the needle, and pull the eyelash; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the part that is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And if you continue to do so with the needle to the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should gently insert the probe into the lacrimal duct with a thin needle or small forceps, and remove the flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not continue to produce continuous tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the finger is placed on the sunken or bleeding area, as we have said, and then the probe should be gently inserted into this area:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the probe, and that it does not cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then gently insert the probe into the eye and apply a small amount of salt or chief powder made from sinar, and remove it the next day; and care for that area until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the finger is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick in that area, then this type of wound can be treated with medical ointments, and it will heal as it should be and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then begin by cutting the patient's skin and take a thin, sharp lancet of high sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	According to this form:
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is thinned and curled up and has entered into that place, then drip some of your blood onto the wound made from sewing or from a needle or from three salt crystals, and cover the wound with the other side.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that until everything that is inside it has been removed, but if the opposite pus is in the wound, then leave that and cure the abscess when it has been healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the lacrimal gland is not noted in the wound for great harm, then suspend it from an onion; and incise that from that one part, and do not completely finish the incision so that you do not incise the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a drop of poison ivy oil into the lacrimal duct and wait until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the beginning of an abscess and about that which is born from flesh adjusted in the belly.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some veins in the belly are born from flesh, and they are overloaded before they cover the pupil, or approach or become too strong on the eyelids, and forcefully close the eyelids to the parts of the forehead and are assembled at the foot of the balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation is done by the patient lying on their back; and then open the belly of that one and collect all that flesh with scissors, and that flesh is a forcep or a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the belly that you do not descend that which is your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision is the one that you incise those or with an awl which we have recommended in the beginning of the nail, or with small forceps which are collected as soon as the shape of it approaches this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When the incision is completed and the entire flesh is reattached, then fill the wound with salt water, or distill it in powder like the corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a cloth soaked in vinegar to prevent infection.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of wound infection and the wound is not healing properly, and you fear infection, then clean the wound and treat that infection with a solution that dissolves that infection, and repeat that treatment during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh that has been adjusted in this way.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, if you find that all the cure of the wound is being done naturally or accidentally, use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you make sure that that member has suffered that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of blood from the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Blood vessels that are tortuous on the wound and prevent the operation from being performed, and develop the wound in length over several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the swelling in which it is located is very hard and not another illness that is hard, then you collect that swelling.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you command the patient to put his head on your shoulder, and then hang those veins with an onion or two according to your judgment; and that onion should be of fine duplication in this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onions gradually in a cloth according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins are collected with fine forceps, with delicacy, and wipe them off every hour until they become clear of the swelling and are released from it.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Be careful not to damage the swelling with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation in the morning gives the sunlight, and you have a motive firm in your operation that you do not incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then you pour in the swelling with cold water or rosewater to soften that which was hard from the swelling.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If you are unable to collect all of that in one hour, then apply the paste made from all the ingredients that reduce pain, and leave it on for several days until the pain is relieved and the wound is healed.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the application of the paste after the wound has healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing a hernia to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When treating a hernia with a pointed cautery or sharp medicine that does not heal after the description of the wound, do not insert it into the wound, but rather cut open the abscess to drain all the fluid that is in it and let it dry.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in it, then use this instrument of which this is the shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a sharp-headed cap, and made of iron, and the cap should be round like a spike that is made pointed by puncturing with a lancet or aliskalfati for a subtle puncture (as in the following shape).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that one over the affected area of the bone, and gently rotate it between your fingers until you know that that corrosion is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then restore the area with drying and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is consolidated and has good flesh and the body is free from infection for forty days, and it does not recur, does not become an abscess, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and proceed in this manner: and you should use a sharp knife or sharp medical instrument, and when the bone is exposed, then take a tribe in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The outer part of the knife should be triangular, and its handle should be extended into the end as many times as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that one over the bone, and that one near the lacrimal; and stretch your hand a little towards the hole, and gently rotate your hand with the knife until it penetrates the entire bone, and that one feels the pain as if it is being pierced by a sharp object when you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, then apply medicinal styptics that are drying in nature, as you have been taught.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And when the flesh and the wound are healed, the matter that flowed into the parts returns to its source, so it is less severe on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the protrusion of the hernia.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia protrudes to its entirety and does not cause harm or reduction in the stool, then loosen the patient's clothing, and let them follow it, and place a warm compress over the incision site and wound for good drainage; and place a liniment on the hernia made of tar, aloe, senses, and sarcocolla, and apply a strong plaster to the hernia with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of applying the powders is to take cloths from lions' mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the required support.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then place strong linen cloth with thick and tight binding; and repeat the incisions with the succinum; and then remove the bandages and leave the wound straight for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the ligament becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, good; and if not, then repeat the ointment with the powders and the binding and the bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	About the beginning of the eminence of the choroid membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the rupture of the choroid membrane occurs, and it emerges and protrudes through the eyelids as if by a rough surface, and it takes on the shape of a man for that reason, and you want to incise it, then the operation is as we have recommended, which is that you insert the needle into the choroid membrane from the part below and into the part above, and then place another needle double the size of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate, and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double and lift that part of the choroid membrane around the needle, and keep it straight.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place it on the woollen cloth soaked in warm water and let the thread enter the wound.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for that part where the pain is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some of the pieces are gathered from all parts and arranged in a circle around the wound, and then perforated with a thin spatula that comes to the edge of the wound, and let the humid skin descend and enter it immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called cataract is not other than a opacity that is adjusted in the wound like descending water and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of working in it is that the doctor makes the patient sit on a chair prepared and dressed, and then takes the top of his two hands and places it inside where you can see the opacity coming to the parts behind, and then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light, and the patient will see the causes as before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down in the legs, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared for the descent to the sanctuary, then have the patient sit and place a thin sponge on the eyelid, covering the continuation of the conjunctiva and the cornea in the corona (in the eye), until it is expelled from the body.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when it is expelled, you will pour the water with honey in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have made a mixture of fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of water descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which one is appropriate to pierce according to the speech declaring it, then that second one for healing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then make sure you have the patient sit and place their head on a pillow, and then close their eye.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your hand near the eyelid of his eye, if the eye is the right one; or place your hand directly on the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take hold of the spoon with your right hand, if the eye is left; or take hold of the spoon with your left hand, if the eye is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the spoon near the crown of the eye, on the thickest part of the ray in the album of the eyelid on the side of the lower lacrimal duct, and then push it upwards with your hand and rotate it there.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the eyelid and feel that the spoon has already reached its cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And cover that the length of the spoon is the same as the distance from the edge of the pupil to the end of the eyelid, and it is the crown of the eyelid; because you will see that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunica.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the spoon inside the place where the water is, and then throw it downwards with another force, so that if the water descends at first, you will see that the patient's sight is already on the spoon in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; if the water is descending, then pause at that other position in front of which there should not be any vomiting.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dry and not descending, you extract the vomitus with ease, and revolve your hand in the water to dissolve it; then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in the water and wash the wound with that; and then place a poultice of flour or infused barley, oil rosewater and albumen of egg on the wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May those who in our time have paused over that which is written about the use of albumen of egg.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your vomitus by the instrument of the wound because of its hardness -- which is one of those men for whom the wound is hard to treat --, then cover what you take with the spatula, which is called the alberid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce it at that conjunction, and do not stop your hand in the trunk, and see if you are not doing something subtle to the vomitus.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then enter the second medicine that we have mentioned.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient for a surgical procedure that has been performed, where they sleep on their back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place your hand on that area to keep it calm and not cause any harm to their head or the surrounding area.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And the bandage should be placed according to the patient's condition by the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that in the same dark room and extract the foreign body, and make the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do that during the hours of treatments or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having said that, you should do that because water can sometimes be strongly and quickly absorbed.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should remove the pus on the seventh day, and correct that with the medicine that causes the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you observe the patient's face and place your hand over their mouth to prevent them from vomiting, which often occurs during these dark days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then gradually raise the patient's head and discuss their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in some cases, the student of vision is not excused from certain precautions, and then you should be careful with the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already reached some of those that are in the Artach, and some say that a fire is made in the Arabian desert by pouring water over it.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen anything like this in our land that has done this, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can overcome those who do not know them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or copper properly, and their external parts are like this triangular subtlety, the sharp end being like that shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh not in its place in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are different flesh pieces that are sometimes caused by certain causes, such as a spike from a mouse or a polyp; and this malady is called a polypus, which is similar to that pea represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from there there is a cancerous flesh, a black spot, of dark color; and from there it is that the flesh is not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in those flesh pieces that are not fraudulent or cancerous, you should make the patient lie between your hands and place it in the sunlight, and open their nose, and poke the affected area with a sharp instrument.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the parts deformed, and then cut off what you have comprehended from those sharp instruments of a thin space between which you know that all the flesh has been removed; because if there is any cause from which the abscission is possible, then immediately remove that with one of the thin instruments to facilitate it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord has a pustule or an abscess that has not been opened, then pause at that place; or it is one of the malignant pustules, then cut and cauterize the area where the pus has been completely drained and all the cavities have been closed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then apply a compress to the nose, near the opening where the pus and blood flow out.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is open and moisture enters into the palate, then know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If moisture does not enter after the opening, then know that there is no flesh in the pus that has risen to the bones of the nose where it has not been drained.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, after the opening, insert a thin finger into the place where there is some swelling, and gently move it in the mouth, and pause between each movement the amount of time that is possible, and examine the patient and introduce an end of the finger into the nose to remove the cause that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that has been done, draw the patient's odoriferous substance into their nostrils as soon as it reaches the nasal canals, and place it on their forehead, because troops of similar action do this to children in school, and it is a likely cause for those who wish to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place both of the patient's outer limbs on their nose and the other on their mouth, and administer a carnal serration of meat to the nostrils that are in the patient, and do this before you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the patient, and place in their nose an abstraction of swan's down, and do this for three days or more until the entire substance of the meat is consumed.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in their nose a plumbing canula to clear out the years until they are healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you find that it does not cure, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the instrument used for nasal irrigation, which are distilled oils and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it from silver or copper, which is similar to a small open lamp with a small bowl, and the metal in the same way.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canula like this with cane, and the cannula of the nasal irrigation instrument and it is flat, open; at which has a handle in the back of it, which you hold when you pour in the oil or water that you want from the sucs and of the sucking causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This nasal irrigation is very precious: recipe of castor beans, of white bay leaves, of ginger, of safron, of long pepper, of scarabs, of spice ana unc. like this with the suc of blood and of caul, and it is made into pills, and one pill is dissolved in hot water, and it is poured into the nose of the patient facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the noses outside the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	When the nose is swollen outside the nostrils, it is magnified and becomes painful in other days when it is looked at.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And to remedy that, you should incise that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place your hand over the area or use a burning cautery or medicine that is in the place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider if it is yellowish, hard, of dark color and little sensation, then do not touch that which is a cranos abscess; for when the nose is swollen with this abscess, it is due to great malice on that which it had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of lion-like touch and is not of dark color, and when incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incise that which is torn, and cure the area with what exsiccant and astringent enters before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose and lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by a blow or similar injuries.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is dissolved, do not perform an operation in this case unless with other men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if you find any cause for those, consider whether it is a fresh wound or not, and then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and care for that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of discontinuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then consider that you should scrape each part of their visible skin until it is healed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips to suture and strengthen those, and above them sprinkle healed skin powder and three times trissat, and place a poultice of diachylon or any other consolidating plaster on top, leave it for two days or three, and then remove that and replace the plaster and care for the area until the abscesses have formed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the solution of continuity or add needles as we have recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with glue as you have done and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that come in the lower lips in the parts of the buttocks.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Some men have boils in the parts of their buttocks similar to abscesses, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the labia and each of those hard parts, and fill the abscess with the remaining three-sided wound until it is reinforced, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with what has stiptic effect until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the beginning of the flesh adjusted to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A large number of boils are on the adjusted flesh on the gums, which the ancients called albulus, therefore you should suspend that with an onion or what you have with forceps and insert it into its place, and let the wound run or leave the sore.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place your hand on the location, applying stupefying or stimulating powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then puncture it secondarily, and cauterize it, as the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for iron teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth of the parts that are missing and of the front and between the gums, sharp, rough, and some wavy lines are black and are made yellowish or greenish before that corruption goes through them, and the teeth become black.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you should make the patient open their mouth between your hands and place the head of the instrument on the tooth, and scrape the teeth in which those rough lines and similar sand appear before any cause of decay has occurred, and that makes the blackness and yellowish or greenish color and other colors before they are modified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if that is still there at the beginning of the reason, then it is good; and if not, then you should repeat the reason on those on another day and the second and the third until it comes to the last statement in which you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth have the need for various shapes and forms of forceps and tools according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that you can see the shapes of the forceps that are used to remove the tooth from its part and others that are used to scrape between the teeth in different forms, and these forms of forceps should be prepared by you as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You should cure the tooth of its pain at all times and for the entire extraction process, because there is no reason that should delay the withdrawal of the tooth when it is extracted, because the substance is sublimated within which the extraction takes place.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	You should be certain when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, because sometimes the pain deceives the patient and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, which we have already seen in the operation of the teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must determine which tooth is causing the pain, and you know how to do so, first cover the area around the tooth with some space where there might be some usefulness, until it is dissolved from the tooth from the gum of all parts, and then remove that from the teeth, or use fine forceps at the beginning little by little until that concave.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then place a long, strong tool for good communication or extraction, and place the patient's head between your two hands that you hold so that they do not move, and then extract the tooth in a straight manner so that it does not hit the patient or cause them more pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not forgotten, first take one of those instruments, and place it next to the tooth from all parts to facilitate and reduce the effort of its removal at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or decayed, first cover that break and strengthen it with fine wire at its end so that it does not break during your construction on that with tools.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should work carefully with exquisite scarification around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear it away from there, and return over the patient for the malice that is major than the first pain of him.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity in the eradication of them, which they do not administer what we have recommended; for those who are very skilled in causing great harm to people, some of which are more difficult than being quadrupeds, and all of their reasons remain unchanged, or some of those, or that they extract those from there with great force as has been testified by many.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of him is washed with vinegar or with salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is an outflow of pus through the wound, as has been done by many, then scrape some charcoal and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that charcoal does not match, then cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and holding them subtly with those that are praised for their sharpness at the beginning of a long extraction, briefly with a handle and thick, so that they do not bend when performing those tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And there are times with thick handles that when they are used, those that are not bent, are short extraction tools.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian iron descent straight extraction tools, and in the extraction tools of those, there are teeth of which one is inserted into the other and they extract with great force, and sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a ciconia, so it is held, and they are of great strength.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from the jaws that are impacted.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you have to remove a tooth that is impacted, first place your hand over the location next to the tooth for a day or two until the location becomes soft; then insert an anesthetic or use extraction tools with the shape of a ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The outer parts of their joints were cut away using a knife or scissors.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey you and follow your instructions to hold these forceps or hold them, then you must cut over the bone and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument called the atali, which is a small hook with a shape like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it has a short, thick end, make it small and not too thin so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if the bone is broken, it is good; otherwise, use these other instruments of which the following are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extramittent with some roughness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you have helped with this instrument having two slopes of which the following is the shape appropriate:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments that I will describe for the extraction of teeth; because it is important to do this with this instrument which is similar to an awl, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular extremity that is twisted or shortened, which is some swelling, and not too thin so that it is not three-cornered.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments of the teeth are like the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The artisans should be skilled and subtle in the art, so that they know second to none what the operation means and the various maladies; for some of these maladies are of such diverse forms that the ancients did not say or describe a proper instrument.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is triangular or worn out, then be careful with that in its place as it is suitable for the instruments and the forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with the use of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is some swelling little by little, and it is stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or enter until the entire bone is completely removed; then restore the place with suitable medicines for that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pore in the bone, then drill that pore and its surrounding area, and heal it within so that it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not fit naturally in their place, and this is more common in women and especially in revered virgins, you should consider: if one tooth is not close to another, and there is no possibility of a bridge or filling for it, then remove that tooth. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, then use this instrument to remove it. It is similar to a pig's tongue, and should be made of Indian steel with a sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if you have incised it with this instrument in three days due to the hardness of the tooth, and there is no other tooth nearby.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the gum, then use this instrument made of Indian steel with the following shape to remove it.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And if all the iron from India and the marjoram is not available; and if pointed needles are not present, which are made like lima seeds, which are sharpened little by little in several days for convenience, so that no other sharp object is needed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw lines on the skin, and shave it with a razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a sharp object that has been dipped in a part and placed on the tongue, then cover it with a cloth so that the roughness of that fragment is not felt and covered, and filled so that the tongue does not leak or the word is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of sharp objects made of gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or impact, and the patient cannot bear that which hurts, and you have treated it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been successful, then use gold wires instead of silver ones, because silver turns black and becomes poor over time, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the bone is so thin and rough that it can only allow a small amount to enter between the teeth; then take the file and double it between two healthy teeth, and gradually increase the number of turns of the file between the two teeth until the cloth reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the procedure at the same place where you started, strengthening your hand with effort and skill until it is not rough.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your grip be strong enough to prevent the file from slipping off the edges of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then remove the excess file with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place where you have worked, and convert them into something that can be hidden between the healthy tooth and the rough tooth to prevent injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it rest there as it is.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it slips or breaks, strengthen it or them with another file in such a way that it is strong throughout the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness of two healthy teeth, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When a tooth or teeth return to their original place in these locations, and they are recreated as we have recommended, and remain so.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only skilled craftsmen and wise people can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some people are suitable for certain causes of cow bones, and they make them into the form of teeth, and place them in the location where the tooth is missing, and strengthen them as we have said, and remain and serve them well for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter thirty-four.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the beginning of the thread that goes into the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This thread that goes from the tongue to some people or is natural to them, or accidentally and accidentally occurs due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation is that the surgeon opens the mouth of the patient, their own head is present; and raises their tongue, and then inserts that thread according to the latitude until the tongue is released from its recent position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or difficulty in that place, and that is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should insert an uncia and scrape it through the width until you have dissolved the difficulty.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make an incision in the flesh of the thigh and that you do not break this arc and let out pus.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the traces of the incision with clean water or vinegar or fresh water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from being consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If pus comes out, place your hand over the wound; if it does not come out, then cauterize the area with a lancet that is suitable for that.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat those other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, tongue abscesses resemble a small non-specific prohibition of the tongue from its natural operation; and frequently, it is magnified before filling the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case involves opening the patient's mouth from the side and considering the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color, hard and without sensation for the patient, then do not touch that part which is cranial.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it declines to a whitish color, in which there is moisture, then you should apply the onion to it, and insert a thin probe into it, and scrape it from all parts; and if pus ventures out during your operation, then place a piece of cloth over it, which is vetivert, until it is restricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work before you have completed it, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that part with the other treatment according to what has been said.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Chapter 36: On the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and those that are in the groin, and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that resemble cotton, which are deformed and are called axillary glands, which when you cure them with that which we have said in the division and is not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and has little pain, then do not touch it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with a knife because of the risk of infection; instead, let that one mature inside, and then either you will puncture it or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, red, and the root of it is thin, then that one should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether the abscess of it has recovered completely or if it has diminished in any way; and then seize the patient by the sun, and the head of it should be in your hand, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it, and the instrument most noble of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or aram, and thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press that tongue and it shows you the abscess, and cut above that lesion, then take out the pus in the cavity, and pull it away from the sides as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you pull out some cause from the membranes, and then insert this instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are bent, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, a sharp one, which should be made of iron and thin.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then insert this one of which this is the shape of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have inserted one needle, insert the other according to this method of insertion, and then remove the needle from the patient's body.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is internal bleeding, apply a poultice of ground dock root or marshmallow leaf and similar to the causes that stop the flow of blood, and cure it within that time when it is stopped.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes some wounds in the gums give rise to other abscesses or those two boils, and incise them after I have said at the beginning of two honey equal parts.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her gums, the abscess tended to a dark color, with little pain, which had already closed her gums, and the woman breathed very straight, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already put out so much that it had half a finger's width between two teeth.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, you should make a proper incision and put a probe in one of its openings, and pull that out, and then pour out a large portion from it, and then you should incise the other part where you understand from the other tooth, and then close the mouth of it, and press the tongue, and then put a probe in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you should take away a large part of the flesh from it, not all of it but just a small piece.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the best remedy for that woman is to start immediately by drinking plenty of water, and then apply warm food, and do not stop incising that abscess for a long time, and successive abscesses will appear in place of that one, which should be incised until it prolongs.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore you should apply and cauterize the remedy for that woman, and do this often; and then you should walk around and not wash what God has done to that woman.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	About the incision of an abscess when it forms.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the abscess, and it becomes long, then it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured with the remedy we have mentioned in the division, and you do not compare your cure, and if often times the abscess has become flat and thin, then you should incise that which is aggregated round; and if it is at a certain length, and it is bloody, of black color or dark, and not at the center, then you should make the incision in that place, where there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you see the second opening between the patient's thighs that I have mentioned, which is long and white, then make the patient lie on their side and place the tongue depressor instrument that shapes their mouth and put the occlude in the new, and pull that down and insert it into one of the two instruments that are called in the beginning of two chisels.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to insert it any further than what is adjusted to the natural term of its addition, because if you insert it more, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then use the instrument that we recommended in the beginning of two chisels, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the instrument, then use an anesthetic in the cauterization of it, and the handle of the cauterizer should be sharp and pointed, and you should place the head of the patient on your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned, and take a sharp and pointed needle from the one that we mentioned in the beginning of cauterization, and quickly and firmly stitch the wound, and do not make it too thick or delicate, and fill the hollow of the instrument with this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Be careful when applying the remedy in the cavity where the medicine is placed with the spoon, and place the instrument of the medicine on the wound, and the patient turns their head to the side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not drip onto the surrounding area of the wound and cause any complication from the intrinsic medicine.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it onto the uvula for the space of about an hour until that substance is denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap that over the end of the spoon, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the spoon into the cloth in a small canula until that cloth adheres to that canula, and do this as many times as you want from the cauterization of the wound, and leave it there for three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and then perform the cauterization by wiping around the small, red, inflamed area with a cloth, and modify that which is in the circuit of the medicine, and let it be washed with cold water, and let it be cured deformed from the embrocation, and give gargles inside until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is safer than beginning and longer in duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are healed by that which is more subtle than cauterization and beginning, which is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabic scicados, camomile, bryony, and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be submerged in very hot water, and boil; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a trap over the middle of the bowl on which a tool made of brass according to this manner should be placed; it should be made of silver or brass.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And if the tip of the tongue enters the patient's mouth before the steam reaches the uvula over the uvula, and the uvula is not obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this cure until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this cure at the onset of abscesses, because it would aggravate the abscess, and do not do that, but rather declare the declaration of the abscess from there carefully.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	However, if this instrument is not present with you, then take a rod and insert it into the tip of the tongue, because the mouth of the patient should be relieved, since the cloth of the honey prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of what sticks to the groin and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Things stick to the groin or a thorn in the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then cover that which is visible from those, upon which the sight is placed, rather than using your tongue as an instrument to taste, in order to declare what is in the bowl.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not visible and is hidden in the bowl, cover it with a cloth, and make the patient vomit in order to expel the food from the stomach, since often the cause of the disease is removed by vomiting; or if the patient has swallowed a small piece of napkin or a piece of dry bread; or take a sponge made of sea sponge, soak it well with warm water, and apply it to that place, since when it comes into contact with the area where the bones are and are removed, it is often expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And moreover, take an eel and soak it well with warm water, and cut it into pieces and extract it; or take a pork and soak it well in warm water, and cut it into pieces and apply it to the wound.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if those causes are not removed, then use an instrument of the following form to remove them:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is larger than a small one, and on the outside of it there is a cavity that you can enter into its shell for ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And if the aga's head is raised up in sus, and you guard yourself from touching the sieu's bones of the neck, so that it does not engage with you or the spin, or what that doctor puts on his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But if the patient does not enter into that engagement, because of his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and puts it on the bottom, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the amount that is prepared for him to be scraped off.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of sanctified blood attached to the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When sanctified blood is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure of medicines and not comforted, consider this in the neck of the patient at noon, so that you have understood the tongue of him with the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see blood, remove it with a small or delicate cloth.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to remove that, then take a concave canula and insert it into the wound of the patient, place an ignited iron in the hollow of the canula, and do this as many times (until the blood stops flowing and remains in the wound) and keep the patient from drinking water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a full bowl of water and wet the mouth of the patient with that, and wash the mouth with it; do not let any of this water enter the patient's throat, and let the blood settle for an hour, then another servant holds their hand.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if the remedy we have recommended is not forgotten, then inhale the patient with chamomile or asafetida through the instrument we have recommended for inhalation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may be effective.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another method of operation in suffocation of that kind, you take a pipe filled with burning coals and the pipe should be covered with a cloth at its middle where there is a hole, and it should be placed in that hole the end of the instrument; and then remove the suffocation; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffocation is not forgotten until you know that the suffocation has reached the veins, because the veins immediately collapse.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if not, then repeat the suffocation method more frequently, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and do not let them drink water, and if necessary, this regimen should be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat blood from the throat when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps with sometimes, but it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	When the part of the body is similar to the beak of a stork that hangs down, and its surface is rough like sandpaper, and when you find some cause, do not leave it.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the main topic of the sermon on the recognition and cutting of abscesses and their discharge.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special masses, of various shapes, according to the memory of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in puncture and incision of them by various methods, one of which is for the special type of abscess that does not drain; and because you understand about the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where the abscess occurs on the body, such as the abscess in the head is different from the abscess in the buttocks; and the abscess in the flesh is different from the abscess in the joint; and each of them has its own incision for surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And moreover, some abscesses that have not been perforated but rather matured at the end of their lives or in their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses that are supposed to be ruptured when they are crossed, and are not matured according to their completion, such as abscesses that are directed towards the joints, because an abscess that is heading towards a joint, its cause is prolonged until it reaches the surrounding area, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, it will not be treated properly; or it is near the anus, therefore rupture the unmatured one; and do not rupture it crudely, but rather the one that is near the anus, so that it does not cause harm to the surrounding area and is lengthened towards the parts of the anus, and it is made a fistula, or that it is made in the term of it that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May you know the time of the abscess's puncture, and do so when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is ripe when the swelling of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in pain and pulse, and the increase in the redness of the abscess, and other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you know where to make the incision near the abscess and from which direction the pus will come out of the cure of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the incision should be made quickly through the long of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the legs or feet, and in the location of the arms, of the cords of the nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all locations equal to those in which it does not reflect; because in those that reflect, use incision according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	May you wait until the abscess is in flesh, because it is customary to make the incision of it before it is confirmed by the digestion of that according to the complement, as we have said; because if you puncture that immediately, it prolongs the suffering of the poor and causes great pain, and very hardens the lips of it and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	If the abscess is too large to be punctured according to the width of the flesh or bone, or if it is too small for the member to need it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer small punctures, and in large abscesses, make a large and wide or deep incision according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses where it is necessary that the cavity be incised and closed, when made, as if it were a wound, as if it were a bubo or a glandular swelling.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that have three-cornered incisions; and of those that are made like the shape of a spearhead, as if they were the abscesses of the elbows.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are made with round and crescent-shaped incisions, similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	If the one who does not have any similar to those is a superficial abscess, then you must make a shallow puncture or just flatten it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not cover it, but let it all come out in that hour; taking away part of it, and the next day put it back into the other side, and the next day take away a larger part, and do this gradually until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very weak, or female, or a child, or elderly and in decline, where the animal spirit is more aged and resolved at the exit of the pus, and the patient dies quickly, and you perform these operations on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter, and your incision where you make these abscesses, so that the pus is removed and consider whether the pus of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then you administer any remedies for it or from ancient times; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the incision are wide, then wait until they meet in the middle.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If a part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that area, you should cover it with a piece of cloth made of linen or fabric, as when you have treated wounds or sores, to remove moisture; and strengthen it by the third day; and then proceed with that treatment and cure it with the same liquid that enters until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you have an outbreak of pus during the operation, then you should administer cold water and apply a cloth soaked in it on the affected area, and place that over the location where the pus is coming from.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the outbreak of pus persists, then you should administer medication and treatment and powders as recommended in various locations of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the winter season, and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then you should cover it with powder and oil caution, and place those on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you should apply powdered eggshell or vinegar and oil, or vinegar and oil, and all of this should be applied before the next clean day, as we have said, and then you should remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to it whatever is appropriate for its healing within the time it takes to become healthy.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said that every type of abscess should be treated differently by specific chapters individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck of the jaw.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	Small abscesses in the neck of the jaw, and they are of a special type that contain tunics that are unique to them; and their specialty is their hardness.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they have sharp points, and of those that contain moisture similar to honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain moisture similar to snow and ice; and of those that are stony and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the dry section, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as it does not oppose resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the dry section of those is that you extract them with an instrument in the shape of which you approach it, which is called a lancet, as long as you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If that which contains is moisture, then cut that instrument in sections according to its length and on the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line of B until the line of G. So when the moisture is evacuated, then you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it all, because if it returns, if there is any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian mummy, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it there for another day, because that water corrupts everything that comes from that layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the Egyptian remedy second and third, if necessary, until you find that there is no cause for that skin problem; then cure the plague with the remedy until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert the second one in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a hollow, crocodile-shaped section, and pierce it between two lips of the section and scrape all the parts, and exert your skill in extracting that skin which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your surgical skills cause trouble, then do what I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, do the same thing in the abscess with the section and cure according to what you have told; a section over an inflamed abscess is lighter, because it is less painful and has less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some people have such abscesses that they never get wet; the cause is that you insert a section over an abscess on the head of an old woman and squeeze the abscess like a deaf stone, dry, white, which cannot be washed, and if anyone is affected by that, it will cause harm.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other cases of abscesses in the head, this is not the chapter for this, as with the abscesses that come to the heads of children and require the removal of their hair, but the section of these all should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the incision of those from the lowest part of them to prevent the spread of infection to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply that which is appropriate for that of treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofula, which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and some of which are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunica, and as with the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The specific types of these scrophulas are small, some of which are hard like stones, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malicious and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you have seen in good condition in the Tumor, of which the color of that which is manifest is prophetic to the color of the coda, and is malignant to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the ribcage, and is not preonda, so that you incise that one from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend two lips of the coda to the tip, or to the tip if you have a need for those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that small by small.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more important that the vein or nerve is not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the space should not be sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the incision, or disturb the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or ribcage and prohibited it from your operation, then pause in the glass of three-sided or other powders which keep the flux of pus, and clean the wound, and leave that inside which stops the increase of the abscess and softens the wound and begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the bone is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before you complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if there is any cause of other small scrofula, then explore those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein scrofula, then do not explore that from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you cut it, make sure it is firm and cut it before it falls off by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already submerged in Egyptian mud, and then heal it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you explore that scrofula completely, then make sure to adjust the two lips of the wound and cause it to heal as soon as possible so that there is no superfluousness.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is superfluousness due to the greatness of the scrofula, then make sure to explore its root and remove it, administer sutures and that which is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in the case of scrofula that contains moisture, make a superficial puncture at this location where it appears to be maturing, and pause the puncture of that which is deepest in the flesh, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the puncture with a similar instrument and liquid, in order to corrode that which is left over from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see that the wound is already clean, then you cure that same liquid of animal origin before it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the separation of the core of an abscess through the skin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this operation on the abscess, and no one in our land has seen anyone perform it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the script of that speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have curvature, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the abscess, as it cannot be done without causing harm to all the veins and major parts of the patient.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the illness is not in the bone, cut away the section of the epiglottis to prevent the danger that is caused by suffocation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want to do that, cut away three or four small sections of the epiglottis, between the circles, where the section should be flat, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning, which is private from flesh and the vessels of sinus from it are luhen.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tube of the throat upwards, and then cut the tube until it reaches the canal, but avoid the sinus vessels if you see any cause from those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the trachea second, as we have recommended; and it means over the section of the canal by the flap that is from that and which is disrupted and for the opening of the throat.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the plague open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour comes in which the perforation is feared, add two strips of the coda's tail to the plague, and place it alone on the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh not rot until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And as Albucasis says that the summary of the sermon which we have recommended is nothing but to see that some of those apostems have already filled the body of the patient, and the patient has come inside to die, and his head is bent over, and they have incised the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the location of the plague for some time, and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that commander, leave the plague open until the evil of the patient is consumed; and the evil of him for three days; and then the commander thus the plague, and cure it within which it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant places a spoon in the patient's mouth and inserts one part of the lung cane, and she was called to cure him, and she removed the phlegm as it is the moaning of the dead, and she removed the plague and removed the small sanc which was inside the plague.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you should confess that there was no incision of the vein or guided, and the wind was from the wound, and healed that within which fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not allow the servant to return to his better dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now tell you that in the section of the epiploon there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the incision on the abscess that occurs in the groin, and is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the groin is an abscess of the second color of the body, and is caused in the women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one occurs in two ways, either similar to large nodes, or similar to abscess that is caused by obstruction of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not make assumptions about it as you would with iron, unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that and investigate it, and if you find something similar to gout, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should incise it with those and extract what contains the joint from the skin and bursa; and if not, then you should carefully examine its entirety, and cure the area with whatever remedy before it becomes healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the separation of the kinds of gout.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the kinds of gout that I have already mentioned all the kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should make a difference between gout and an exit wound when making doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you should say that an exit wound is heat and fever and severe pain before the boiling over of the excess; and it is completed by putrefaction that stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But gout does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains that whitish substance which is in the joint itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if the second color of the body is the beginning of it, and it is made thus with a cushion, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two species, because they contain grease and moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, according to what I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then, when you reach the cure of the node, expose that and inquire about that at the beginning of the instrument called the introducer, according to what will come out of its shape in the chapter which is approaching this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is necessary to inquire about the abscesses and all nodes, and you should take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you will rotate its tips little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the flesh.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and extract the introducer and consider what is in its traces.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture is lost, of whatever color it may be, then you should insert it into the dry surface according to what I said in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture in the footprints of the intruder, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if there is dryness on the area, it has the shape of a crocodile according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, suspend that area on a hook, and excise the cord from all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag over that area and remove the pus from there.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that skin, and then you should wait until that area heals before removing it from there.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it is removed too early or too late, the wound will return to its previous state.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some part of it is still small, then apply a layer of some corrosive powders and strengthen the layer, and place your hand over the area where the pus is located to prevent the wound from becoming infected again, and cure that from another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is necessary to remove a large object, then you should grasp both sides of it and heal that part which contains the injury.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the bleeding is from the opposite side or not, then you should cover and fill the wound with three threads that are made of iron and leave them in place for two days or three until the wound heals and the inflammation subsides; and then return to cutting away that which remains.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those that are used for probing, and of three kinds, namely, those that are large, and of which the size varies, and those that are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the variable-sized probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small probe is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Made of iron, smooth and well-rounded at the ends, so that the instrument may not be caught in the folds.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are called the Albert, and one of them is called the Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three kinds of spices, one of which is great, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experiment, its shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium experiment, its shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experiment, its shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient for those abscesses and wounds and fistulas and boils because they are among the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And there are made lances, large, lions, as with large needles which are sewn into the sutures, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black lead, which are like those that for those are opened the fistulas in the cavity of which are reflections, which are reflected on their lightness at those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three types, one of which is long and narrow, and the other is short and wide, depending on the size of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The great experience in forming a plaster cast:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The lesser experience in forming a plaster cast:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The smallest experience in forming a plaster cast:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the nails are of special types, one of which is simple, and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And there is another type of nail, and there are three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them, there is a type with two curves, and there are three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them, there is a type with three curves, and there are three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large simple nail:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The shape of a medium simple nail:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a small simple nail:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large gouty nail
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a large gouty nail, form of the foot
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small gouty nail, form of the foot
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large nail having two curvatures
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized gouty nail having two curvatures
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small gouty nail having two curvatures
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large nail having three curvatures
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized gouty nail having three curvatures
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small gouty nail having three curvatures
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the sharp and curved scalpels that are used to cut and lance boils and abscesses, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium-sized scalpel
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather so that it can be done well in the scraping of boils to avoid the danger of puncturing a vein or nerve, and for these, the patient is cured and calm, and also quiet from the adjustment of the incision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of almonds, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large almond:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium almond:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small almond:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are the forms of almonds and their similarities to raisins, which are made into alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the outer layer that the punctured almond is hidden and in that corner, you can divide it into parts and open it as you wish, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the mentioned ones for the puncture of abscesses and do not pierce the patients, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of those which are cut off from the sane, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of which are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are the forms of almonds which are round and some have a certain length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these special types of ventilators, large, medium, and small, so that for those who are abscinded from blood flow due to necessity, and when there is no immediate medical treatment, you can use them.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them in all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy locations, such as on the backs of the thighs, and the chest, and the mamillas, and the belly, and the groin, and similar to those of fleshy locations.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some veins are made of other small instruments similar to those of fish, according to this form; through which blood is abscinded when it is done by phlebotomy, or you must begin with a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some veins are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of the breasts of men, which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some women inflate the breasts of certain men to compliment their sleep, and then they deflate the breasts, and they assemble the breasts of women, and they are remote.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to those who have that, cut those areas with a sharp instrument in this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then excoriate the entire wound, and place the carnate medicament on the wound, and adjust the edges of the wound with a skin graft, and heal that within the time it is healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the breast declines to the parts behind and is softened by its size as it does in women, then cut it into two pieces that are slightly higher, and make two sections similar to a lunar figure, each of which contains the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. And then excoriate the coda which is between two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in healing within the time it is healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the initial step of inserting a catheter into the patient due to their restlessness and excessive bleeding, then cover the wound with a plaster submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it in place for several days until the wound heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the puncture of abscesses that come from the breast.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the breast are of the species of scrofula, hard lumps, which contain a pus pocket.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among these are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be punctured with a lunar crescent-shaped incision: from line G to line B. And as soon as all the contents of the abscess have been evacuated, you should complete the wound with stitches on the following day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then let the wound heal and be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the pus from the glands of the neck and lymph nodes is present, then you should lance it as we have described in the section on lymphadenitis equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the infection spreads to an area that cannot be pierced, then apply the cautery as we have described in the section on that matter.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of abscesses that occur by puncture or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the puncture wound is broken and the tissue over it is consolidated, then abscesses can occur through those veins by which inflammation and abscess are known to occur through the artery or vein: since abscess from puncture is longer attached to the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound in that area.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And those that occur by vein are red on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And lancing over this abscess is an error, especially in those that are located on the back, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is a great mistake, so be sure to avoid its treatment, and those that are on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	May one who is their own doctor, by inflammation of the orifice of the archery, divide the tendon section in the long; and approach the section with tweezers and approach the archery, and remove the tunics that are discovered inside.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And approach that needle and make it penetrate through the other side, and straighten the archery with a double fold in two places, which causes you to have an incision in the extraction of two archeries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And approach the place between two ribs with a space inside that is enough to hold the entire swelling, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And approach the cure in which pus is generated inside that falls as the ribs; and approach the cure that is appropriate to that inside that is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is by section of the vein, then cover that you have your hand on the location where the abscess is, and approach the needle after the location where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double fold inside where you extract the other side, and tie the abscess to a ribbon according to what I have told you in the rib of grape of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the needle into the abscess at the beginning of the needle, and strengthen the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in the middle of the patient's body until you see that what is inside it comes out, then insert the excess of the thread, and leave what remains inside.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand on the patient's chest, which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with herbs and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, abscesses occur in the arteries and veins, and similarly, abscesses occur in the nerves when they are affected by their compression or excessive work, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the most affected places of the assistants or the thigh, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if the abscess is large and resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the patient, and when it is stretched with violence, the patient feels like he is being struck by a great shock.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left behind, and it is completely black in all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those who are in the joints, it is not recommended to be pierced with iron, because it would often cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But if it is in the head or forehead, then leave it alone.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then use the forceps and cut off that part.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it with an incision, and scrape off that part, and remove it; and adjust the bandage to the wound, and cure it before it becomes healthy.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of the abscess that occurs in the mouth and also in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	When certain men have moths in their abdomens and other parts of the body, which are called fungal due to their similarity to those that grow, with a subtle reason and a large head; and their lips are also conversed, and they are from those that are small, and they are from those that are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its abdomen were two parts that were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of a small reason.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were conversed and they defended themselves, and moisture ran from that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I entered those and again entered one in the foot of 18 unciae and the other in the foot of 6 unciae.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at the beginning of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid and the color of the skin is white, humid, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a narrow spatula, and in your presence, apply the cautery in the fire, because moths that are separated from it are expelled by the section; and if you find the section, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is weak and afraid, keep a sword nearby; otherwise, take a piece of freshly made bread, strengthen that with the handkerchief we have mentioned, and lay it on for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the string of bread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large rotten part in the handkerchief until it is removed and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the handkerchief is of large size, there may be some cause of fear and dread, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you will remove the intestine of the patient, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for that until it is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not remove the handkerchief which is of dark color, little feeling, and regularly held, for that is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And when you come to remember the cranes, soon.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of hernia at the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia at the navel is caused by various causes; or by a fissure in the abdomen, which allows the intestine or hernia to come out as it does in other ruptures; or by weakness of the wall, which allows blood vessels or arteries to protrude as it is called; or by constriction of the abdomen.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is by fissure of the abdomen and protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and the pain is sharp, and appears in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that which we have mentioned is more violent and varied, and as you press on it with your fingers, it disappears and returns; and very often it is in the same place, and is a great sign of the need to introduce a catheter and violent effort.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is by moisture, then the pain is sharp and does not disappear when you press on it with your hand, nor is it constricted or contracted.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for lancing, then first apply these signs to the abscess to make it descend.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is for meat, then the abscess is large, thick, and hard, and is fixed to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is for suppuration, then the touch of it is lion-like.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is considered whether the prominence of the navel is for lancing, or for a vein, or for suppuration; then it should be prohibited from the cure of it, because in that there is fear and fear as you have been taught in the chapter where he said about abscesses by lancing and by veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is for the intestine or for the hernia, then command the patient to hold their own arm, and be standing extended; and then apply a tent around the entire umbilicus, and command it to be facing between your hands on its own side, and then wrap the cord around the wide part of the umbilicus over the place you have well placed the tent; and then extend the base of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then apply a firm or loose bandage and the manner of tying the bandage.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Approach the bed and extend the bandage over the wound and insert the said catheter into that place and try to reach the intestine; and if you have not previously guarded it through the wound, then extract the pus and push the intestine towards the parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the bandage, then take that needle and remove any excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is against your artery or vein, then circle that thread, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two fields strongly and insert two needles around the wound in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the wound in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place where the flesh extends and falls off; or insert that which is thin and can be removed, and then care for that which covers the wound with that which heals it before it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the prominence of the umbilicus is made of flesh and no infection or moisture is present, then cover it as we have said and remove the pus or the moisture that is in it, and then cure that wound with a remedy that covers and heals it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 43.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of the spine.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of the nature of the spine and in what manner it is cured by medicines, and that it is better to cure it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the spine generates in the greatest and most careful way of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that some spinal tumors are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as the one that is in the breasts or in the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stray all of that, and more so when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, do not try to treat it yourself, because I have not seen any other that can be cured by that or that has reached that point.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation is performed as we have said, by preceding and lifting the patient and purging them of black bile for some time, and then suture that area if it is found to be manifestly open.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in which they are located, and prohibit them from eating anything that could cause a reason for the delay of the operation; and then thoroughly clean all parts of the area with good scrubbing before the operation begins.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not stop it again, and express the locations, and wipe away the blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible from the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find that there is a lot of blood at the beginning of the vein or artery, then cauterize that area before the bleeding stops, and then care for that area with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 4
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, of the species of hydropathy with water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure with our medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron alone is only the species of lithiasis, and it is not similar to iron for the species of temporalists or the species of hydrops, because that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydropathy temporalist with your medicines and do not compare your treatment, consider why if the patient has been weakened, or is another patient with another hydropathy, such as in the chest or stomach and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not treat it with iron, because fear is over it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient of great virtue only, and it is not another disease but hydropathy alone, and not in children or the elderly, then the method of the operation for it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and give it to the exact center of its belly with your hand, pushing the water to the part behind the pentenilh, and then take sponge spinose according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp tip like a needle; but rather it should be in some small brevity step by step, so that in the operation it does not penetrate into the intestine, and that it leads away from it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the generation of hydrocephalus is due to the intestines, because it is customarily said that you should make the section along the belly for the quantity of three fingers, on the right side of it over the peritoneum.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocephalus is due to a malady of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the belly for the quantity of three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to a malignancy, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make your section over the side on which you wish to place the patient so that the superfluities do not flow to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate the instrument entirely with the cautery, and enter it into that section, and elevate your hand between the cautery and the siphac, and you excoriate that; and if the quantity of one nail or about.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then, approach the needle through the skin until it reaches the space at the affected area, and this is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then, extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of fine iron, with which at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is made by scraping the end of it according to the manner of the pen, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper part of it there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, then one should quickly place it over the instrument, and then evacuate the water in a moderate amount, because if you evacuate too much at once, it could cause great harm to the patient due to the resolution of their spirit animal, or an accident could occur to the five organs that are approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Then, evacuate the water according to the amount of virtue in it and according to what means to you the dispositions of the patient's body, the virtue of their feet, and their goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and release the water that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you recommended to use to pierce that second one in that way.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the process on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of water, and do this for several days in fear, and be careful not to let too much water out.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	However, if you are afraid of the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then cure that one with burial in sand and mud, and wait for a long time under the sun; and cure that one with dessicative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the horse and the foot near the extraction of water, according to what I have previously said in that water.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	About the cure of children who are not born with a perforated bladder.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their umbilical cord not pierced (or twisted straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then, cover the wound with a thin cloth according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place your hand on the twisted part and tie it with a thin needle and thread for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when you want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not place the plug, it is possible that the urine that passes over the area will not clean this wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Then, the one from which the twisted part is straightened should be treated with a thin needle as we have said, for three days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Then, those in which the twisted part is not in its place, the urethra, which causes this, is due to those who are born with the penis curved at the tip of the head so that they cannot urinate in parts downward, until the penis is raised to the hand above; and it is not at birth, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and this is a malady caused by lag.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation in this is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the knife towards the left hand of the operator with great extraction, and insert the point of the knife into the place of the peritoneum sharply, as if writing with a pen, or not cutting any part, so that the edge of the knife resembles the point of the knife and the intestine falls into the second place after the operation.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation for fistula, four things often go wrong with this; and pause at the place where you cut the sinew, and cure the wound before it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 66.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the blister that often occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis and the corroption, blackness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four things often cause this blister in the penis and its glans.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And from that one is malignant and another is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No-malignant, cover it with a thin oil and cut out the part where that wound is; then place your hand over that part that is submerged in Egyptian ointment; and apply that, cure the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the wound is malignant, use black color, then cover it with a cloth that you administer a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	However, if the wound is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the wound is in the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then cover it with the wound that is inside the prepuce until it is consolidated; and now you cure that deformity, because when you cure that together with the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not be trinquated.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if accidents have occurred in the genitals and in the black and curly prepuce, then cover it with all that has already been denigrated and that is about to be corrupted or that is already corrupted; and apply linens over that, which is pounded with flour of scorched millet and of trissatz and crushed.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then take care of the other wounds until they are healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is bleeding from the wound, then administer the silver nitrate cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	where the silver nitrate cautery is placed at two positions together, one for bleeding and the other for the wound when it becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed entirely in an hour, then place a catheter into the urethra to allow the patient to urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those where the foreskin is known, and it is not required for circumcision; and when adherence occurs due to wounds or abscesses), then remove it with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove those very carefully, then remove some of the skin from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and when the foreskin is thin, it is often easily punctured by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then gently separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis using a sharp instrument, which is already prepared in water to prevent it from sticking to another layer.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVI.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence as in other plagues: rather, it is from our operation and our will, and it is properly in children, so it is necessary to assign in that better operation and thus more likely to be lost to salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free people, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment, which causes that I have found the majority of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a spoon; and they use a piece of cloth and a beginning with a finger.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already performed all these methods and no better method has been found with scissors, with a strip of cloth that in modification is like a nail, which moves the vein most underneath, where the foreskin is a double tunic, and the tunic is more behind, and often it is necessary to start from another incision and cause certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the modification that is done for alphecati, and it is digital, of which blacksmiths use, the incision at the end of the male member is not secure, because often it goes into the wound of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, a nail, often it brings iron and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the vein of the child is narrow by nature, and often it has been said in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the modification that is done with scissors and strips of cloth and a nail, the good one, I have experienced it myself, because the scissors are not proportional to the incision, for which reason the sharpness above is like the sharpness below; and therefore when you place your hand so that the two sharpnesses are proportioned, and the incisions are made at the same time; and it is done with compression of the nail in the shape containing the vein of the penis from all parts, and it does not make any error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first step in the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands a little, that you only tie him to the bed with his hands, and let him enter the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to make him happy in that manner.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make sure he is between your hands, prepared in advance, and not naked; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind his back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on his back and blow into his navel, and pull out the one that is stuck at the top of the bed, and change that which is added to it from deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the place indicated by the patient's hand double, and then attach a small second thread below that one, and then pull the other end of the thread towards you, and then put it under good retention, and insert it between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Approach the hood and carefully remove the cap of the vial; then slowly and gently pour the small amount of liquid, which is better; and place powder on top of the powder, cover it with a cloth in which is spread mustard oil mixed with rosewater recently boiled. And let that be placed over the affected area; and cure that with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for extraction, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The ends of the forceps should not be sharp and the other ends should be sharp, so that it does not damage the nail, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in extraction is that one forces the entire or part of the intrinsic needle into it from the beginning.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should stretch that of your hour against the nail at the location of the abscess and insert it with the same equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it against your nail, then extract it with an awl and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If they have passed three days, and the abscess has swollen beyond the verge, then carefully introduce that which is prepared to help drain the abscess, and scrape that area to facilitate healing, and then apply the second remedy that you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful not to touch that area with your finger.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat that area with the powder that we recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it does not fit properly over the wound, and you observe the parts below, then do not apply that remedy to that area.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with the remedy that we said should be applied when it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or a congealed mass, or by poison or flesh, and similarly to those remedies that we have mentioned for treating in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of it due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then make sure the patient is lying on their back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that person on their own bed and extend their belly from the part below their back, and the patient should tighten their abdomen as much as possible towards the lower part of their back.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is pressed to expel the stone towards the back parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see that force is needed to expel it, then make sure to use the extraction instrument called the siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and have a thin lion's tongue, like a needle with a small opening at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of collecting urine for that person is to take a thin piece of cloth or cotton and fold it into a small opening at the tip of the siringua; then insert the edges of the cloth into the part behind the siringua, and if there are any excess pieces of cloth, do not introduce them into the canula, but instead introduce the siringua with force into the border and the album of the wound.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And apply the ointment on the patient's skin, and massage the affected area with the oil of lavender, and rub it with olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And introduce the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the tip of the lavender; and then bend the lavender upwards to the part of the abdomen; and then push the catheter through that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and if the cause of the patient's illness is not reached in this order, but is pushed into the wrong place, it will cause harm.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the thread to the small wool, as the urine soaks the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and use it for the cure of urine, and use the catheter, do not stop doing that and use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 99.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	About the quality of bladder catheterization with clamps and similar instruments that are suitable for that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or if it is constricted by inflammation, and you wish to drain fluids and medications from there, then use an instrument called the clampcedra, which has this form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but if it is located on the outside of the bladder, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three ways to do this: two from one side, as needed.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there is a cavity where the liquid is inserted, and as much as is needed, it is added, until when some cause it is pulled out of that, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled, the liquid is poured out, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra is made of naphta in the battles of sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to introduce liquid into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the liquid, and pour that liquid which is poured into the compartments above, because the liquid is poured into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the powder of juniper into the wound secondly as we recommended in the potion; and then apply moisture with that water, which moisture will soon reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the fine cystic body that the bladder is shaped like, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, of which the tip is similar to a small quill, and then place it in the urethra.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder in motion, and place it in the moisture that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong threads, and boil that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the crystal into the wound.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand over the bladder with the moisture that has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if there is no bladder present, then take a pessary of pearl and make it into this circle; and perforate it throughout its entire circumference; and then insert a strong thread through those spaces, as soon as it is turned; and then add the circle as soon as it is added, so that you place it in that water that you want to crystallize from the moisture, and boil and evaporate.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then approach that one with the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express the moisture into your hand when it reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of extracting stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the previous section the types of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and stones that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the stone that requires surgical intervention and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you will notice that it is exposed and shortened.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that stones forming in the bladder mainly occur in children; and among its symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears in that sediment; and the patient feels pain, and approaches to be treated; and at that time, it is said that the belly is filled with those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is the cure for children of that age who have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it may be due to that which is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is few, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, cover the beginning of that which they call chirurgeon's plaster on the patient; because that opening sometimes prevents the stone from being expelled due to examination of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then press the patient's feet and be careful and make them lie down so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it falls out of some opening.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then do that which is prepared between your hands, and the hands of the patient should be placed under them, so that the bladder is completely made to tilt downwards.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then approach that one and all of that one.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel a stone in the space, then immediately perform a section on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot touch the entire thing with your hand, then cover it with oil and place the tip of your left hand on the indicated part, if the patient is a child, or the tip of your right hand if they are an adult, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And then approach that stone where it was previously.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly insert it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that one where you indicated, and expel it through the parts of the bladder to the location where the section was made.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extends the thighs above, and with his left hand remains holding the intestine which is behind the thighs, in part of the location where the section was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the pointed instrument that has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in that part between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, towards the left side of the cushion; and the incision should be made over the stone and through the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the incision is wide and narrow according to the quantity that the stone is in that place, and not too much, because if it is too much the stone will be forced out of the incision, and its deficiencies will be exposed.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is a part of the stone that has sharp angles and edges, so that its removal is difficult for that reason.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that part it is like a lion's claw, round, and made of the same difficult material.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is to that part with sharp angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not too much exposed, then carefully cut that, or forcefully pull that with a decent gesture, the end of which should be like a razor that pulls on the stone, and does not slip from it; or insert it behind the subtle instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then gradually widen the incision a little, and if you want to stop bleeding, apply strong pressure with that sharp glass tool.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the tip of the instrument into the mouth of the bladder, and gradually incise over it; and then push a little more of that; and similarly do if there are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is often the case that you incise that with a large saw, which causes the patient one of two causes: either death or because of the continuous distillation of urine, for that reason the place is not completely solid.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If you administer the extraction of it before it is forgotten, or if you use forceps in the fracture of it, enter them into the bladder and extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and press that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth soaked in oil or oiled and wet with water on it, so that the abscess does not open.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then lie the patient on their back, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when those wounds have been removed, rub the area with water and oil, and cure it with an ointment made from the plant called "diabazilla" until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If an abscess that is causing pain and inflammation occurs in the same place, and if it is similar to the one that is frozen in the bladder, and if it is prohibited to drain it (and that is known as the exit of the pus through urine), then insert a needle into the abscess and extract that pus, because it can cause inflammation of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the area with warm water, soap, and salt, and apply an ointment that is suitable for that healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the hours of treatment that you have done on the patient and adjust the medications placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the bladder, and it is fixed there, and urination is prohibited, then use that which I recommended in order to reach the point where too many troops have been lost due to this treatment; and already I have extracted it, and you should take a needle made of iron with a sharp tip, of which this is its form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, sharp, fixed in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And take a thin wire, and tie that bladder behind the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And insert the iron into the bladder, piercing it until the needle reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the needle in that stone little by little, and you will pierce the opening of it until you make the other part penetrate; for the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that which is located at the bottom of the stone in the part of the verge, which is called "trinca" and is urinated upon, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure cannot be applied for some reason that prevents it from being done, then place two people on either side of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then lie down on the stone in that verge between two ledges.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the bandage and apply the ointment to the wound, which is made on the spot.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to place a bandage on either side of the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage should be placed above, because when the true bandage is removed from the edge of the stone, the codena returns to its place and takes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason, when you have removed the true bandage, you must lift the codena to the parts above, or return it to its place and take the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of extracting stones from women's kidneys.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women's kidneys are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if one sees a stone in any of those, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many handsy people.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very weak and pregnant.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe it to the surgeon when he is cast, or has had many husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not have a woman who knows this art, especially the operation of opening the abdomen.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in women's kidneys is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision beforehand, and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if you are forced to do so, then you must get a very wise and rarely found woman.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are not present with that person, then approach a woman sage and experienced in the art of women's matters, or a woman who has recently parted with her husband in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So bring that person and command her to do everything you order, from the examination of the stone until the beginning; this is because it is necessary to see if the woman is a virgin, then cover her and place your hand on her buttocks and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then, if you find that person, cover her with her own clothes, and then command her to lie down on the bed.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her hand into the cavity of the patient and examine for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and feel for the stone well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then, if you find that person, gradually press her from the orifice of the bladder to the parts behind the pubic bone until she reaches the stone in the cavity.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then approach the position of the patient's neck and place the edge of the cushion under their neck, centering the stone in that part, and the patient should not remain with the stone covered over them.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be slightly smaller at the beginning; and then approach the ray over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know the stone should be cut from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are varied: some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know which type of stone is suitable for what you mean by that.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to draw out pus, adjust the three-pronged needle in that location and place it there for an hour until the abscess is opened, and then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want to expel feces and know that the expulsion of feces is from the arc that is inserted, then place powder on the area and stretch that which is loosened and the structure descending, and do not repeat that; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient will surely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, as the intensity of the feces decreases and the area improves, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white cord that contains the umbilical cord of the testicles and is called the cord.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some of them are in the proper panniculus that nature has prepared in the part of the umbilical cord before it becomes another umbilical cord; and this is the cord of the testicles between the white cord that we have said, and this is not other than a scar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	When this hernia occurs, it is due to weakening of the muscles, which happens to some people, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow on the groin.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has different colors, such as yellow, orange, red, brown, black, or white and watery, which is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the symptoms by which one recognizes this collection of water are: if it is in the white phlegm that we have called, then the abscess gradually changes into a long shape like a bird, and appears on the groin, because the moisture comes from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the own panniculus, then the abscess gradually changes into a separate part of the bird, and it is estimated by some that it is another bird.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the creases of the groin and the white phlegm, then it is usually felt as pain.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you want to know the color of the humor in the abscess, first extract the color of the humor from the pus that is inside the abscess; and then judge what is inside the abscess according to that color.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when you come to the treatment of the patient, first tell the patient to be phlebotomized if it is possible for them, and then examine their pulse.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then have the patient lie on their back with their buttocks raised for some reason, and place a cloth under them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who extends their hand to one o'clock to the groin and the part of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a thin knife and cut the groin of the patient from the middle towards the pubic bone.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Then make the incision straight and evenly distant from the line of the groin until it reaches the white circle that contains the pubic bone.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Exorcise that person, observe and guard yourself so that you do not injure them; and your exorcism should be done gently and subtly according to the amount possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the bottom of the jar with a wide hole and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between two lips of the section with the incision, and extend the jar to the parts above; do not touch the cord that contains the genitals, and pierce the jar in that way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And pierce them on their totality or in the feet, and more greatly their side subtly, because if you do not subtly examine the incision of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the cord processes from that deforation of their cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the jar, return to them and adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with a stitch, and care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the abdomen is corrupted by another illness, then carefully tie the veins that support it, remove the abdomen, and care for that which we have said about it.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is added in two equal parts, then you will know that two are hernias; therefore, insert the part that you have made in the other equally; and if it is to your sight that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you will clean the wound, and insert it into the incisions with wool submerged in oil or roasted oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil over two genetius and the mirror of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top of them, and bind those with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two cloths and fold them according to this form; and make the edges of the ones that are pressed from cotton or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the trousers, and one of the edges holds the buttocks inside the two, and the second holds the part of the underwear, and two edges on two cushions and two other edges on two elbows, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some vegetables are used to medicate this hernia artificially with a cautery instead of a section with iron; and you take a thin pointed cautery and insert it into the groove of the ginitius, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be revealed before the white cipher containing water, and then you take a cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that cipher, and ignite it inside so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cipher with a hook, and scrape with a hook, and scrape with a thin pointed cautery ignited; and insert it as much as possible inside so that you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself from the heat that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer than a section with less bleeding, and better than an operation with a cautery.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you feel contradiction to the abscess at the time of section or at the time of cauterization, or bleeding, then cover that you cure what contradiction it causes for you with that cure, which is appropriate according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is weak and does not want the second operation due to its horror, then administer the second puncture as I recommended; and when you are sure that this hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then, make the patient lie on some raised bed, approach the abscess in the lowest part of their back, and pause the puncture according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make sure the opening is wide enough for all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area and hold it there, so that the water keeps flowing out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for them until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the outflow of water at that time, then do not puncture it unless you put in the white cloth in the orifice of the wound which causes resistance and prevents the outflow of water, then you can insert a pen or instrument of the kind that extracts water from hydrips, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust a small pressure on the edge of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	When the water returns, and it is added back after several months or in the same environment; and as it is added back, then according to that manual method, the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	About incision over a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You should know that in the incision of this hernia, there is a risk of loss of major dispositions; therefore, I see the removal of it and being saved by that better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that one and the species of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that abscesses do not form in the places where those gentlemen are composed and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute aggravation, which is poured into them, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the place, and it is not black in pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And if the abscess is greatly inflamed, its color is dark, and it does not give pain to touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some wounds are made by the breaking of the ribs, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This is known as the rupture of ribs because the abscess breaks when it comes into contact with the thighs, and it does not matter if you touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	This is not dispersed from the wound for any reason due to compression of the thighs.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this special case and on the other flesh; you insert the suture of the genitalia, and then tie the vessels above, and remove that from the white cord, and remove the suspensory of the vessels, and ligate them, and insert the suspensory as you remove all of the parts of the vessel.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the wound has already healed on those flesh, then you can remove it and suture it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is adhesion due to some cause of the bladder, or between those that are between the buttocks, then you should remove all of that adhesion and incise it from the beginning with a round knife.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is meat native to that location behind the adhesion, then you should incise all of that which is from it, and extract it as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with a layer of wool soaked in rose oil and vinegar; and then care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of a hernia that is of the groin.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The groin is an abscess wrapped in a sac similar to a bursa, and it causes difficult movement exercise and walking on the buttocks.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear for that which precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, if they say operation in that second one that made the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that the patient should lie on a raised bed; and then hang the testicular suspensory apparatus to the parts behind; and then take the cord of the genitals and pull it towards the thighs, which are spread out wide; and have another minister hold those parts, and extend them strongly.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert the narrow, sharp instrument across the right of the veins where the veins are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove all the parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of the eyeballs, which are in the sockets.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with a double point into those places, and the first one in the parts where we have happened to put it, and the other one at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert them in the middle part by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what has been added from the filthy and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then care for the wound with the treatment of other wounds in which you want to generate health by causing the veins that do not cause damage to one or both testicles, because it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If all the veins are affected, it is possible that the testicles are extruded or that the testicles are compressed by the veins, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the beginning of the veins, and that they are swollen, or that they compress because they are not well attached to those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	About the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the side of the belly button, causing the intestines to protrude through the rupture of any of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the abdomen or from an incision of it, and these two species occur for various causes: impact, sneeze, cough, or elevation of a heavy cause, or from similar things.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the reason for this is that when it occurs due to extension of the abdomen, it happens gradually over time and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess that enters the intestine because the abdomen compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the patient's leg is affected by the section of the sciatic nerve, which causes severe pain suddenly at the beginning; and it appears to be an abscess different from the usual one, and that is due to the intestine, and the cause of this is the disintegration of the sciatic nerve.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes, the intestine is pushed out by the abscess, and this is called an enterocele.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes, the abscess is caused by feces, and sometimes it occurs in the intestine's wound, and it is held there, and that is a great danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and more pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this disease, iron is used with caution, because it can cause harm to the patient's stomach.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out again, and then lift their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Approach the cord that is attached to the testicles and separate it from the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles completely through the long; and then place two fingers on the incision second when it is necessary to open the incision.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is of a quantity that is possible for you to have been opened from there.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise that tissue which is located below the cord of the testicles, until it is discovered white and hard from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you enter the tip of your finger into that place where the testicle is located, in that place where white and hard tissue is found between the cord of the penis, which is located below the cord, and between the tissue, and remove that adherence that is in the part behind the penis.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then press the cord of the testicles against the parts of the incision, and also extend the white tissue to the left side, and raise the penis with the white tissue to the part of the incision; and command the assistant to extend the penis and you dissolve that adherence which is behind the solution completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And surround the knees with a cloth that is not the cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white blanket.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause, then place it on the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle that is thick and made of iron, and insert it into the back of the white blanket, which is the seccion of the scrotum; and then incise the extremities that extend from four fingers, and place a cushion on them in the shape of a cross; and tie that needle to the white blanket which we have said is behind the scrotum and has a strong band of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the fingers and tie them with a strong band that is not one of the veins that pierce those, because otherwise an abscess could occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then place another band on the second line, about three fingers away from the first; and then leave these two bands below the white blanket which is behind the scrotum, the amount of the greatness of the said, and incise the entire remaining round, and remove it from there.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert your hand into the part behind the base of the testicles, section by section, as we have recommended in this matter, as we have said before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer wet wool, and place it on the wound; and apply the bandage that we have recommended (and some white linen is sometimes cauterized, which we have said to do at the beginning of the treatment, because some wounds bleed excessively, which happens).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the wound is delayed in healing, then apply warm water and place it over the wound as we have said before.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the wound with the other treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of inflammatory hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has been seen to have been healed without iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is inflamed; the method is to tie the vessels above the section, with the help of the wound; and then dry it in the middle location around the pus, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the pain according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the dislocation that occurs in the elbows.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the elbows, as we have said, and examine the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is no known cause for hernias in the groin; and if there is, it is rare; and return to all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged, a fissure is made in the groin until the hernia is found in the groin; and this is done by the extension of the groin, which is in the elbows as we have said, which causes that the groin is stretched, and then it becomes soft and the location becomes an abscess and examines.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a pointed cautery as previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and that the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then the location of the abscess is secured by incision according to the size of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white cloth that is placed inside the mouth to be revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rag and place it over the prominent part of the cloth, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cover the two prominent parts on the end of the rag of the cloth, and adjust one of them with a stitch to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the rag, and do not insert the cloth into the abdomen at all, nor extend the bowel, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the fields, clean it and restore the wound inside where it is consolidated; because the cloth contracts and is not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more likely to be beneficial.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the cord of the testicles is softened in old men due to age, and the tissues that are between them become softened, and it is necessary to maintain their position.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is appointed to care for the patient to place him in a position that allows him to lie on his side, and insert the entire cord over the natural cord; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened cord at three or four places and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and care for the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds close.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for certain reasons it is allowed to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor knows about it when he is asked about it, who can treat it; and the other reason is that we sometimes have the necessity of castration of other animals for our purposes, such as cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition or by incision through section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the one that is done by attrition, the method of operation is to make a hole in the tail of the animal where the testicles are, while they are soft and hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those out with your hand while they are resolved and do not appear from the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In the one that is done by incision and section, hold the animal and take the cord of the testicles with your hand on the left side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then lift the suspensory ligaments, and incise through one hole into each of the two testicles that proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those that will be exposed after each excoriation.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on those of the scrotum, but rather cover them with a thin one that is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one done by attrition, because attrition leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal desires gout.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hernias.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is when it appears where the space between the testicles is located, and another is between two testicles, where a part of the intestine is found.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes it contains urine, which is located in the space between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is a special case: and it is that the part of the intestine above the pubic bone is like two testicles of a man, a little below them and at the part of the vagina, where the perineum of a man and two testicles are.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: one from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted inside until it escapes the entrance of that one, and then treat them with the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second special case of men where urine is excreted from the base of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lentils and meat that are prominent due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Strong lentils are adjusted according to natural causes until it is stretched and made in the usual way; and some women are magnified in certain cases as long as it is spread there with men and during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then cover what you have excess of lentils with your hand or with an ointment and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not incise, especially at the opening of the urethra, so that it does not cause urine to flow out.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then cure that with the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Raw meat that is not cooked is meat that has been in the belly of the animal until it fills that, and strongly it is used for parts of the intestines (and by that first called "rotten" disease); therefore cover what you incise there as with lentils, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or it is a small one.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is caused by the previous illness, and that one is made from flesh not properly adjusted or from thin or thick skin.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made in the front of the thigh, or in its sides, or in the back of the thigh, or in the inner part of the thigh, and prevents movement and engagement and protrusion, and greatly prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that one is made by the regularity of the menstruation, if the obstruction is obvious, then you should place it there; but if it is not obvious, then you should circle that with the threads called "ditz" or with the thread.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is from thin skin, and it is placed on the two lips, then you should cover and tear that one.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your hand over the two labia, and then press the indicated points on the inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then gently pull the two labia inward until the delicate seal is broken and the opening is exposed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on that spot, and gently massage the area to prevent the wound from becoming solidified.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the seal is large and thick, then make an incision with a sharp knife or a lancet.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the opening is fleshy, then suspend it with a hook and make an incision into it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And apply the medicines that stop blood flow from wounds, such as honey, and sulfur, and wormwood, adjusted to the size of the wound.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad-bore catheter to prevent the plug from becoming solidified too soon.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold that in place for several days and administer a poultice of lime.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be cured with the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes, accidents occur in the main nativity of other flesh, and then cover it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for a white abscess, the white abscess that is in the main should not be made into any method with iron.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of emerods, tail, and red buboes that occur in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Emerods are appreciated from the openings of veins inside until those that are continuously flowing; and because emerods are made in them, they are.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already said in the division the species of those and their symptoms, and I direct that those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	When the morroids and their contents are in the abdomen and do not appear to the touch, then it is not necessary to make a cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the abdominal openings above which sensation is felt, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover that you place the finger in the most wet part and extend the ashylum to the forceps, or to the rough cloth, and insert those into the wounds.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then apply powder on those to stop the flow of the sanctum from one of the inserted powders, as with acid and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then apply a compress on the feet for an hour, and place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of the sanctum persists, then make that in a decoction of sumac and of scraps of millet, and of walnuts, and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of rice and mix it with honey, and vinegar, and make a paste from that on the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the bone is absent, it is good; otherwise, make two incisions and scarify the milk glands.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of colchicum or the juice of arnica or the juice of guaiacum and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May I ask which one is of more use, so that you can insert that which is on your side of the second that I have said in that way.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	About the puncture of a hernia in the abdomen.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special cases of abdominal abscesses, such as carbuncle and lapdent abscess and ulcers and adhesions and erpetromens and fistulas and emorroids and typhoid and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said about these diseases and their special cases and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is said in this treatise about abscess that the best way to treat it when it is one of the largest abscesses that can be found, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed with a needle.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp and caused by pressure, fever, and sometimes swelling and catarrh over it, then do not perform perforation of it, and cure that which helps in the maturation of it before the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then consider whether you make the woman lie on a bed that has two sheets; and recline on her side and adjust her feet to the part closest to the belly, and her legs are spread, and place your hand on her breasts behind her neck, and hold a cloth moistened with appropriate liquid.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow from the left side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the largest abscess is made, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be mentioned.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, hold it with the flat side of the blade facing up, and ensure that only the edge of the blade enters the patient's body.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the width of the blade, then place cushions on top of the blade to prevent the entire instrument from entering the patient's body.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And place a cushion on top of the instrument's handle to prevent it from being grabbed by the patient, and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the handle until it is inserted into the patient's body.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When applying the catheter, touch it with your hand and lubricate it with oil, then remove that device from the patient's body using the flat side of the blade.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, place a wet cloth in the wound to prevent it from drying out and causing pain; and place the bandage on the section in the patient's body.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place your hand on the larger one and cover it with a wool cloth soaked in water in which was built a bed of elderflowers.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with a poultice for two days until the appropriate time when it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some wheat flour is washed on the larger one and the wound in such a way that it is crusted with water and honey, and then return to the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the washed larger one, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care for that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the fetus is best medicated when it is not in a natural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows the natural position of the fetus by feeling it, and when you have seen the woman express herself at the parts before and desire to smell the air, and over that which is on her is the part, and quickly know that this part is the second natural position, and the position of the head is on its own cap, and the second is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those signs, it is necessary to press the patient's abdomen gently so that the fetus does not move too much when lifting their head, the second head appears, and it is called good maneuvering of those superfluities.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If this is another part of the body that is not natural and not usable, because when the fetus is outside on its feet and the body of the patient is in front of its head and its feet, and the hand of the patient is on its foot or at its foot, or the head of the patient is outside and the hand of the patient is on its abdomen, or it is converted on its own collar, and similar to the figures of the patient that are not usable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you should show the whole figure of those, and what sign is in those so that it means by that and is on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When it is done, it is outside on its own head naturally, and that is very difficult for women, and the power of the patient has already been weakened, then do that, or what the women had to do with the patient, and evaporate the sweat of the patient with fenugreek and oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Approach and insert the metron between her legs and cut away that second skin, or dry it with her nail until you remove what is in it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Press the woman's abdomen until the fetus is expelled.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	However, if it is not expelled, then cover the woman with a mixture of mint and fenugreek tea to induce labor.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command her to lie down, remove the covering, and make her comfortable; then blow into her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus is expelled soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both the arms of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then gradually reduce their size.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	However, if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet off the ground; then gently shake the chair on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the hands are not dilated and the fetus is dead, then insert those and remove the remaining part of the fetus or wrap it in a cloth and remove that from the patient's body.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the eyes of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus lies on its feet, then push those away from it, and turn the fetus small, and then equalize that, and take one of its legs and extend them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	As they are inside the cushions, then command that one to be removed, and make that conditioned, as that person may be saved if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if that one is not saved, then return the small fetus little by little into the position of the second natural figure, as that person will be saved later.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take some olive oil and dissolved rubber, and grind everything in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that to the woman's body, the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that water in the bowl warm, until you reach the desired temperature.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when those parts are warmed up, then apply the poultice of myrtle and rest it on that place.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have heated it for an hour, then place it on a cloth, and gently remove the mucus from its mouth, and take it away from there, and press the lowest part of its belly with your hand, which will often cause it to urinate.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	And observe the animal over its body and its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the animal has been examined in this way, then gradually engage its smallest fingers one by one; and place the woman's hand on its neck, and its feet downwards, and those things should be on the light, and complete its hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on its belly gradually, and remove that which is under its feet from the hooves until it is prepared in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forgotten, then take the feet of the patient and move them with great force, and gradually push that which is over the hypochondriac region into the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then gradually insert the hands and wrap the fetus little by little, and command the woman to express herself until the fetus is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The entire length of the fetus hangs from one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If possible, use engineering to reduce the intestine of the patient, but if you cannot do that, then lift the woman and let her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go, then perform the jazer on her lower back, and shake the cushions of the patient with great force, and administer ointments made of the same materials that you have recommended for mucous membranes.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child is born, then perform that procedure on the skull, and study the reduction of the intestine, and wrap the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman understand when it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	When the fetus is expanded, its hands are spread out and its foot is at the back of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife holds the hand of the fetus and gently turns it little by little, and that helps.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it is and how much it is equal, and then place your hand on the back of the fetus, where we have recommended oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command it to turn its hand little by little, and when you have done that, place a cloth under its back, and command it to be inclined on its left side, and then command it to be comfortable; and do that sternutation.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the second child is born in this way from the mother, consider, and then you insert the second finger into the vagina to remove the moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging from the face and neck of the mother, then you insert your finger into the navel to prevent it from being retained and rotting.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then gently place the patient on the parts of the bed that are covered with blankets, and send the woman to bring some warm water, and let the man who is there wait a little while, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of many or many offspring.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that the warm water used to bathe the infants is not new, and sometimes it has been used three or four times, but this is strange and disturbing; but if it is caused by nature, and not by you.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiplied, one by one, and separate them from the intestines at the navel of each of those, and some warm water is used that has been used before with a newborn baby, and its use is to naturally help it, and some warm water is used that has not been recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to remove from their position and reach that which we have said about the unnatural figures, then you cure those as we have recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the wise and skilled woman does that which causes ease and subtlety, and delay, and is ingenious according to all figures according to what is prepared by the engineer leading to salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed in the womb, one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and it is already verified that one woman aborts not at all, and another forms all, which causes this to be made because of the glory of the holy saints.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all such things should be in the knowledge of the midwife that it is very useful to that person similar to that, and therefore it is applied to that which is known.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	About the extraction of the fetus when it dies.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus, use that which we have said in the division of medicine and it is not deformed and ready, and you should be able to use operation by hand, then consider whether the woman is of sound virtue and not of any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying on her back with her head resting on a pillow, and her head inclined slightly and her limbs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant holds her arms at a distance or lays them on her chest to prevent the umbilical cord from extending during extraction of the child.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you moisten the mother's mouth with oil and a mixture of mint, fennel, and sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife places her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then inserts her hand into the mother to facilitate delivery, and then covers the area where the umbilical cord is in the child.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In such cases: Then you consider whether the child is prepared to cry over his own head, and then you look for the umbilical cord in the neck of the child, or on the collarbone, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or behind the beard, or on the breastbone, or in the locations appropriate for the back, or behind the hypochondriacs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the condition is on his feet, then in the plantar region, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And hold the needle with his thumb on the straight part of the hand, and press the curve of it in that place which is between the fingers of the other hand, and insert the needle into any of those places which we have said, until you reach the cause of pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another needle in the same position, or a third one if necessary, so that it is attached equally, and not stretched more than straightly.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be applied to all parts, so that the discharge of it is as it is done in teeth for its eradication.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then hold that which is between those fingers wet with oil and insert those experiments and rotate those which are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the toes are moved into the space that is most suitable; and make sure that the entire fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is on the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by its covering, then wrap a cloth around that; and remove it entirely, and insert it or in the joint of the hand or in the cavity.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And make sure to do the same in the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or it is stuck in the covering in the essence, or it is in the cover of water that is not adjusted, then insert between the mentioned spines and cut the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called “alundat”, the form of which will come from the forms of the other instruments in the capital which is appropriate for this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, do the same if the fetus is naturally large: and then insert that into the forceps, or take it with the instrument called “alundat” as we have said; and remove the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is exposed and restrained by the furcula, then cut it open so that the moisture inside the chest can be drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and the head is not too fat, then you should insert it as soon as possible according to your own ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the left side of the abdomen is abscessed or in hydropic state, then pierce it so that the moisture inside can be drained.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the fetus is on its feet, then the direction of the uterus should be towards the mouth of the uterus.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and chest are restrained, then remove the cloth that has been wrapped around your hand and pierce the abdomen and chest so that the moisture inside can be drained.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still intact and the head returns, then insert your right hand; but if the mouth of the uterus is open, then insert your hand into the vagina, surround the head, and pull that cord towards the mouth of the uterus, and then insert one or two fingers.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, then do not force it open; before doing so, first administer an injection of thin, wet humors.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on their side, if possible, it should be pierced: and that which we have said in the living wound should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be scraped off with a spoon, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of death in the second stage.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And after you have completed all your work, then administer that which we have said about the cure of abscesses that have occurred to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if blood flow occurs from the wound, then first apply styptic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in the womb of whom was dead, and another fetus had been prematurely born, and another died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him that he had a long time ago an abscess in his abdomen; and when the fire was brought over, he began to tremble violently.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to care for him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed some strong-adhesive plaster on him for certain causes, and after several days, I removed one bone, and after a few more days, I removed another bone; and he was very surprised, as there were no bones in his abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So I followed the wound, and removed some bones, which were existing in his abdomen in various dispositions, and had been there for a long time, causing him to have a slight fever.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not think it was strange, but rather that in this case there was knowledge and help for this that the skilled physician would administer for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of a hook is used for this, which is inserted through the mother's womb:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a forceps in which the fetus is grasped, to which it is attached by two hooks on both ends of its handles:
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this hook should be more slender than restrictive, and it should be made of iron or wood:
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each rod should be two fingers wide, and the margin of each end should be one finger wide, and the length of each should be a palm and more; and in the middle of the two rods there are two adjustments of that measuring rod which are already fixed, whose length is the greatest of a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that they can be grasped when you turn the two described hooks:
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form of that more subtle and less dangerous poison:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Should be made from a bamboo stick or second-hand iron, according to the similarity of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of this tool, there should be two additions with handles, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and the width of each is about two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the larger one, first place your hand on the left side of the patient's feet, then insert that which is between his thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then raise your hand with the tool according to the amount you want to remove from the opening of the larger one, so that the midwife can do what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of virtue which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impelling, which is pushed into the fetus.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of amidation, which is held in the large head.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at the end of which there are teeth, sometimes, and some forceps are made like this, sometimes, at the end of which there are teeth that are sharpened and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of administration for small amounts:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of one ounce having a spike:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of one ounce having two spikes:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with which the closing jaw has a point that the tip of the fetus can be contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two ends, and the tip is removed:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two flat spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more they are multiplied in the species of that and prepared by the craftsmen, as it is more suitable to their operation and more convenient for the people by their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with those instruments whether it is from there or not, because the need for those is not excuseable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the second tooth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is held, then command the patient to hold their own tongue, and make that sternutation in condition, and place your hand on their mouth and on their nostrils, and if by chance it is deformed or dislocated, so be it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take an egg and pierce it on the cover with a sharp object and place it in the herbs that are burning at the mouth of the mare, such as calamint, rough and rue, and camomile and scicados arabic and cassia lignea and sainturea.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the egg, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a siphon of cavernier in the mouth of the mare, and hold that inside until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mare.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then do that shaking as we have said, and the second time it is removed quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this cure is not effective and does not work, then command the midwife to dip her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and then insert that into the womb and massage it for the second time, and as soon as it finds it, then take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the pregnant woman's belly, then insert her second hand as we have recommended, and when it finds the second time, extract it little by little correctly so that the pregnant woman does not catch the violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Above the knees, which should be moved to the right and left for ease of access.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust it to the appropriate amount of attraction, so that it will obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is covered, we have already recommended the cure for suffocation and the medication of the eye with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then guard yourself from performing it on that one in the iteration of abstraction, but rather cover what is necessary from the patient's mouth to the mother's mouth with a cloth, and then apply a poultice made of enguent and tetrafarmacon; for that will cause it to rot within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And when it rots, raise the patient's head and stomach, and that will help the patient; and then cover what is necessary with sub-fumigations and appropriate for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May ancient authors also mentioned under-fumigation of nitrates and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument by which the woman is under-fumigated is for the retention of menstruation and the secondinea.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the thin end should be placed in the fire and the thick end over the fire, and the under-fumigation should be placed over the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that one until that under-fumigation is consumed and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the healing of the child's unperforated anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	If newborn children and their anuses are not perforated, which have been thinly scraped and oiled.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife perform that scraping; otherwise, scrape that space sharply, and make sure it does not touch the skin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place your hand over that moistened wool in vinegar and oil; and cure that area until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that they may be asleep, then place a catheter in their bladder to urinate, and remove it when they want to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there has been an abscess in the anus for consolidation of the plague or abscess; then cover that consolidation to be incised, and then cure it with the same remedy as we have mentioned for the cure and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that occur afterward.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the body, which are more numerous and which occur near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is a fistula or a wound.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that wound is ancient and comes from the moisture, a white or thin pus, and some of these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating ones are recognized by the fact that they come out with urine and wind; and some of them use the patient's urine, and it is often found in these worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are sometimes woven in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in the case of a fistula that penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, you insert your finger into the anus, and gently insert a thin needle or iron into the fistula when it is not turgidity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turgidity in that case, then gently insert the thin needle or iron into the fistula until you feel the needle or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all or experience any cause of diarrhea, worms, or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then proceed with the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the meaning of it is entirely of urine from that place and prohibition of it so that that place may be consolidated by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If the infection penetrates into the joint or bone and causes pain in the limb, it is likely that the joint is infected if there is swelling around the bone and pain in the affected part; and that it may recur quickly; and that it is not suitable for that medication, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all these fistulas, the cure is not complete, and the cure of those is difficult and depends on the skill of the surgeons over which it is stopped.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	If in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, the cure is expected to be successful according to what you have recommended and what has already been done.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back, and raises the cushions of him into them, the cushions are inclined to the belly of him, and then insert the probe of plaster, or of earth if there is swelling in the fistula, until you know the location where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if you see that the patient is leaning towards the back, then insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the tip of your finger has already penetrated, or another thing that you feel between your finger and the patient's body, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not treat in that place, as it is not a cure, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some people say that this is a cure for certain diseases.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment that is hoped to be effective in this, you should ignite a fine cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the affected flesh has been burned away, resembling a quill of a porcupine.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then apply ointment to the affected area until all the burned flesh has healed, and then apply medicine to generate and consolidate the new flesh; if it is healed, then it is good; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the probe enters and does not penetrate into the anus, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the probe there is a velamentous membrane of flesh or skin, and if the fistula is in that place on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see if the probe dries inside the fistula, and if it reaches the location where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is released and catheterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a pen needle and have no cause of those.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flow occurs between you and your operation when those flesh is inserted, then milk that is and from the pus use a sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because the cauterizing iron with fire adjusts good doses: it adjusts those flesh adjusted, and abscess of the blood extraction of the humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then carefully remove the thick cloths or pads that have been placed inside or outside the wound, and then carefully remove the hard meat that has formed and solidified in the wound.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	These are medicines that have both astringency and dryness; when it is restored, it heals and there is no risk of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already reached the anus and extends to the surface of the rectum, then insert the finger into the anus and explore that area.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the tent is centered and it enters between you and it is made of skin or meat, and is prepared for penetration, then it is not an operation in that way but a second way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This cause is to be administered in that way in three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to dry up that which you can reach the cavity of it by which it is possible to enter and treat those things and the curative plan proposed; and not process any motive for sepsis so that you do not insert the contents of the bowel, and that an accident occurs on the patient's will and immediately from the information of the history; and then cure that which we have said is very strong and heals; or to lengthen that veil and cleanse that puddle which dries up that which is prepared for penetration into the rectum, as we have said, or with the tent or with another instrument of sharp extremity, and to remove those fistulated meats which are in the section inside where you can perform crustation; and then to exert yourself to restore the entire wound section, and if the opening does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the part of the rectum, and it is more dangerous for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is closed according to this method: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the anus and on the edge of the anus, then take a punctured extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the wound in this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert the probe into that group of flesh or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the anus nearby, then you extract the flesh from that area where you introduced your finger into the anus; and remove the end of the flesh and adjust both ends, and let that lie for a day or two, and when more of the flesh is inserted into the flesh, then cut out those parts that are between the two ends of the flesh and which can be removed.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in some way that is suitable for you, but not too much so as to not injure the skin; and then insert something into it that will heal it.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spiral probe that is used to puncture the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp on one end and blunt on the other end, so as not to injure what is not necessary, sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Stitching of hernias where the intestine runs through the incision at the beginning of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hernias occur in two ways, either between the thighs like a cyst, or they are like a lump of fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the intestine runs through them immediately and is one, and its margins, and its back to the thighs, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that run through the thigh like a few moist ones, of which the intestine runs through with a continuous small incision, and its color is according to the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is in the belly is that you command the patient to lie down and breathe deeply until the belly is full and the intestines appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you should sit and hold the patient's arms or whatever you have to hold them with, and then insert your finger into their mouth.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the arms are not held with those because of their moisture and softness, then take those with dry cloth or cotton or woolen cloth, and remove those from them, and then insert those and powder some charcoal at the beginning, so that they will be in place as a cauterizer; or cauterize them according to what is written in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the belly does not open, then crush the patient with a crucifix in which there is a small bite, and wash them with that water which is in the belly and which opens the exit better when the patient exhales.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the swollen parts are deformed at the anus, the cause of this is often a worm, and you should remove them with your nail or a needle, scrape them out, and then care for them with the ointment we have mentioned before they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that which was before removed, cover the wound with a thread and insert this needle into it, and remove the worms from the parts above, and let the other end of the needle penetrate into the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part behind the needle, and lengthwise; and strongly tie the worm to the structure, and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this for all of them, and leave one untouched, so that the excess blood from that one flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus; and place this on the abdomen and command the patient to lie down.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that one inside the box; and when it is healed, cure those wounds with ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Masses of vegetations that arise from excessive dryness or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since you cannot find those in that medicine, then cover those with a wet cloth or your finger into which they have been punctured, the one that prevents them from consolidating; and then cure those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should apply those with more violent ointment than the first one that was scabbed and scraped; and then cure those that have been healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of almsamir, it is said.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that almsamir, it is said, and not if not redone according to the color of the body similar to a cork, and it is done throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the mentioned ones, and it is caused by those pains.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut that which is inside the claw, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	The molluscum is a small, raised, round wound on the surface of the body, and moths come out of its legs in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And care for that is to extend and cut that, or to remove it with forceps or tweezers.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the inverses and non-inverses are removed with the instrument that he said.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	The termite is a small, furry or large wound on the surface of the body, and when it enters the prone position, that in the same way as the bite of a termite, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is to take a sharp needle made of gold or iron, and it should be strong, and place it on the part where the worm is contained within the circle of the needle; then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle where you have inserted that which is in the circuit of the worm, and place it on the flesh, and remove the worm from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to do this with a needle made of iron in this way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part above the needle should be thin and sharp, unbroken (not pierced), wrapped in what is above the place where the attachment of the worm is removed and the rotation of that is done.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the worm according to what is called in the chapter on cauterization of the head in the book on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give anesthesia.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some anesthetics are made of silver or lead or melted or hammered; and some anesthetics are made of those instruments small and large according to those with which they are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose wounds are painful or inflamed, the anesthetics of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The large and small intestines:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the catheter inserted above, in which the bag is wide according to this method; and at that distance, where the bag is attached as needed.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the other end of the catheter, which is inserted into the anus, should be dull (not sharp) like a lion's tooth, thin; and on one side of it has two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the size of the holes should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or sheep's wool are placed, and the reason for it is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by thin needles in this way, and if the space between the needles is the largest of them all.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert the thin, sharp needles into those holes, or around them; and adjust the bag to it; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight between two distinguishing strong constraints, and then cauterize each hole: May the quality of cauterizing it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the tolerance of the patient; and remember that it should not be too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and their legs raised and supported by a pillow or a blanket; and then apply a warm ointment made of oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances to the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the nurse should hold the basin and express the contents until it is all evacuated from the intestine; and then remove the basin and the patient should lower their legs to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if that remedy does not work, hold it as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps all night, it is better to do it in the morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you apply that remedy to the patient's abdomen in the solution of belly and the application of it, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are ulcers or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp cauterizer from the cauterizers that children are cauterized with.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure of plaques
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	He has already said in the division of the cure of plaques that what was suitable for free men, and he says so thus the cure of those who are slaves and servants is according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore it is said that plaques are diverse according to what is the nature of the plaques and according to the place where they are found.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plaques are formed are such as with a stone in the gallbladder, or an incision of a spike or of a knife, or by a blow from a lance, or a stick, or a sword, or similar to those of other causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the plaques that are in the places of the body be such as the plague that catches on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or wings, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And he recommends the cure of some plaques because of that reasoning and rule over other plaques.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And now I will begin to describe the simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So it is said that when a simple wound occurs on the head and is not a fracture, if it is caused by a stone or something similar, and has only been washed with water and is large and you fear that the patient might develop an abscess, then you should immediately perform a trepanation on the cephalic bone as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and extract the pus from it according to the amount of its power if no other cause prevents trepanation, especially if the pus that is in the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if the trepanation is on the opposite side of the wounded part, then keep the patient away from heat and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any cause that prevents the minimization of the food, then reduce it and do not approach meat or fish.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place your hand over the wound, if an abscess has formed there, and pour in warm oil or place something hot on it to stop the bleeding.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of the abscess, pause over the wound, if it is recent, apply your own clean cloth and air has not changed to that place, then apply a small amount of powder that I will recommend to apply.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed there, then pause over the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or extends into spaces and is not adjusted by fingers, then adjust those with sutures according to what I will recommend for their sutures.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already been discovered from bone and flesh, and is not retained but a small suspension, then insert that and apply medicines to the wound and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and form coytes and similar things until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is decay in the wound and does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that putridity and remove it, and apply medicines to it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these parts there is an artery or vein from which unhealthy blood can flow, and it is not cut by medical means, then you should look for the uncut part of the artery, and if you find it, then you should incise it with a needle or sew it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the unhealthy blood is cut.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these parts are simple and small, the cause of their being so is leuger; in any case, you should powder them with this powder, which when applied to them will consolidate them so that air does not move them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of broken olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished; mix all of this together, and fill the wound, and strengthen it with a good compression inside and outside, and coagulate it with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen it above with the powder and leave it there, do not remove it until it is healed, because the medicine cannot be repeated if it is not healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some have done it alone with cauterization, when you are not present and cannot do it yourself.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this medical operation is performed in the large intestines when it is necessary to stop them over those and straighten them, and their recent wounds are closed with their own skin, which has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer time, then do not apply this powder to that position, but first cure those with what we have said, whether you place it on those wounds with disgusting ointments, or on those wounds with flour of bread mixed with honey and water until they are healed; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if an accident happens to the broken bone in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that which was said.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will tell you the cure for the broken bones of the head in that which is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plaques of the neck
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague affects the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in the engine but rather avoiding treatment with that which causes great stopticism, as well as ziniar and zege that is vetriol and similar to their quarrels that do not damage the nerves and contrary to that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place anything over the plague of all causes of freedom, because the substance of the nerves is free and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is cured of false medicines, as if it is caused by washed with hot water, some vaporized in olive oil or not-olive oil, and then when it is washed with hot water and the others pearls minimizing according to this manner, and find humor.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then administer stitches or tie the lips of it, and then cure it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound has depth or accidents in the lower most part, then pierce it in the deepest place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the wound has an incised artery and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that from happening.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the ribs of the chest or all have been incised, and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with a stitch over the edge of the chest and do not touch that; equal it to that and reduce it to its natural figure, and apply strength to that with structures that are decent, and leave that for several days; and then cure it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has pierced the bone, then perforate it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; and that which is not visible to you, leave it until the wound becomes festered, and then separate it and let the pus of it drain.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the wound is recent, then powder it with the recommended powder.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula is made in the wound, then cure it with the same thing that will come to memory soon at its capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar ones that are made between the ribs and are made with a space or a knife or a lance or a similar thing.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of a lance or a knife, and sometimes you see the depth of it, then consider whether the wound is bleeding when the patient breathes; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in the wound and it is recent to its own scab, then you place powder on it during the first hour, and do not strengthen that so that the scab does not stick to the depth of it and so that it returns to the heart and so that no one hurts the patient, but place a wet bandage on it.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the gout does not present itself to you, then place your hand on the opening of the wound near the old scar to let out that which comes from the humidity; and make the patient lie on the wound so that the liquid that is in it flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasm, tremor of heart, or stricture of the abdomen, and other signs are good, then know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with ointments and the other cures until it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is delayed and it has been opened for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore, treat it by its capital method.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut of a knife or a spear, and it is simple on the surface of the thigh or the back, then treat it with water that precedes stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been an incision in the bone, and it is already cut through, then you will twist the plate and cover it to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then insert the instruments that can reshape the plate, as its extraction is praised.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plates in the other members, the treatment is as we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plates of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or mixed.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Some of the large ones are the intestines or nerves of the belly, so that an incision into them is made and a suture of them is done more forcefully and more subtly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is difficult to make by another method, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult, so if you do not make an incision into their place immediately, because they open and are enlarged, making the instrument for them difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best treatment is to migrate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, as it is in the two special cases mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that there are four ways to suture the abdomen, but two common methods are usually used for suturing other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures communicate with other parts of the body, but they are more proper for suturing the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend that you explain and declare each one to you.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore say that when the part is small and there is no cause of the hernia for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then in one of the two methods: either by peritoneal irritation as we have said, or when inflammation comes to the hernia due to the cold of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is the case, you should cover that part with a cloth soaked in warm water alone, or with water and wine, and spices, and embrocates at that place where the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some vinegars are used in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which althea and mallow are boiled, because for this purpose it is an effective remedy.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the remedy is not suitable for this cure, then divide the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not blunted by rust.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is best when it is appropriate that it not be dry, and not occupied with the need to dry and fail.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, its shape is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp and curved, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, and not as thin as a needle, but slightly blunted at the end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is amplified and the intestine comes out, then place it back in its original form, in its proper place, if possible over water, because that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is widespread, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then let it lie on its back, and place its legs as high as possible above its head; and if it is in the higher part of the abdomen, then let it lie on its side, and place its head and chest as high as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, then place your hand and consideration quickly on the side where the pain is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so that you administer it in the major and minor pains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the minor pains, place the remedy that you have prepared between your fingers, and let the administrator hold the disruption entirely with his hand, and adjust its lips, and remove from one to another if there is any cause of a suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: you take a needle, or count the second needle according to the width of the pain; and from the end of the disruption of the said ring, you strengthen the needle once, or do not put it in both ends of the cord, but in both ends of the thread that is behind the two parts of the wound, before you make that penetrate into that part; and you have added both ends of the cord and both ends of the thread, and it has been made four times.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And strengthen the double thread in the circle of the needle, and some sutures of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and then leave the large one and put another needle in that, and then tie it as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this until the wound is completely closed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium size between coarseness and fineness, because fine needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and large ones are difficult to pass through the needle, therefore it is recommended that they be of medium size in terms of fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not let the needle be stuck at two ends of the wound intended, because the flesh should not be penetrated too easily and so that the wound can heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the sutures so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then carefully insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient's skin; and place pulverized cotton on the suture, which holds the tips of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of sutures with needles should be used carefully in small wounds, as the suture contains one or two or several needles.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is similar: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the cylinder, in a line, with a needle that is thinly and evenly wrapped.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle from that same part of the wound, so that the first layer of the cloth does not rise above the wound, so that the suture is the second layer of cloth.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the amount of thick of that torn part.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch should be done by women.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch was used to repair a wound in a man's belly that had been cut with a knife, which was the rupture of the abdominal wall major of a palm, and was located around two palms from the intestine at the lower part and was the rupture in the lower part of the member; and then she reduced it so that the intestine had been through the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and that was healed and cured; and then she used this ointment for months, and she continued with her treatments.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had thought that it would not be healed; and by a miracle of fire, which was in the place where the wound was not at all or any medicine, but she placed over the wound a piece of cloth for two days and washed it frequently with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you direct two special types of suture according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And if you begin with the suture of the neck, insert the needle from the side of the skin to the side of the flesh.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And as the needle penetrates the neck and the other side of the skin, leave the end of the thread in the place where you inserted the needle; and let the other end of the thread penetrate from the side of the flesh to the side of the skin on the other side of the body.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And as you have finished that penetration, then do the other penetration in the other side of the body from the side of the flesh to the side of the skin; and leave the end of the thread on this side, and let the needle penetrate from the side of the skin to the side of the flesh on the other side of the body.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And let the needle penetrate in the way that makes that penetration in the thread at the end where all of that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then, approaching from this position and leaning towards the other side where the kidney is on the other side, extract the needle from the codex that pierces it, and then return it to that codex and cover the end of the kidney that is on this side with the extracted part; and then extract the needle from the codex that is next to it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And then do this again and again, and do this again approaching another one within the time that you have finished all of it according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the total of this method of suture is that you sew the skin layer that covers the fur, in such a way that you sew the kidney once from the side of the end of the codex, and then let it rest until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second special type of suture called Gualia, and this is how it should be done for each and every part, is that you sew that second semilunar part that doctors usually sew to it, in such a way that they add all the parts to their corresponding part on it appropriately; and then apply the end of another one to it and the end of the mirror to the other end of it, and this is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have the needle at the end of the mirror, in your own hand, and make it penetrate into the part of the body from that direction, and let two ends of the thread; then revolving the needle, make it penetrate from the outside to the inside of the two ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then revolving those needles, make each one penetrate from the inside of the body to the outside in two other ends of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suture is better than the common one, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the word of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And moreover, they say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so you should insert one needle into each of them and begin with the insertion of the needle according to what you should do, and make it penetrate through the other side according to the second suture of those that equally cover the hearts.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When the disruption occurs in the middle of the abdomen, it is more difficult to suture than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of plague medicine is the judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you obtain the recent plague, it is because the air has altered it, and reduced the intestine and its contents, and prepared it inappropriately, then place powder on it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it an ointment that is present with you until it forms a hard and sticky substance, and is consolidated and mature; and cure it as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines present with you, then place on it mustard until it begins to blister, and change the dressing twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in cases of simple plagues.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague might spread to the main members, then cover the lion's paw with tempered or rough oil, and place it in the circle of the areas between the thighs and remove the sheets.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then apply that which is used for such a purpose, and if the infection has reached the intestine and a deep penetrating wound has been made inside its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the pus from the intestines is a lighter and more effective cure than the pus in the thin intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to cure the intestine that is called "genu" because it does not receive cure for all plagues; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, and its size, and the thinness of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If that which comes from the plague is a cloth, and you have obtained it recently, reduce it according to your correctness, and reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If the space has already been opened and it is now time to perform an incision or not, then strengthen the finger on the location that is being denigrated from the patient, in order for blood to flow out, which contains the veins and arteries in the cloth.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise that other ligament, and place two ends of the finger's tendons on the part of the cloth above the wound, in order to avoid the attraction of the patient from the contents of the cloth and emission of the blood from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering the wounds that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen that person who was wounded in their stomach from the impact of a lance and the wound was the part of the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made into a fistula, and they managed to restore its function and mobility.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I continued the cure of him that he was not yet cured, but I ceased to apply it gently until the wound is healed and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw that the area was consolidated, I placed over the patient a cushion to protect him from any accident of evil in his abdomen; and he did not experience any of that evil accident, and remained in his soft dispositions eating and drinking, and he was then bathed and exercised in his bed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And many experienced people say that when a wound occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then it should be sutured according to this method: and you take large needles; and you adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those needles with the mouth open over the two lips of the wound; so when you put on those and strengthen your mouth, cut the cap of it, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another needle at the first one, and do not cease to do this with needles according to the quantity of all the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then approach and reduce that area; and those nearby should keep their hands away from the intestine until it is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine can be tied with a thin, sharp thread made from animal intestine, which is more suitable than a needle; and you should take the end of this thread, which should be clean, and wrap it around the end of the intestine, then insert the thread into the wound, and reduce it to the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing is only the second way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the small intestines, then it cannot be sutured, but only treated, and not healed completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of fistulas and abscesses.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You should know that any wound and abscess that becomes indurated and ancient, and is left to form an ulcer, which does not consolidate and constantly drains pus, in any member, universally is called a fistula, and we call it a sinus.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And secondly, a true fistula is a hard, white, painless lesion that is located in the same way as a painless ulcer; and to avoid confusion with that, it is called a rice-like lesion, that is, an ulcer.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in moist ulcers, which ooze pus, the wetness is usually drained off within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this wetness is moved, and it is thin, thick, and granular.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned this in the division, as I said about the plaques, that every ulcer that is not healed or not in the raw flesh is not so but for one of these causes: among which one is from pus in the wound; or malice of the ulcer; or because between the ulcer and the lips there is hard flesh that prevents the growth of new flesh; or because it is caused by moisture; or because that ulcer itself becomes putrid and the matter that is in it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable for its cure; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or because of the nature of the region, as in the case of Saragossa, where digestion of evils is difficult, and healing of the abscess by nature is slow.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Here are all those causes, their symptoms, and the treatment with various medicines in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now I will tell you how to treat fistula, which is caused by surgery.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among these are those that reach the great veins, arteries, nerves, spleen, intestine, bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the joints composed as mentioned above.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among these, the one that follows this method is of difficult healing, does not receive treatment, and occupation is often due to hard work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas has a depth that does not reach the mentioned locations, and you expect and trust in its treatment, and want to reach knowledge of it, then take an iron or steel probe, and if the fistula goes straight, and you can reach it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate whether a thin probe can be used to elevate the weight of their body and straighten the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is too painful, it is not possible to use a probe over it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the orifices with their own urine, as the moisture by which you cleanse one also penetrates the others and helps them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then carefully examine, in whatever way possible, whether there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or short one is in its cavity, or if it is a fistula with many openings that is entirely covered by your strength, your enteroguacio, which enters the patient, and the invention of the pain due to your compression of the hand over the area, and similar meanings and causes of accidents to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And if you have found all these causes in the position of the fistula: then proceed to the cure according to your confidence: and consider whether it is an apparent fistula near the joint, or in a location that is long from the joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When necessary, after the first incision is made on the surface of the foot, remove any pus that is present in that filter and rotten flesh, and any discharge that comes from the orifices of the flesh, or from the bones and similar parts, and cure that wound before it becomes infected.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is long and deep in its depth, and is straight, then cut it as far as possible from the front, and remove all rotten flesh; and apply bandages soaked in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood to be iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that to it several times until the acute medicine corrodes all that is present in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal by that, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and dry the second one as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member present as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is yours to expose and it is in any corruption or blackness, then remove that within which the corruption is held completely; and cure that with the same that the flesh within which is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and the bone is not as it was, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore you expose again and carefully perform the reason of it and the purification of it with the strongest fortified tie, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep long distance of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you cannot enter into that but only lay aside that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it back, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you cannot move the broken bones, carefully perform the extraction of all those that are not affected by any cause.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any resistance due to moisture, and there is no fear or mistake at the beginning, then carefully insert those ligaments or flesh that are near, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you do not have the preparation of bone to replace the bones of your time, then place that which can harden that area, and let it enter where those flesh and ligament bones are near, and keep the area from being consolidated and strengthened the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you fear, place it under the incision in the area above the elbow, or under the elbow in Egyptian oil, or in any of the oils that are green, because when those ligaments harden, and the bones are separated from their position, the pain is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a large bone like those of the backbone or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then remove that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you have someone who has experienced this in the patient's thigh to hold and assist during your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around the age of thirty, who experienced pain in his thigh, and from the parts that were putrid was on the matter of the body inside where the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a large abscess, and not from an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the doctor extended the fire too close to the affected area before the abscess was opened, and the matter that came out of it was stopped by the doctor's hand, and the cure was stopped by the doctor's hand before the bed became fistulated, and the pus in the wounds all poured out and the humidity of the wound.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then all the doctors treated him for about two years, and the fire was not in that place but in the arm, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the bed of that person and the matter that came out of those wounds was very thick; and the wound of that man was completely stable and the color of it was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced the tent into one of those wounds and reached the tent to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined quickly those wounds and found that they had reached all parts of the bed.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I showed and incised over one of the wounds those that had entered before describing a part of the bone, and at once I found that it was rotten and corrupted and decomposed; and already a part of the bed had penetrated into the muscle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And you should have already discovered and prepared that which was hidden under the bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you should have discovered that which was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I had cut and prepared, and you had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then place your hand over the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then you should have discovered and opened again and explored over the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and continued to find corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And you should have discovered that which appeared from that corruption, and then you should have prepared to perform the cure of it and restoration, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you should have discovered another way and not ceased to gradually incise the bone particularly and perform the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you have incised around a palm of it, and that extracted was its marrow, and then you should have restored it with medicine, and it was consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And repetition is not necessary in the operation of cutting off the limb and the limb itself, but for the disposition of the lady's maid and the scarcity of her tolerance and fear of death, which often occurs in all hours due to excessive evacuation of bad blood.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And then healing is for the entire cure, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to position him in his own body and restore his strength; and he is treated according to his positions and does not do anything contrary to him in ambulation or cause any harm in any case.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	And if the limb is in place of the body already rotten, then proceed with this method: and that you take a bandage and strength at the end of that limb, and command whoever stretches it; and pause that bandage of thick wool from the first bandage; and bring it over the flesh that is left of the bone, and extend the outside of him to draw the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When the table is placed incorrectly next to the bones, it is not forbidden to use a saw that does not dry out the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover the sawing on the rotten area little by little, because if it is in the hollow of the corruption and does not appear at the surface, then another method must be used.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not eminent, then continue sawing from one continuous piece to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a separate piece, then remove all the flesh from all parts; and place a cushion behind, and use the saw of the first piece where the corruption is continued until the sawing of the other piece is complete.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the sawing is done according to the location of the corruption, then do it a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, then insert the saw into the rotten joint and saw the bone where the other piece continues.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then do not saw in the ratio but rather in a straight line.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the breast or foot, it is difficult; however, try to find the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and remove it, and wash it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and let everything be corrected to you, when not against your will comes blood or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You should know what are the sawblades and the saws to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and parvity of those, and their hardness and rarity; therefore try to prepare all kinds of instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You should know that that operation means to you regarding the specific instrument that is needed; when you are great in study and long and knowledgeable of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, therefore you have already chosen that which is suitable for you from all the instruments for that illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will form in the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use simply and easily, which you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Circular saw blade:
Forma de autra serra:	Other form of saw blade:
Forma de autra serra:	Other form of saw blade:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Large other form of saw blade:
Forma de ray:	Ray form:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray should be in the shape of a star-shaped crown, and its points should be in the form of alstefes.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not advisable to use them only when the joints are corrupted, or if the mouth is very wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of flat razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of other well-made saw: make an arch shape with the blade and sharpen it with iron, and the handle of the blade should be well-made.
Forma de lu:	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of a blade with a concave surface:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another fine shape of a blade:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The shape of another curved-ended blade:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The shape of a small blade similar to a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of a cutting tool that can cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another smaller cutting tool:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The shape of another tool, similar to a ray, with its end like a saw, and is used in certain places in the surgery of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of a tool that is suitable for drilling through bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have mentioned about blades, cutting tools, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the ends of cutting tools and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	When the extremities are affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or when you have treated that corruption for the cure of those medicines and the cure does not come, or when the corruption leaves the member that was not affected by any cause, then it is necessary to insert that member into that part of the body where the corruption is, so that the patient might escape from that part of the body that causes more harm to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the cause of that is that the member becomes black before it is properly cooked, or if it becomes rotten near where the fire has burned, or if it is affected by a disease that has spread throughout that member and has taken over the whole body; therefore, I advise you to insert that part into that place.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the corruption is caused by the pressure of certain poisonous causes such as a scorpion's sting or from a viper or a rattlesnake and similar creatures.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or pressure is in the extremity of that member, then you should insert that member and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you approach the patient's face, then insert a cushion under their cheek, and do not give space for corruption until they take hold of the cushion in their arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you insert that one, then insert your arm into the space at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes around the joint, then that is the death of the patient; and in treatment, give another cause or that one to increase its effectiveness.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if corruption passes into the foot, then insert that one into one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold of the toe, then insert the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter the ankle, then insert the cushion into the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached the ankle, then in that case, there is no hope, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the skin in the part that you want to insert, and strengthen another skin over the area; and extend the minister a skin to the parts behind, and extend the minister another skin on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two skins at least one span wide until all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And let there be placed cloth of all parts to prevent it from touching the wound, and bring the patient's injury and abscess carefully.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If there is bleeding when working, then cauterize the wound continuously, or place some powders to stop the blood; and then return to your medical practice until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bandage the affected member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend that you be aware of this event that happened to a man in his foot, which is the accident you and I have recommended, which occurred due to the blackening of his foot from an injury that was similar to burning by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurred in his toe within a short time.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself more than the cure to go to the member with the urgency of its pain and burning, and he did not cut that foot into the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, it often happens to that woman in the mentioned place, corruption in the said uterus.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and I perforate that excess fluid that was placed on the surface of the medicines, approaching the purification of the body; and if the excess fluid is not repelled, it begins to go into the other part where it begins in the uterus.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he calls me to incise the uterus of that woman, and I do not want to do that hoping for the reflection of that excess fluid, and more than he fears death from the incision of the uterus, because the virtue of the patient was weak.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he was disappointed with me, he returned to his land and reached me that that man prepared and incised his entire uterus, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful for that which is caused by this illness, and to have meaning for the one who understands it and to be done according to that meaning.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the treatment of sinuses and the quality of clutterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses occur in fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it collects pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains open as if it were a vessel, and the codena that is above it is covered with thin cloth, and it does not reach deep corruption, and it does not press on bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space extends until the corruption presses on some member, then it is called a fistula and does not heal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to insert that codena entirely with a revolving motion, and more when it is thinned and made with cloth, and you make sure that it does not stick to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the codena will stick and that the corruption has not reached deep consequence, and in the codena there is a break, then you treat it with a clutterization.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the sinew, and if it is large, and the brace that you have made from fat has a strong odor, then cleanse it with the Egyptian medicament which is made of oil, vinegar, and zinc, and divide it into equal parts, and place it in a vessel, and boil it over the fire until the medicament becomes honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinew with that, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine on it for the amount of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract that which is left; and do this for so many days until the sinew is cleansed and remains moistened.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some waters are cleansed with ash water, when you are not present this medicament; and you should take the ashes of wood, and place them on the water; and then collect that and cleanse it with that inside until you confirm that the sinew is ready.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then make a clyster with honey and charcoal mixed together, and make a clyster with honey alone, because honey is moistening and cleansing, and it makes the sinew adhere, and especially when there is an excess of stupefying and drying in the water.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And if you have done this for some time and feel that the sinew has been reunited, then make a clyster with water that makes the flesh soft in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And if you take some egg yolk and dissolve that rosy oil and vinegar, which is stupefying; or if you make a clyster with some medicines and other oils that have the properties written in the treatise of ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinew are straitened in which the clyster needle is not received, then you should gradually enlarge that water with a small iron, and pause in it covered with Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the anus is also dilated, then you add stitches to its lips and leave some quantity in which the intestines can be inserted.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the anus of which the intestine passes is raised to the sides above, then dry that part in the lowest place where it is in order for the intestine to pass through, because when the intestine is constricted in its beginning, the flesh will be in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the lower part of the bone as you wish, then prepare the member with the preparation that the intestine passes through according to what is available and that there is no cause of the intestine being retained in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed on the sinus appropriately for that which you want to extend over that cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity that it covers all the sinus; and then insert the forceps in the right of the anus of the sinus a slightly larger than the anus of the sinus; and then extend over another cloth from the intestines according to the quantity of the tract, and place it over that for a long position of the anus of the sinus so that the feces of it are not retained but only the cloth is slightly attached to it.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When it is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains open all the time in order to prevent that which is adjusted in its place from coming out.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether that which comes from the arm is mot or little, or digested, or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so that you consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter which is secreted over the orifice of the sinus has adhered, or has acquired adhesion, then you should remove it or tear it out on the third day, and when you remove the plague, then change the dressing and renew the poultice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus there is also a subtle pus that approaches, then do not despair of the adhesion of it, for the healing of which will be appropriate, because in some people in whom the generation of flesh in those plagues takes a long time, and in those in which it is done the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus becomes filled with undigested matter, you know that the sinus does not adhere; if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and this prolongs the cause, then adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their effect, they are dried like a diaphonic, when they are applied with excessive addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The most effective remedy is to take a diaphonic and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on the affected area, equal in its substance, and apply that remedy.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	It is similar in that action, when there is no undigested matter, myrrh when it is thickened, and use of it; or take mallow root and aloe, and grind all and powder over the melted honey when it is above the fire, and apply that over the sinus; and apply that which you have thickened myrrh, and powder over cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some of these remedies are administered to the long-suffering patient with lily of the valley (and it is indeed lily of the valley) and flour of eggshells, and centaury, and use those simple herbs or adjustments, sift and powder them over the meal that has been recommended; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew is prolonged and not healed by this remedy, then you should know that the corruption is in the very bone of the patient, and it has already been examined in the bones or other hard members or in the ligaments; therefore, you should cure it with the fistular remedy as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the remedy for broken nails and toenails, and with the addition of digit incision and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The remedy for broken nails is an abscess that has not been removed from the finger or toe of the said foot or hand, and it often occurs in other such places, and as it prolongs and its cure is highly valued, it is either a cautious abscess or it is corrupted, and it quickly spreads through the nail bed, and it quickly corrupts the entire nail, and it quickly spreads to the bone inside of which is the same fetid odor, and the end of the said finger is made dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that same instrument that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your cure, then cover it with iron and scrape off all the excess that remains from the nail, and then cauterize the area with a suitable cauterizing tool, which is helpful in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the attachments of the nail have already joined the flesh to the parts of the body, and the pain and inflammation have subsided, then place a thin cloth underneath the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it towards the wound and scrape off that flesh with ease, and place something over it until the remaining parts of the medicine that were burning corrosively have all disappeared; and then cure that area.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if the corruption has already spread into the bone, then cover it with that bone and remove it, because there is no time when a bone that is corrupted can be healed.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you see the corrosion and corruption beginning to occur in that area, then insert a needle into one of the nails according to what is remembered, and cure it within the time it takes to heal.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail is dislocated or broken, and there is severe pain in that area, then first cleanse the patient, and dry the nail with a sharp cut across it transversely above where it was located, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is underneath the nail, otherwise you will cause severe pain to the patient and may cause damage to the surrounding tissue; and cure that area with something that reduces pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, it is not common in the hands of most men, as it is completely flesh, and it is often in the bones, or it is often in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And it is not common at the tip of the joint, or it is the origin of that in other nails of the same kind.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	May that which is born in the husks of that nut does not harm, and this one that is born in the joints is bad.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you incise that one with its length in space.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	May that which is born in the length of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore guard yourself from its abscission.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May that which is born in the husks of that nut, cover that you incise at the beginning of the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then press one of those convenient saws to it, and then cure that within which it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	May the consolidation that occurs in those between their teeth, or by the native birth of the man who was born with it, or by the consolidation of plague or by combustion of fire, or by similar things, therefore cover that you separate that consolidation within which the said returns to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their clothes some oil soaked in rosemary to prevent them from becoming consolidated, and separate between those, or place between those a thin layer of plaster that has been consolidated according to what is needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if there is a consolidation in the palm of that hand, then dry that consolidation according to what has been prepared and adapt it to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	At the beginning of the diseases, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Diseases are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come from the members of the body, and the most common place for them is in the abdomen, especially in the abdomen of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer purgation of the body of black cholera some strong expulsions, and then draw blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of their wound is done in two ways: the first is that it be cut and that that black pus be thrown away, and the other way is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The second section of this method is as follows: at the beginning, apply a compress with a tail of wax to prevent the swelling from becoming too large, which is useful for the compress, and then strengthen the patient's back against the most elevated part of the cushion, approaching the part where the vein is, and then dry the vein in one place, or in two, or in three wide sections, and then lift the black blood up to the upper part of the patient's back, and then down, until the desired amount and time have passed, and the patient bears it with his virtue.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then apply that, and command the patient to avoid foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is known to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of the patient's limbs follows this method: if there are moisture spots on the patient's back, and then place it in a bath and apply a compress with wax to the patient's back until it becomes red and the veins are protruding; or if it is exercised by exercise strong, if bath is not at your present, until the limb is scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then carefully cut the cord on the side of the vein, either in the long or short direction, depending on whether it is in the front or back of the leg, or at the bottom of the leg, you should use a denol or a talon.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then use scissors to cut the cord at the side of the vein, excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to be clean, and apply a bandage to that part which often has that wound inclined to blackening.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you have removed the cord, tie it with a white thread.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place your hand under that part which is elevated and shaken by the cord, and suspend it with a thread like a lemon.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section close to that section for three times, and then excoriate the cord from the part above the vein until it appears clean.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that part and insert it into the back section with the talon, and then extract it and elevate it within that part which is on the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that before you extract the section that is most similar to the one you are removing, and then insert it into the body; and later inscribe it there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and elevate it, then insert a strong double needle and tie it there and remove it, or insert behind the bone and rotate your hand at every part until it is cut through.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it is difficult to elevate that part and it comes over the patient through that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been cut through, then place your hand over the wound, which is covered with wool soaked in wine and oil and not oiled, and heal it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is twisted and has a curvature that is wrapped around the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then cut through it at every part of its curvature and at the locations where it is wrapped, and suspend it with sutures inside until you elevate it all.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to pierce the vein and not to press it, for it is difficult to lift that one; and use your prudence in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made to open the vein:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of a puncture:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be at the same location as the punctures or of sharp extremity to avoid piercing the vein; and it should have a thick flexibility, because if it were too thin, it would pierce the vein due to its thinness; having both in excess thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of venous extraction from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs, in low lands as in the Ategi land of Arabs and in the dry and sparsely populated lands of India, where there is no grass or more.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its treatment is of putrefaction that leaves the wound as we have said, with venom from snakes and vermpts and scarides and worms generated between the wound and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the suspicion of the occurrence of this venous congestion that happened in the bedsores, and then the place is blistered; and then begin to lance the vein from the location of that blister which seems reasonable from the plantar.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when it appears from there, the extremity, then you cover it with a cloth of lead that is the weight of a dragon, within two dragons, and do not remove that and leave the lead suspended from the bedsore.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	So many times when it appears from there any cause to the parts forward, cover that in lead and do not remove that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the mot is prolonged, then you insert a part of that and wrap it around; and do not insert that of reasonable until it is outside and dry, because if you insert that it is twisted and goes into the flesh and causes an abscess and pus and ulcer in the place and bad wound.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it is treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is removed from the back of that and does not remain in that any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And in this vein, it is said that some men have reached the length of twenty palms and fingers, and I have heard that it has been achieved.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then insert the needle into the track of the wound and pierce through the long track to the body, until all the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area with certain medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	Sometimes this vein has caused pain, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it causes pain to those who have it, and it has been said that it comes from a certain orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure that as we have said in the division and with what is above mentioned.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called cow disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is not named in any land as the cow disease because it has several symptoms that are not between the skin and flesh, and it is a worm that goes through all the body and downwards, and it is shown by the sensation of the same members in members until it disrupts the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of this is from the putrefaction of some humors with such accidents as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarides in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared for its maliciousness, as when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then a strong pain arises in it and enters and destroys the brain, and this ends with convulsions.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore, when you want to cure this and extract it, it is not done unless you must remove its appearance and presentation to the senses, and then make sure that you strengthen what is on top of it and what is below it with a bandage and strong pressure, and then dry it off and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not touch it, then you place a pointed cautery with fire over the area where it lies, and the main fear is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the head before the brain, then strengthen over the temple with strong pressure, and then dry it off and extract it; and make sure that the patient uses medicines that evacuate bad humors which cause maladies, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on pain from flatulence.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is not named in our land as flatulence, but it is pain that occurs in various members of the body, and is transmitted from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen the second one that I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after an hour, I saw that inflammation move as if worms were moving in it, more slowly than if it were alive silver when moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved to that location and remained in the muscle, and stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it corrected itself in the other body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it recommended itself to me that it was turning around in all his body after I saw it; and it was too wonderful of the change of it and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I have seen that in the first stages of this disease, according to that method, I have also seen words that indicate that pain is transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I did not see that in the female genital area.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that was the case unless it was due to the fact that the woman was elderly, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this situation the sensation of that transfer is apparent.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this cure in those who are delicate and have a soft body with constricted veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not apply the method we have mentioned, but strengthen it on that spot and press it gently and securely over that area until it is covered with that sensation, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see that in the first stages of this disease, then cure that with the exclusion of the body and that which expels that sensation, and remedies those with foul-smelling pills and serapi pills and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extracting teeth.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Teeth are diverse according to their species, and according to the locations in the body where they are found, due to their diversity; some have large points, small ones, concave, and deaf ones, which are solid; and from them there are three angles, and from those that have tongues; and from those that have tails.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the tooth that is second to the members and feet in which they are found, is according to two methods: first, the main members such as the brain, heart, lung, and similar members; and when pain occurs in any of these members and appears to you as symptoms of death, the cause should be counted immediately, and then it is necessary that you avoid extraction of that tooth in those cases where death would likely occur if the tooth were removed in its deeper position, and when such symptoms do not appear, and the tooth is not deeply embedded in the member, then you extract that tooth and cure the pain.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the bones in the neck are broken, and they pass through the skull, and are found above the cyphac which is above the brain, which occurs due to strong shaking, scotomia, vertigo, pain in the head, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of anger, and great swelling is removed from the word, and the voice is destroyed, and it is found above the wetness of the white humidity, similar to polls, and they are similar to the thickness of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore, if you appear to have these bones, then refrain from the cure and extraction of the skull, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the bones of the skull are broken in the heart, and they are close to the mamilla sinister, and it feels like a hard cause, and not a soft one; and greatly the movement of the skull is similar to the movement of the flesh, and comes from the plague of black bile, and then the coldness of the extremities, and sweating, and sincopation; and therefore you know that death descends upon everything.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the tumors have covered the lungs completely with abundant foam from the plague, and the veins that are close to the neck are swollen, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily and ask for air frequently.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the tumor is in the cloth that is on the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it is made with great force and a loud cry, and does not spare all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the tumor is in the stomach, then there are strong belches of the plague's vomit, which is undigested.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the tumor is in the belly, and it sticks to it, some rags of the plague, or cloth, or intestine that is torn, and there is no hope of cure by its extraction from the tumor.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the tumor is in the bladder, and it blocks the urine from being passed, and it causes some cause of the parts to be blocked, and there is great pain on the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	When the other members are like the face, neck, shoulder, back, ribs, sternum, wings, and similar parts of the body, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the knife does not find vein or artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I would advise you to tell that one who has seen the use of these knives, so that you know what to do for the treatment of this disease.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is, that in a man a knife is used at the lacrimal canal of his eye in the corner of his nose, and if you extract it from there to the other part, behind the eyebrow of his eye, he is cured, and does not harm the skin of his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And if you extract another knife from a Jew who has it in his eye in the gray of his eyelid, behind the eyebrow, and the knife is already hidden and not obtained from that but a small part which adheres to his flesh, and it was a sharp knife among the sharp knives of the Turks, without eyebrows.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And if it is not the case of the gout, and there is no such accident in his own household.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And another remedy was extracted from a man named Crestian who was struck by lightning, and he was an Arab sage, and this was the one that had been heard of; and then they inserted it into two guides, and it was already submerged in his body; and then they removed it, and Crestian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another remedy was extracted from a man who was struck in his own stomach, and it was believed that he would die from it; and then, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, they inserted the remedy into him and applied it to the wound, and he was healed, and there was no bad accident for him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And they saw another man in whom a remedy was inserted into his back, and it had become solid on him, and after seven years, the remedy was removed from his body.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who was said to have a belly ailment, and the plague was consolidated within her, and it did not change in her positions in bed, and the woman did not improve in some of her natural activities.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who was said to have a face ailment, and the plague was consolidated in his face, and he had the same symptoms, not experiencing much pain, and similar symptoms to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the ailment of the man from the principles of the king who was said to be ill in his middle nasal passage and had already declined to the direct part a little, and the entire ailment was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat her within three days of the onset of the ailment.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I again treated the ailment of the woman with great difficulty; and then I inquired from that one subtle friend, and she did not feel it; but he felt the point just behind the middle nasal passage, and then suspected that that point was at the end of the ailment.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply pressure on the area with an ointment that has both attractive and digestive properties, so that the area can be prepared for me to examine it, and to remove the excess from there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not allow any significant accident to occur in that area; continue applying the ointment on it for several days without any accident; and during this time, the plague is gradually healed, and the patient remains in bed for several days until the doctor examines him again.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then apply acute and corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it is ready, and then gently pull out that, and again smooth the rough edge of the doctor's hand, which adheres to the skin.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then adjust the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until I can see the edge of the doctor's hand, and then apply it to me for several months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, when the wound is ready to be closed, I will gently insert forceps into it, and then continue to carefully and skillfully work on it with the tools of engineering until one day I can close it with forceps that are properly shaped, according to the form of those in the end of the chapter, until I extract it; and then restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and if it is restored, the wound heals and the patient is completely cured, and there is no harm in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some plants for which you can apply that rule and meaning on that which I have not mentioned, as the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration or not understood by those who are free.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled craftsmen understand by comparison with few things; and they understand what is present in what is absent; and at times a new operation and a new instrument must be used to descend the causes of the art when something happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that herbs are not removed from the members in which they are stuck, but by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the opposite part of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place in which it enters, or herbs are taken from fleshy places, and they are drawn out and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the instructions given at the time when the cat is used, then cover it with a cloth for several days until the flesh that is around it heals, and relieve the attraction of the cat and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it becomes lodged in the bone and you do not obey its instructions, then leave it there for several days and apply it again with attraction and moisture on each day, and it will eventually be dislodged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey its instructions within several days, then pierce it through the circle of the bone in that part of the tooth on all sides with a thin needle until the space around it is widened, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the tooth is lodged in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one of the intestines of the brain, and appears in the patient with those accidents that I have mentioned, then refrain from extracting the tooth and leave it there until its condition is equalized within several days; for if the tooth reaches the cerebrum, then death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the needle is not inserted into the body of the bone only and does not pass through the fascia, and the patient experiences pain for several days, and no accident occurs due to those causes, then you engage in the removal of the needle and the treatment of the patient.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If the needle is stuck and does not obey your removal, then you administer traction in the path of the needle as we have recommended, and cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the needle is already embedded in the body and is felt by the patient, then you inquire about that feeling, and if you feel it, then you insert those needles with appropriate techniques for its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach the patient due to the constraints of the wound and its length, and there are no nerves or veins there, then you perform surgery on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to remove the needle.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you find those bones that should be held, then you remove the flesh in which it is inserted from all parts of the body with the engine that can be done; and engage in that, if you cannot remove the bone from the fracture of the bones and their twisting until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of the stone in any location where it is, then you use a forceps in your hand with forceps to all parts that form that obesity; and subtly, the subtlety that the stone is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attachment to it and to that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot at your time, then leave for several days until the parts that are in its circuit can be scanned, and then repeat that which is usually done.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you have resistance from the flow of sanctum, then administer what we have said for cure in its capital.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue from the beginning of the vein or nerve, or of the cord, and administer in all ways that are possible for the evasion of the stone; and do this with facilitation and tranquility and delay and firmness as it is with you and to your recommendation.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, you make the stone against it that the patient is second in the figure according to which you must the excavation of the stone in it, because it is more useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If you are unable to do that, then administer what is possible to them through figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	If the forces that are exerted by the opposite parts, or if any part of the other part has already been affected, or if it causes gilbosity in the extramitation of the forceps, then cut on that; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken; and then apply it, as it is made lighter by the intention.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then twist the blade according to the opposite direction until the forceps enter the bone, and widen it as it enters, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for a few days, and then apply it when it can enter.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the forceps are in that, then push them into it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the forceps have fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then introduce it into that, if it is dull, hammer the concavity so that the concavity of it enters the coat of the forceps and then push them into it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the wound is concave, then you should forcefully insert a probe deeply into it, as this is beneficial for the wound.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the wound is poisoned, then carefully remove all flesh from where the poison is present, if possible, and treat that area accordingly.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is located on the chest, abdomen, bladder, or ribs, and it is close to where you touch the patient with your tent, and if possible, cut over that area, then cut over that area and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, extract it, and apply a poultice if necessary, and treat that wound before it becomes infected.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of forceps used to grasp the wounds:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of which are shaped like the beak of an owl and are made with a saw when they are placed over the wound to prevent it from being left open.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those, special types of hooks are made, large, few, and movable, according to the size of the wound, its length, the width of the poultice, and its construction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	If this limb is concave and has pain from the instrument of the saw in it, and if you need to pull out that deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of pulling out a deaf limb:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	If it is necessary to pull out the instrument from that concave saw:
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of the puncturing of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of puncturing, of which there are 16 in the cap, are two pulsating veins that are near the temples, called altasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two humps that are called aspirants; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the collar; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are called algelic — and there are two more veins that are behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May the veins that are bled in the arms be visible; one of them is cephalic, and it is called wild thyme; the people call it "the cap vein", and it is deaf, and it is migratory, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that one to the people "the vein of all the body", and basilica is the vein that is stopped in the domestic latrine, and it is called "cistern", and they name that one to the common people "the belly vein"; and the brachial vein, and it is stopped over the fire, and it is the one in which it is bled, and it is the one that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the saphenous vein, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest inner ear, and it is in both legs.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is that it is stopped behind the curvature of the wild thyme latrine; and the second is saphenous, and its location is behind the domestic latrine thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild thyme latrine thigh; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The swelling of the veins that are close to the ears is due to ancient catarrhs, emigrations, and inflammations of the head, which are old wounds.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of that swelling is as follows: it is to wash the patient's head, and to rub the patient's head on the occipital bone in the place where the veins are wide and with good friction; then strongly press the patient's neck with a band in which the two places and their locations near the ears appear; and ask for that, and if you feel the pain of those swellings, here is what to do.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cuticular lancet, and that is the one that pierces, and then you introduce it behind the vein into the groove where the phlebotomist comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and the groove to the upper parts and pierce the vein at the beginning of the piercing.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the amount of two digits or about that; and make it as deep as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply strength to the powders and let them remain in that which is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Of the ten veins and arteries that are at the temples, the improvement of phlebotomy is an ancient and useful and necessary and corrosive, and it causes acute fluids to flow to the pores.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that which I recommend to you: strengthen the patient by pushing through the one in which the ten veins appear at the sensation with a manifest and clear demonstration of their polarity, and then you should try it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you should lift the cord above the vein at the parts above and according to what I indicated, and insert the phlebotomy incision behind, and lift the vein up; and make an incision in that way as you have done in the ten veins others; and make it flow with the amount of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then remove the bandage from the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that side and press and strengthen that area with a firm compression, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And then the recitation of prayers has preceded them, and of those who have been injured, and the attraction is at the beginning of the free.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the levitation of the vein from the forehead is approached by the levitation of the cephalic vein to the ancient malformations of the face and to emigration and rotten ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of that levitation is as I have recommended to you; so it is that the patient strengthens their neck with a band around which the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is the form of this:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point eminent at the top of the fossor over that vein and strike it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and leave it until it runs according to the quantity that you want; and then remove the perforation from the patient and strengthen that area which is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes a blunt instrument is used from the flat side of the foot, but it is not recommended that the blunt instrument be of acute extremity like the other blunt instruments, in front of the extremity, and the blunt instrument should be along the transverse, because the bone is propped up and it is easier to break through the bone when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The swelling of the two veins that are next to the lacrimal ducts of both eyes due to infection and inflammation in the eyes, and to the diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the blunt instrument is that the patient holds their head in a bend, and then you should place the blunt instrument there, and you should be standing on the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the blunt instrument should be made along the transverse, a short distance from the blunt instrument, because there is no meat in that place; and if the blunt instrument is subtle, it will easily break through the bone.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then make the incision as needed, and place your hand over those areas, and hold them together with a new bandage, and remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	If the patient's nose is inflamed and painful, and accompanied by facial pain and headache, and especially when it becomes chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the nasal inflammation is that the patient tilts their head and brings their own nose to your left hand, and takes a thin, long forceps and places it in the second vertical location of the bridge of the nose, where the vein does not appear at this point, and where the sinus begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	While you gently move your hand with the forceps along the sinus according to your need; and wipe it with a cloth, because that is restored more effectively.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	If the discharge from the nasal inflammation is thick and sticky, and accompanied by the beginning of leprosy and other skin diseases and ulcers, and corrosive wounds such as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of that nasal inflammation is that the patient tilts their head and places a cloth under their chin; and the artist is on the patient's head, and the patient is lying on a bed.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then use a small, thin, curved needle to carefully push the vein from the long side to the short side; and then remove any excess blood that is necessary, or as much as needed; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the flap and tightly tie both veins with a ligature to prevent the patient from being overwhelmed, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The use of the small, thin, curved needle for vein ligation also helps to prevent and treat small abscesses in the mouth, gum corruption, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers in the nose and around them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the small, thin, curved needle for these purposes is that it makes it easier for the patient to breathe, and tightly ties the collar around them, and then rotate the lips of the wound and look at both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of those, and more so where in the circumference of those veins are small black ones; and then incise each from the beginning.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have doubt about which of those, then you should understand the most common and obvious one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it look like the two veins that are on top of the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	If it is customary to cut the two veins that are on top of the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	If it is not customary to cut the two veins that are on top of the tongue, then approach the lancet of the cephalic vein at the forehead, to the patient's mouth, and to the patient's uvula, and to other parts of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of puncturing those veins is that you should look at the patient's mouth between your fingers and raise their tongue, and then look at the veins on both sides of the tongue, and the color of each one is changing to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then puncture each one; and be careful that your hand does not slip when puncturing those veins, because they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the belly are those through which blood flows in all men, and phlebotomy is done in two ways, either they put a small berry or olive oil to inclination; or they cut the phlebotomist, and call it venesection, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this venesection is suitable for section and of those who are special and subtle according to the size of the veins and according to the thickness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of phlebotomy with berry:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	If the patient is thin, it is suitable to open the concave veins that are full and protruding, and those that contain thick pus.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of phlebotomy with olive oil:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser magnitude and more subtle end, and it is suitable for phlebotomy of thin veins that contain thin pus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the incision of the basilic vein, one of three veins: which extracts the sanctum from the maladies that leave the guillotine and the neck, and from that which secures the chest and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And advise the phlebotomist, when making that incision, to be careful in that area, where there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts at the point of the phlebotomy, cut that artery and cause blood flow from the sanctum, so that he does not make that incision with a sharp instrument, before slicing through the skin.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by apparent manifestation, then advise that you leave it and move to another, or that you encircle some of its branches; or that you make the incision at the end of the arm, where it is manifest; and cut it as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May you also want the incision of the forearm, then advise that you know the structure of the arm before touching the location where the veins are, and place your hand over the area; and lift the arm and cut the vein at the concave section of the incision as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in any part of the location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see, as you tighten the bandage, inflammation in the place where it should be touched, that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore remove that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the pus flowing in the phlebotomy as with the golden horn of an infant, and the pus is thin and red, know that it is from the pus of the artery; then cover and press that place for a long time; and remove that, and if the pus is abscised, then cut away those veins, then strengthen your arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the mumps of their eyes, and be cautious of them and do not mistreat that for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the pus is not abscised, and you see that you must not present medicine to it, then insert the artery, if it appears to you; for its end is contracted, and the pus is abscised; or take a needle and make that, and take one thread and strengthen that over the place of the vein at the stricture and the pulvils until the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the wound is amputated, it is well; and if not, then cure that part with the same method as previously mentioned in the memory of the location of the powders to stop the flow of blood from the wound.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The amputation of the bone is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the dark vein is punctured, it is greatly helpful in removing the bone from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for this reason, it is composed of basilar and cephalic rami, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the assistant who is overly anxious in the puncture of that vein, which is a nerve; and then he adjusts to the puncture of the vein and tears the nerve, it will cause him great pain, and it is difficult to cure him, and often he is not cured at all. And this nerve appears in the sensation; and if it is hidden from other people and is subtle and does not show, then cover the puncture of the vein with the same instrument you used for the section of the sinew, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves the symptoms of the hands.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And you can do this properly, if you want the venipuncture to be done by a skilled physician or a skilled surgeon; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not touch the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is important to note that the venipuncture should be done by a skilled physician or surgeon; because they do not pierce the back of the elbow only, but rather around the location that is less painful, and not at the same spot as the first percussion, which is sometimes above the vein.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is very important to note that in some men, if they are not venipunctured in the first percussion, they do not notice the abscess until later.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the venipuncture and its complications should be considered in which you can think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one is of the type of phlebotomy that is administered only for the sake of health preservation and hope of the patient and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy should be done in one of the veins that are in the body, such as the cephalic, fusca, and basilic; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of primaviera, after breakfast in primaviera and autumn, and in winter near dinner, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be done and on the third day or the first day after three hours have passed since dawn.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More phlebotomy is administered when it is necessary and convenient for that, either at night or during the day, at any time and in all circumstances.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is not advisable to perform phlebotomy on children under the age of twelve, and women should not be subjected to phlebotomy except in the fourth month after the seventh, and the elderly who have already passed sixty years should not be subjected to phlebotomy.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, let them drink a cup of lion's claw wine, and in those who have a narrow vein, hold it with a tight bandage, so that the veins do not spray excess blood during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are pure, and do not delay the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who have not been phlebotomized should not eat any food that causes drunkenness and hangovers, nor escape from illness or intoxication before it has passed from them, nor suffer from hydropsy, and more that phlebotomy is feared for colic passion and vomiting, and for stomach pain, and for multiplication of cough and labor and exercise of breakfasts or vigils, and for any cause that dissolves the virtue, whether it be corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in the subtilization of humors according to the size of the body, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible to the body.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if it is appropriate to insert into the wound and no cause prevents, or it is exercised by some exercise so that the wound is thinned.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the dressing on the wound in the chest, around the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And pierce through that chest so that it is guarded from all animal evils on that day, as we have said, including anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as well as labor and superfluous pain, and crying and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in its place make present the causes in the use of which men commonly have aromaticity and odor and balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the dressing on a cushion that is put or that of which the one that should be dressed is made.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And if it is appropriate to extract the arm, and wash that with the hand of which the one who dressed it does so twice or three times; and then strengthen the bandage around the wound and cover those twice or three times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	When the structure is cold and tight, as it is not equal or excessive, or when it is softened, then prevent the flow of blood from the wound; or it is softened, then do not allow the body to enter the wound.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And approach the structure, so that the one who should be a finger-fleam should clean their hands between their fingers where the veins are inflamed and declared to the sense.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And approach the finger-fleam holder with their own finger-fleam, and place your hand on the side of the vein where the blood is flowing, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set up because of the veins that are in that area where the finger-fleam is being used, and those that are full of blood and when you place the finger-fleam on that side, it is contrary to the finger-fleam, and the finger-fleam holder is discovered; and if the finger-fleam does not touch the vein, or if it does, that is tight.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, for that reason, the bleeder should be stopped and worried about all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then remove the bleeder, but if the vein is pierced in a crooked direction, you should do so; and if not, repeat it another direction from that place a little, or over the wound, if the place is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is inflamed, or the patient becomes feverish, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the bandage, because it would cause more pus to form, nor does it enter into the wound.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the bleeding if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the puncture is small and bleeds slightly, and you fear that it will not be enough to draw the desired amount of blood, then repeat the bleeding in that place second, adjust the bandage a little, and do so until the place becomes inflamed, because the place becomes inflamed in some people due to too much blood being drawn.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If you have already placed a poultice on that place, do not apply anything else to it, as it may cause some harm; and place a piece of cloth over that part of the wound to protect the body from cold.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is best in this case to use oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, apply oil to all phlebotomy in which veins are pierced by the phlebotomists, and perform this procedure triangular and sagittal when it is placed on one of those places, as it makes the body weak and twisted when it is large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess is formed, which may cause serious consequences, and especially to those who have not been bled but only punctured, or in the insertion of the needle into the vein, then you should immediately apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little bit of burnt alum, and strengthen it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And you should do that near the incision of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is any blackness or greenness in the area, do not do that; and if you wish, place over it some cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of succus of mentha or of chamomile or a similar substance to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And move the swollen and raised areas with incision of the abscess.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that, and if you find softness, apply your compression on that, that area is bad and bad; and therefore remember to place over it some cause of that which we have said, because it will draw out a lot of blood from the vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply an astringent remedy in that place, so that the area is tough, and then cure it with another cure before it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And you should remove the blood from the vein to all of man according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that remains on the vein after it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the bone is black, then leave it inside until it rots; and similarly, if you see it swollen, then leave it inside until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, then leave it inside until its sharpness is dulled.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if it is a person who is tall and strong and has the need for bone extraction in a valley, then amplify the needle of the vein and the needle should be long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in the one who is weak, do the opposite of that, and if it extracts in valleys, then the path should be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in vein puncture is that it is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of vein puncture saves from bone flow and from the beginning of nerves, and it is more praised and safer than second puncture in length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in the case where syncope occurs during vein puncture, and if you care for that by giving them a small amount of weak infusion in the form of milk or simple oximel; and extract from the bone in three valleys or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is complexity in the body, then take a fleam to bleed from an artery of iris or from an artery of honey-aromatized wine, or from an artery of infused pebre, cinnamon, ginger, and similar spices, or from an artery of aromatized and additional odorant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if a sincopus accident occurs and the fleam causes the issuance of blood from a vein, then cover that you take in meat broth and aromatized wine; and use aromatic oil, and let it lie on the wound.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of sincopus for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to move his arm and dissolve his second blood clot, cover it with the artery from which the fleam is for forced evacuation, and the virtue of which is free, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	When one wants to perform the first operation on their arm, and if the second shoulder is very strong, then do so around seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	When one wants to draw the shoulder blade of their back against the opposite side where it inclines, this should be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that shoulder in which the pain is great and has been sharpened and causes fever, it should be drawn from that shoulder blade in a gentle manner, and it should be drawn out in large quantities and amplified the opening until the syncope occurs, so that you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that your hand should be placed on the pole of the other shoulder, to prevent death in the location of syncope, which is caused by gentle drawings when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not do it when you want to dislodge the arm and evacuate the second shoulder drawing, as the orifices of the vein have already been closed and it has been done difficultly from the shoulder, because you press against that with such force and bend it improperly, which is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When performing a bleeding procedure, one should use a lancet of appropriate sharpness; or pause over the vein's orifice until the blood flows; or place a compress of tyrian silk or sage on the wound to stop the bleeding.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is infected, leave it alone until the infection subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary to remove the blood again, and there is no excuse, then draw it from another vein in the other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "funis del bras" is bled from the area of the popliteal or gastrocnemius muscles, when they are not hardened or swollen, which is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the bleeding from that vein is that the patient should introduce their hand into warm water until the lancet warms up and the vein becomes visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then place a strong bandage over that ligament of the median nerve; and bleed again using a lancet at an angle, not horizontally or lengthwise.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make your incision wide and your flint blade sharp, which you will use to make a small cut over the joint of the arm.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if it is forbidden to let the sanctum flow, then you will wash the arm in warm water and let the sanctum run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from washing the arm in warm water, and the same applies to the cloth of the sanctum in cold water in times of winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the flint blade of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the flint blade of the calf of the leg is similar to the diseases of the foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this flint blade is that you will strengthen the arm with a bandage or with your hand, rather than putting it in warm water, until the vein is inflamed and demonstrated at once; and then make a transverse incision; and if you insert it from all sides, you will not notice anything in return.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And do not let your hand touch the throbbing artery, as it would expose the nerves of those undressed parts to harm.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the lower back and let the blood flow into that, as if you do not repeat it there, the blood will coagulate in the orifices of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the amount of necessity, then you place your hand on the vein oil and salt, so that it does not consolidate completely; similarly, cover everything straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the throbbing of the artery from that of your right hand be compared to the sufferings of the melons.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same in the throbbing artery as you did in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the throbbing of the vein in the throbbing artery is to the sufferings that are in the part behind the body, as if it were the sufferings of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and to the sufferings of the ronchos and ulcers of the thighs and legs, and their similarities to the sufferings.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the fleam on him is that the patient inserts his own foot into cold water and makes pressure on the area where the veins appear; he ties a tourniquet on the ankle joint; and the location of the vein he takes as a guide, from there it branches out on the surface of the foot in a ramified manner.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then perform the fleam on the widest branch or next to the cushion, following the guide of the vein, which is better and more salubrious.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform the fleam on the surface of the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that are next to that on the surface of the foot, and pause your fleam as if you wanted to insert it perpendicularly, as if you wanted to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the fleam be silent.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the issue of pus is prohibited, then you repeat the foot in the cold water and let the pus run out through the area where it should be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first vein, then repeat the procedure with another needle in a different place, as the spot is salty; and do not be afraid of his malice, but guard against the nerves as we have said before.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, apply the splint to the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the spot is where we have said before, behind the calf of the inner thigh.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the pain from the phlebotomy of that spot is in the buttock when it is done carefully.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of that spot is that the patient lies down, and quickly and firmly presses the cushion of his back against the thick flesh above the calf below four digits in a long, subtle bend, so that it does not appear.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, you should phlebotomize that second vein each time according to what is possible and transversely, and it is better; or incise that one at the beginning or cut off that one at the end, because the spot of that is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in men who are more advanced in age; and if that is not the case, and it does not appear to the senses of all, then apply a leech to some part of the leg, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot, which is called the Achilles tendon.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow from the wound in the amount you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then remove the suture and place your hand over the location of the leech application, pressing the area to stop the bleeding, which is usually healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of the symptoms and qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The symptoms are of cold, or of heat, or of wetness.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The symptoms are caused by two methods: one is the incision and extraction of blood, and the other is the symptom of incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this symptom of incision is caused by two methods: one is heat, and the other is fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the symptoms that are caused by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which the first part where symptoms are placed is the nape of the neck, and the last part is the back; and the middle part is two places on the collarbone; and symptoms of the jaw below the mouth; and symptoms of two spoons; and symptoms of an asthma inhaler, and it is on the top of the shoulder blade; and symptoms of two tweezers, and they are from two bones; and symptoms of two cups.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	When the abscess is not drained from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason the virtue is not given to those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is there any need for the abscess to be made with fire or hot things in some bad condition caused by inflation before the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if the abscess is caused by illness or continuously, administer it at all hours of the day and night, in the middle of the month and at the end of it, and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in men, in which the abscess multiplies before it is extracted by incision and atrophies in their own head, and from those in which inflation occurs in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and from those in which it occurs pruriently in their face and in their forehead, and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and from those in which the location of their abscess is changed; and from those in which their taste is multiplied; and from those in which there is a taste of pus in their mouth, or their tongue is swollen and filled with pus; and from those in which their sleep is multiplied, and from those in which they have pain in their sleep, and fevers and plagues and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	When there is a cause for those, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe of the foot, then command that a blister be made after two or three hours have passed since it occurred.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is recommended to prick the blister from the back of the head because when it reaches the skull and bursts at the hair follicles, it is more appropriate for the evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this blister is in the place of lumbar puncture of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good to use that one which is of complex nature, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, do not use those ones which are old, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for that reason, it is recommended to use those which are continuously on the blister; and for that reason, do not command the puncturer to place his hand on the parts behind, because of the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	May ventilation of alcohol is in the place of fleubotomy of the vein and basilica: and for that, it confers to asthma, and to the constriction of lungs and to the division of the stomach of lungs, and to coughing, and to repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And cover that the ventilation of alcohol is a small one, because if it is paused, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation of alhagdahan confers to the accidental pains in the head and to obtalmia, and emigration, and pre-focacio, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleubotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And cover that commands to the ventilator that does not press his hand during the incision so that it does not puncture the artery and an accidental bleeding occurs.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation of the mouth confers to alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleubotomy of henbane that is in the upper lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	When the wound is made on the two spoons, compare it to a cap, which is made for the purpose of retaining heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the wound of the two parts of the spoons, which is made from the tines of the three-vein bleeding lancet, which is of the basilica, fusca and cephalic type, attracts all the small veins that are in the flesh, and the smaller veins from the larger veins into which it reaches the attraction of the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the blower not to proceed with incision, because the location is bare of flesh, and he leaves his nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And there is a blower that is blown over the buttocks and compared to the hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that are left.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And that you command the blower to be a large blower, and of iron, because the location needs strong incision; and many subtle blows are needed and it should be incised during the incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May wet sheets be applied to the chest for manifest relief, as they support the entire body, and relieve old pains of the ribs, and the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and relieve constipation and stomach pain; and take the place of tracheotomy, enemas, and catheters.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, this method weakens the entire body and causes hiccups in men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the wet sheets, the enema is applied to the anus with the same method as the wet sheets.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the wet sheets is that they are placed at the beginning with warm water and gradually cooled, and do not prolong the position of the wet sheets, but pause them occasionally, and keep them warm constantly, so that the humors come to the place for advent.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already red and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should shave and gently cut the hair in small parts, and then consider the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who is of thin flesh and has many sores, you should shave him once and not again, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the feather to fan the shaving and blow a small amount, and sprinkle the hair to facilitate it.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the groin is thick, then shave twice, because in the first shaving you will open the path to the subcutaneous layer and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second shaving, you will examine the acquired moisture of the thick extraction from the groin.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the groin is very dirty, then make a thorough shaving in the third shaving to achieve cleanliness.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the groin in small parts or a little at a time, provide us with shaving.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large groin, shave with a large shaving; and if we know that the groin is thick, then shave in a preliminary shaving.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for incision in which the depth of the wound is only until the bone.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person's bone is thick, hard, black, and its pores are straight, then the places of the wounds should be more gentle, more open, more resolved; if it is in summer time, use oil of myrrh or oil of violet, or oil of ambergris, or oil of cement of a hen; and if it is in winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or of sandalwood, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, foul, then use oil of amarnth or oil of balsamita, or oil of myrrh, or oil of aneth, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the ventouse is from wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited to use oil, and instead use water that is cool or slightly warm from solatrum, or water of hen, or water of partridge, and similar ones.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the one whose skin is of moist nature, wash their armpits with warm water, or with a mixture of myrtle and sumac and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the one whose superfluities are thick, wash their armpits with warm water, or with a mixture of sage, anise, camomile, or mint and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is recommended to keep the armpit away from the fire; having hands, it is recommended to be administered close to the fire for an hour or two, and it is recommended to sleep close to the armpit.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is the reason why one should be bled before bleeding?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And it is recommended that one should consider at the beginning: if the person who will be bled or the one who will give the bleeding is angry and has inflamed skin, then it is recommended to take cooling causes, such as vinegar, warm water, and similar to those.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Pause their mouths with a gag, and feed them meat from chickens, cooked meat, and similar foods.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	From that person whose complexion is fair, take honey from bees, or honeydew from pine trees, and sumac, and add a small amount of fragrant mint between old and new; and it is recommended that they use little honey and food, and feed them with pigeons, canaries, and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And on the day of ventozacio and bleeding, the honey should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given in honey to some men with tyrian alpharac, or medicaments of musk, which is muscated, or alcelita denant the ventozacio or denant fleubotomia or approaching, so that the main members are comforted and that the sanc is subtilized; and do not let them take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	When the wounds that are made by scarification are placed on the skin, over the melon and gout, over the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and on the widespread skin, because these members do not suffer scarification on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but rather to draw out the pus from a member, as when a moist bandage is placed on the breast in case of excessive pus discharge from the wound of the nose; and we use that which is to dissolve the inflammation hidden within the member, as when a bandage is placed on the abdomen and umbilicus; because that thing rarefies the member and draws out the pus and heals the pain when the inflammation is resolved.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is placed on the ribs when they are injured or pierced, because of the power of the bandage, it strongly stops bleeding and eradicates the pus from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when it is placed on the skin and melon in those who are closed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these vapors are administered by views with success only; and some vapors are administered by fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some vapors are administered full of clear water in the diseases of the melon.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the vapor is full and large, it is the water that causes or the water in which herbs have been boiled at the appropriate time.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of vapor administered by fire: the width of the opening of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the pier should be the thickness of a palm; and it should be on the side of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the most of it, the trauc should be small according to the quantity that enters into it, an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of wax or citron, with thick edges, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not leave the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be at the side of it, a transverse wax or iron, on which is placed the candle by the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And now, this great wind that we have recommended; and the less of that which follows the diseases and the state of that who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of children are different from those of young and large-breasted women.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this wind on the member is that it extends the meat with a decent amount of wood fire, and place it on the edge of the verge transversely in the middle of the wind opening, so that the fire is lit around the part to be applied, without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place it on the patient's member, and the cloth that we have mentioned, until you have taken the winds and do not open the cloth and let the steam over that opening, at that moment the wind will be quickly dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then apply the meat according to your method, and repeat if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the wind that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, without a verge transverse or opening, and it is not administered except that it be filled with water, and placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this windmill, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodstains are not administered to any members except in the members where it is not possible to position windmills, such as those with gums and similar parts; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodstains that are in the waters of polluted rivers.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then lay them in the day and night in water that is not polluted, and that does not cause any harm in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body with a fleubotomy and windmills; and then apply pressure to the patient's member until it becomes red; and then place them on top of it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and ready.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to see the wound from the inside, it is better to do so through a small incision.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash the wound with warm water and a lot of it; then rinse and express it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body is prolonged, then bring the cloth of the bandage to the wound, and place it underneath where the blood is flowing.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is multiplied, then powder it with trisulphate of vitriol or gallic acid and similar substances to stop the bleeding until the wound is stopped; or place the most matured beans on the wound, and leave them there until the beans stick to the wound, and then the wound is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, change the bandages when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the bandages are not allowed to be suspended, then wash the wound with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places where the blood is flowing; and place them there, so that when they feel any blood soon afterwards.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to open, sprinkle some powdered asphalt, salt, or ash on those areas and quickly cover them.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Now begins the section of the text about treatment.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the treatment of fracture and accidental displacement of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, be wise and know that fools claim to know about this chapter; the common doctors and the vulgar, and those who sometimes do not read the books of the Ancients or understand one letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this method of the sciences in our land is hidden; and I have not done so at any time; and I have not admitted anything that follows, but by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct yourself to experiment and study throughout your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described all of that in this chapter, which contains the greatest science and on which I have passed the longest experiment; therefore, I will not reveal it to you or remove it from its occupation of length; and I will show it to you at the end of the revelation; and I will demonstrate it in this way: in the form of the instruments that are administered in that, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the fracture of bones, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin the memory of broken and diverse members of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to which understanding is given by those who begin them on the truth of those; so it is you and others who know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when something happens to someone with fracture or dislocation or torsion or impaction, then you should begin with fluoroscopy or X-ray of that one, or any other way, if no cause prohibits it, as if the power is weakened, or it is the one on which something happens, or old in decrepitation, or it is time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with seeing fresh herbs and meat of birds and of crabs; and prohibit thick meats and fill with foods and all food that fills the veins of sanc, as long as you are sure of apostema caut, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first regular position, which is usually where they were before.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And as the bone begins to be restored, then feed the patient with nutritious foods that are heavy and thick in nature, such as their food made of wheat flour and water, and rice, and caps, and peas, and stomachs of cows, and hooves, and fresh fish, and large and similar meats, and this regimen is made by coagulation of fracture more gently and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones can only be healed and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members, which is not possible in men who are in their prime and in the elderly.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are healed and consolidated according to their nature for all time by the drying of those members, and those that are from them at the end of leniency, such as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	May nature adjust and anoint over the broken bone of each part, some cause similar to glue in which it is thickened that adheres and strengthens that entrance which is conglutinated and united together, through which venom of fortitude and firmness flows, as with fire at the beginning, through which no cause prevents it from completing its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this cause it is necessary to place the bandages on the patient's wounds, bandages in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Great variety of fracture according to the difference of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you will know that the types of fracture are different according to the difference of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have remembered the knowledge of all types of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great variety of fracture in this case.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There is great variety in the types of bone fractures in these cases; some are caused by arcs, others by stars; and some are caused by the length of the bone: and some fractures are due to the stage and stars and additions that proceed or do not proceed, as is done when preparing to write, and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in each case, there is a specific pain that accompanies the restoration of the bone after its distinct memory returns to its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Great difficulty in bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that reason, bone fracture is known by the following signs: the twisting of the bone, and its swelling and pain to touch, and when it is understood that it is broken at your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no twisting in the location and it is not made by touching the bone at its movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is twisting or a small fissure, where you may not be able to hold it with your hand and compression of all; then place something over it from the medicines of which you remember at that moment, appropriate for the location; and keep it straight by a subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	You should know that the location when it is bent and not split into two or another, what does not occur in its entire part of the body, then cover it from your hour to the rectification of the hand that occurs at the postema caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it occurs at the postema caution, then leave that for several days until it ceases; and then equalize that second according to each method that you can of lightening and of engineering.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You should know that the restoration of it and the adjustment of it is lighter than the bone in which the accident occurs in the body.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then apply that second when the memory of it comes.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there is an accident, then it is necessary to extend this member broken from two parts, whether the hand or the foot; or your hand if the member is small; or two cords or one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And position your hand on the member in a way that is equal to its natural shape, while the parts of the member are stretched out, then pierce those additions and return them to their places according to each manner that you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful not to injure the patient or cause any harm during your operation; and pierce according to your ability, applying one bone to another as a companion according to the best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And consider whether in that hour you touch your hand at the right moment, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors who move their hands too much cause pus to accumulate around the patient's operation, or they cause contraction in the member, as we have seen in their foolish movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And approximate anatomy, approximate equality and proper operation and structure of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient on that and make him understand that he should not move that in the hour of his watch and sleep, and see his rotation and agitation, and determine his excretion, and determine all his movements for the whole of his virtue; and wait until the position of the member is a position in which pain is secure, which causes that when it is in the disposition of the position of the member or injury; then consider whether you should change that to another disposition of that in which he does not feel pain; and guard against that because the position of that member is straight and equal, so that the member does not suffer tortuosity when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the fracture of the limb is as I have recommended; because you know that broken limbs vary in their location, size, and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, like the arm and the wrist and similar to them, then it is recommended that the covering be made of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, like the buttock or the thigh, then it is recommended that the covering be made of strong and durable material, because the laxity of such a large limb can cause it to dislocate entirely, unless it is kept in place.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, with your equalization of pressure, place a suitable bandage over the location of that fracture, three or four times as the limb becomes more stable; and strengthen your hand gently on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then proceed to the deepest part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it gently so that your structure does not tear the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then gently extend your tongue into the area around the fracture, gradually softening the structure until you feel a large part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other affected area over the location, and gradually apply the bandages to the part behind the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and the softening of the second one that we mentioned in the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place your hand between the bandages at the top of the lion or cloth that is equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not place your hand in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand on the other bandage, and gently equalize it with these pointed bandages as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the location; and then place your hand on that which secretes the abscess and which removes the inflammation; and leave that for several days; and then strengthen it with those.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the cane of the master is made of laurel wood, and well formed; or of pine; or of palm fronds; and let the width of each rod be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the nail that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and longer than the other nails, and the length of the rod according to how it is applied to the member in magnitude and evenness; and strengthen the other end of the rod with another bend according to your first structure; and apply the iron decently above as we have said of the structure, and that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the less the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And that the threads should be thin and even in thickness, and of good quality; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some folk pulling the thick threads of cords of the liver, and it is a great error when the structure is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And it is not convenient to use very thin needles, because you will not be able to grasp the things you want with them, and you do not want there to be a distance of one ditch between each needle.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led to the edge of the bed by the extremities of the stirrups, then place your hand under their head and do not let them fall off the bed.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are very painful, and disruptions occur in the spine, and you will find memory in that one in the second particularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that all broken limbs are not straightened on the first day; the reason for this is that the limb, when it is large, does not want to be placed on the stirrups but rather after five days or seven or more, according to your safety of the occurrence of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of the plasters that the Ancients restored to, which are placed on fractures and dislocations and torsion.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Hand of the splint like a restoring device for fractures, suitable for various complexities and especially for women and children, because it is over which no heat or moisture: and you should take powder from milled grain, and the medium of the flour that you can move the bone in the parts of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you should apply that which is like it, but instead of using the fat of the goose, place the comfortable position of the non-sparrow or subtle; and then use it from there.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of splinting for fractures, dislocations, and torsion: recipe of asafetida, of lapis lazuli, of acacia, of enula, and migraphan, which is made from milkweed salt, of all ana drac. x; of myrrh and aloe ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all their trissatz and cribbells and their mixtures are either alichil or the fat of the goose if the complexity of the patient is scalded; and then use this splint, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones more effectively, and confers to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of dressing for fractures and sprains: take equal parts of mandrake, white hellebore, and dragon's blood; of myrrh and aloe, of acacia, and Armenian bole, twenty parts.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of these are crushed in a large mortar with contrition, and their powders, and their confitures are administered with water or egg white.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of dressing for joints and separated bones at those places, and for accidental pain in those areas and fissures and fractures: take a silk thread and soak it in a mixture of vinegar and oil and place it on the wound.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, but it is useful for preventing abscesses and expelling pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of dressing that restores the broken: take willow branches and wild poppy flowers; grind them all and make a paste from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of dressing applied for the restoration of fractured bones and when you want to resolve a recent abscess: take powdered mandrake, camomile flowers, and violet flowers, flour of ers, all in equal parts; grind them all and their powders with water if the member is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply this wet clay or mud from the river and use it to treat it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger plaster for quicker resolution than this first one, when a long-lasting abscess occurs: take the leaves of altea and sesame, balm, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all parts equal; all should be soaked in honey water or rose water or wine, according to the quality of the member and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras not be applied directly to the member that needs to be restored, but rather a wax made of wax and oil should be used, and not another cause; and it is recommended that it be melted between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia be seen that it is placed on the member that needs to be restored, and the causes in which exsiccation is small of heat is with milk, as well as similar things to their own from those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Hand plaster that relieves injury and pain: recipe equal parts of honey, cow's milk, human hair or feathers, aloe, salt; three parts of flour, one part of bread crumbs, and a cloth, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the location of the injury and the type of wound, considering whether there is pain, swelling, or if the bone is broken, and if it is not suitable for its location, then do not use it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If there is severe pain, swelling, or inflammation at the location, then you should apply or remove it in that hour, and leave the plaster on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and sea sponge lion humid, and soak it in warm water, and wash the location until that swelling stops and the pain is relieved; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place a cloth soaked in hot water and olive oil or rose oil on it for a while until you are sure of the abscess, and that the inflammation of the member has stopped, and that the pain of it is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then approach that delicate structure and apply a small and not too strong plaster for your first constraint, and gently insert it where it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and you need to apply plaster and constraint, then you will repeat what you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm has occurred to the member of those that we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and some days all of this is left until twenty days after you have appeared through the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the constraint more than in your first constraint, and adjust in the swelling of the patient's food, after it is preceded by his remembrance.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more painful than usual, then know that the nourishment should not reach that place; therefore, apply a wet, warm cloth to the affected area for all three days; and this operation allows the nourishment to reach the member, and it is healed properly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If they apply the same treatment for healing the fractured limb again when it is not ready to be restored, following the initial stage, and then restore it according to its tortuosity, that is incorrect according to their operation, and great fear arises, and if that is done correctly, it increases the ancient ones in their freedom and they agitate against that action.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have not seen any of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are various, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by the impact of a space, and the impact occurs throughout the socket, which is located behind the bone, just as it does in the fist, and for that reason this type is called simple; or the space enters into a part of the bone and into its flesh, but it does not pass through the surface of the bone; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these fractures is great or small, and whether they are contracted or atrophied; and the cause of this is a blunt blow or a fall on stone, and similarly.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture it is that it is bent in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for this reason this special fracture is called hairline.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is made by a blow or a fall on stone, and similarly, which causes some fragment of the bone to break off at its parts, and it is made in the concave location as happens to the ribs when they are struck and broken into fragments that enter the parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This is more commonly made in the bones of humans, such as their skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these special types of fractures are treated as if they were separated by sharp stones.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find the remainder of everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you will detect all these special types of fracture by inspection over those and by inquiry into their attempts and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special type of fracture is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is cleaned, and it is applied to the attempt, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see through the symptoms that mean by manifest signs such as vomiting from colic, extension, loss of understanding, abscesses of the throat, syncope, acute fever, and swelling of the glands and pain in those, and similarities to their symptoms in major dispositions, these do not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see that the symptoms are not corresponding, then you hope for recovery, and then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When this cause occurs, if it comes to you in the beginning when it is usually found and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the examination of the bone giving the day fourteenth, entirely disposed.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should examine the bone on the seventh day, having that which is left of the pancreas be corrupted, and that accidents have occurred as we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and atrophied, then you should shave off the small and atrophied part, according to what I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you raise the head of the patient, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the shape of the wound, and that it is lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cautiously, then you should pause at the patient and that which is happening, and that you fill the place of cloths infused in five and olive oil roasted, and make a new covering of the wound until it is sedated the abscess, and be sure of flow of pus; and afterwards begin in the circumference of the bone and in the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you insert the knife at a straight angle like this, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another knife, a little wider than the other; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the wider knife than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have different knives of various widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and they should be at the end of their sharpness of their tips, and they should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the knife so that you do not hit your head and it does not break that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and dense, then you should pierce around it with a drill that you administer the knives at shallow depths, which are called non-penetrating drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And those are not called anything but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone at that point where it is approached, so that the drill is rounded at its tip similar to a margin or small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these splinters, the number of which corresponds to the thickness of each bone, as long and short as the quantity of the thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of splinters: The quality of piercing through the circumference of the broken bone is that you place the splinter on the bone and twist it around its thighs until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the splinter to another location, and place it where the quantity of the thickness of the ray or surrounds it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the most delicate instrument that you can find between each fragment of the bone, and use it to carefully remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause to prevent the damage that would appear at that point, as with fine forceps and tweezers.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the instrument does not touch any part of the cerebellum.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have circled the bone and separated it from the cartilage if it continues to be attached, then extract that, covering it with a cloth that is rough and uneven like the surface of the bone of another instrument similar to a scalpel, but rather more sharp and more delicate than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there are any small fragments of bones that are stuck, then take that which you should use from the instruments; and apply it to the wound with linen and find those which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is longer, and more difficult; and this is the word for it: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you discover the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and gentle scalpel, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped fragment does not cut any cause, and the sharp fragment is from there in two parts in length, as sometimes; because the lens-shaped fragment should be adjusted to the cartilage at the face of the sharp fragment which cuts into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then, approach the incision with a small sharp knife until you have inserted the entire bone as it would be rotated, and you should be sure of the surrounding tissue so that it does not occur in any accidental way, and if the physician was the most skilled of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly,
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then, if there is any cause of annexation to the bone tissue in any other places of the bone, incise that one at the end of the incisor lens, and release that one with ease, which is released from its harm and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the bone tissue, and that which is abscised or stopped on the surface of the bone is the face of it, and it remains in the roughness and subtle scratches, then cover that roughness and remove those subtle scratches with razor blades of various sizes so that you can administer them at all locations of their most convenient parts and the right one of those second which you lost your operation that bone broken and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	When you administer the medicine in your ratio that you use to rub the bones at the beginning of those razors, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so until you reach administering the most thin of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small fractures and thin fractures, you should administer treatment according to that which you have lost for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the fascia is torn when you remove the bones, then take a cloth of linen according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and take another cloth folded or tripled and soak it in rose oil and place it over the first cloth, and do this as gently as possible without pressing on the wound, and then administer a liniment to the wide part, and do not press on it except for the amount that the wound has, only as much as necessary.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Let that person rest from this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess's healing; then remove it and administer medicines that provide excessive dryness, such as linen and flour of eggs, and powder of aloes and aristolochia, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, such as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property of which is to remove and not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself second that the wound in your cure is not nettle; and it is not in the swelling of the tongue or other; nor do you allow to add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted on the linen of the brain, corrupts that and poisons that, and occurs on the patient that malice malignant.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And occurs in the socket of the head, as of which is modified the bone and more when it is pressed on the cure of it, and is blackened on the surface of it; and therefore consider that occurs on the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is paralytic its whole.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If no black magic occurs but rather medicine that is placed above, and it is by the power of that medicine that it causes the black magic, then cover that part with honey and four parts of roasted oil, and place a cloth on it, and place that over the affected area; and cure it with the appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken in two parts simultaneously, or one of those some veins, because there are two bones, and the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not suffer from attrition and tortuosity and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then cover that part with the same nose, and match that fracture with the other side, and with the other side, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this to help you, and remember not to cause harm to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and it does not persist there, then cover it with a small piece of bandage.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And cover it with a bandage for the restoration of the fracture on the first day after the injury, if possible; otherwise, then apply the seventh or tenth degree of the cautery to the abscess.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of cloth into the nostril, if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it cover the entire width of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say to the ancient restorers that the splints should be covered in bandage, and they should be changed every day, but I have not seen this done; having covered it with a piece of album made from honey and powdered mullein; and then leave it until the bone is set and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some splints should be inserted into the nose, in place of the calcium, or else it would be wrapped in a cloth of lion's skin; and that the fracture of the nose is more severe and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, make splints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another splint is needed, apply it to the nose with wax or cotton soaked in warm water and rose oil, or with diphtheria.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	However, if no splint is needed, then cover that deformed part with flour of mustard and powder of lentils mixed with egg white; and place a cushion on the lion's skin, and do not press the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	However, if the bones of the nose are broken or fractured slightly, then cover them with that, and extract those with instruments that are suitable for those; and place this cut, and heal that with what encases and consolidates, and with ointment that is suitable for that.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If a person has difficulty breathing due to a blockage in the nose, then apply heat to that area and administer a tube of warm liquid to help them breathe completely.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the treatment of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken but the fracture does not cause pain, and if the fracture is only slightly deformed and not completely separated into two pieces and is not curved to the sides, then it can be treated without surgery.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then insert your finger in the patient's mouth on the left side; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then insert your finger on the right side of the patient's mouth; and push against the broken part of the fracture with your other hand from the deformed part of the bone; and keep that position until the fracture is healed.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is completely separated into two pieces, then apply traction to both parts in a straight line until they are aligned.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a disruption of teeth to the point of breaking, then use those that you hope will remain intact; such as gold, silver, or lead wire; and place them on the broken jaw, and place them on the doubled-over cloth, and place them on the large star-shaped wound dressing, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hang it above second that you have equipped with the glue of your choice and that is appropriate for application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and remain calm, and place a lion's tooth on the wound.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then wait until the third day; and correct what has been altered from it and apply that with powder of millstone, egg albumen, or flour of chickpeas, before you have removed the glue from it, and place on the bandage lion's wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then with this annex and adjust that bandage on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave that until it is healed and strong the fracture; for this fracture is stretched in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the medication we have mentioned for other complications during their rest to heal it and let that abscess remain.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is complicated by the separation of the bone or the fragmentation, then consider whether it is necessary to remove those fragments and use a suitable remedy for removing them from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the wound are too narrow, then use a suitable amount of forceps according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those fragments and they do not remain, then if the openings of the wound are still too wide, then use one of the suitable bandages that would fit well in that area until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The clavicle is often broken at the part where it joins the shoulder, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts, other than those that do not require surgery; and it is easier to restore; or if there are any complications in the surgery, and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is infected.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is infected, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the helper and follows the broken rib, and the other stretches the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with the ribs until the shape of the second is made, and it is not in the prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then cover it with a cloth or wool, and make the size of it according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the rib and tie the covering with your hand until the fracture is aligned as desired.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the end of the furcula to the fractured parts, in order to find the bone, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a large cushion over their neck.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant then pulls the muscle of the patient to the fractured parts before the bone of the furcula is raised and placed in its position, and then you straighten the fracture and equal it with those called traction.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel that the bone of the furcula and its muscle are broken, then have those parts removed to facilitate the healing.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you should make an incision in that part with one of the scissors that you have prepared for that purpose, after you have placed the instrument that serves to break the bone; and this instrument is a hammer or iron of which this is the shape of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And its shape is similar to a cue with which this is the hollow; and its width should be according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the softness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	When the length of it is as long as possible for the operation; there should be two extremities with times, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the bone's suture is wide, and it is sure of pus, then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear pus, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus occurs, then pour in dressing in very hot water and rose oil, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the structure of the bone when it is wounded and cut, be that you place an ointment made of flour of wheat and album of egg on it, and place it over that, and then place the sphere behind the tip of it, if necessary, and then take humidified linen, which is long enough, and its width is about a palm or around that; and then place powdered duplicates over the ointment; and then place a thin tablecloth of the width of three fingers and lengthwise similarly; and then wrap that in dressing, and then place that dressing with the tablecloth in the location over the location of the fracture; and then place humidified linen there as it is revolved, and revolve it around the neck of it and behind the tip of it, and reduce it over all parts, and when the structure of the fracture is covered with structure descent, and that is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And even if the bone above the broken one is not fractured; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage is softened or you see that the bone has been reunited, then you should straighten it and strengthen the ligament.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on the shoulder of the other, and place a small cushion under their chin to support their head; so that the helper can elevate the injured bone of the patient from the side of the other, and thus raise the fracture of the scapula at the elevation of the muscle; or let the arm of the patient rest on the shoulder of the other.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not tear the ligament unless there is an abscess in the place soon or after twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And if you have seen the surface of the bone at that place, renew the plaster and adjust it in the fracture and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the scapula has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some people have done it in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the treatment of a broken shoulder joint.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in the wrong place, not in the patient's body, but on its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	When the spatula is broken in the wrong place — and it is broken in the right place — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare the patient and reduce it to its natural form in any way possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place your hand on the location of the powder of moldy bread and lemon; and then place a thick layer of cloth; and then place a thin layer of tablecloth according to the amount of the entire spatula or more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the thin layer is concave in any of the locations of the spatula, then you level that concavity with lemon juice, and then place the layer according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply strength above with long blood from the constriction of the wound and firmness of the layer until it does not remain in its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament in each day; and all the time it is being softened, apply another bandage and strengthen it and equalize the angle if it remains in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And turn the patient on their left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The splint is restored in 10 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the bandage, and you should know that it is from the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the bone of the foot and place it in front of the wound, then you should cut on it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio de apostema caut if something happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest is fractured in some places and that ends, but the extremities of it are not broken and are not comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the bone is fractured, it bends towards the parts inside and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, and fever, vomiting, and much bleeding; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the bone is that the patient is placed on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulder blades; and then the muscles are pressed against the bone, and the ribs are adjusted to be as close together as possible and as suitable for this, until the figure of the bone returns to its original shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a poultice and bandage over the fractured bone, and cover it with a cloth that is similar to a bag or a boot and of the same shape in elevation, so that you can wrap it; and then carefully apply this over the fractured bone so that it is not too tight; and when the swelling has subsided, strengthen the fracture with a splint; and consider the swelling at all times, and when it has softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to remove the part of the body that has been corroded or prolapsed, or if there is pain, an abscess that has occurred in that area, then you should take and remove that part and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred due to that manual method of treatment for him; and then return the plaster, if possible, and adjust it within the structure until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that rib fractures do not occur except in the thicker parts that are on the sides; and at the extremities of their lower part, they do not occur with contraction, but only because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And if you know him, he is not hidden from the feeling of those who have been mentioned.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it equals the fracture according to the possible method, until it is covered, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with this, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is declining towards the internal parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncturing, similar to the puncturing experienced by one who has been weeping, and because of this, the bones are covered with a cloth; and this causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients had already devised remedies for such great afflictions.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said: cover the patient with warm blankets to generate inflammation and heat, so that the abdomen is full and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should not do this to avoid causing an abscess if it does not already exist; and if it already exists, we can help with this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said to those who are above the wound that they should be placed on their back and that strong suction should be applied; but this is similar to reasoning, however it is feared that the suction will draw too much fluid into the wound due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said to the patient: cover that area with wool that has already been immersed in hot oil, and place powders between their ribs until it is full, which is equal to when you fold it the second time; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient experiences severe constriction that they have not suffered before, and the bone punctures the bandage, cover it over the patient, then cut open the area, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument that contains the cipher, the memory of which is preceded by this, and that they should cut into the bone to facilitate its removal.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then they should adjust the swollen lips of the wound, if it is large, with a poultice, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess forms, then you should cover it and push powders into hot oil and place it over the area, and that the patient be cured with this that covers the abscess from forming.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his left side while he is being treated until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Sacrum and Spine.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck and ribs, and similarly in the sacrum of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such an accident occurs to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, consider this: if the bones are already softened and numb and dead and cannot move or strengthen those and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and feel no pain in those places, then you know that they are not healed, and in such cases the prognosis is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if the bones feel pain when pressed or pricked, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the same thing in the sacrum of the back and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that it has already softened, if those things that happen in the body occur, and when you are lying on its back, it becomes difficult to urinate and defecate, and some people turn over on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of it is to pour the oil of rosemary or some drugs into the abscess that you have placed on the spine, or some people put a poultice of bread and honey into it; place some of those things in it until it is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters on it, and strengthen it with a bandage; command the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the ligament of the bone is torn or some other cause that has already been separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and remove that bone; and adjust the wound edges, with stitches if it is large; and cure it with some fleshy substances, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the back of the spine is broken, and it is at the end of the spine, then enter your left hand into the anus, and balance the broken bones as much as possible on the other hand, second by second; and place a bandage and splint over it if necessary, and strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken ribs in it, then cover that, and hold that, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded by healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and they are inserted into the length and decline to the parts inside; and the patient feels pain in that location and puncture, and the cushion is shocked when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only in the end of it, then you should equalize it with the second one that you have prepared for equality, entering as much as necessary to be similar to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is long or has declined to the parts behind, then you should make the patient lie on their belly until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized it, place your hand on the plaster, and then place your hand on that star of wood or of coda, and hold it firmly against the one that does not fear puncture of fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the concavity with that which you have placed inside it so that the pressure of the fracture is even and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess is found, then you should stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place your hand on that which was previously mentioned; and then return to the restoration of it, and hold that which is with cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if bones are broken or fractured, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Humerus is that which is between the ribs and the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you grasp it at the base of the elbow according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if it is joined in two ends of two bones, and then suspended from the raised place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a bed; and then bend their broken arm over the elbow so that it reaches the tip of the humerus in the middle of the place where the curve of the bone is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy over that, or the nurse extends it to the parts behind; and then the doctor, when the fracture is united, places it in a splint, until the fracture returns as it was before.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other hand's task is to place the patient on their side and support their head with a cloth; then command two ministers to hold that which is above the fracture with their hands, and the other to hold the pillow behind them; and each of them extends their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then place your strength on the fracture and on the other cloth, and each of the two ministers extends their part.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the cloth on the side and the other behind the fracture to hold it in place.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the side, then place the cloth on that spot and on the side.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equal to that which is easy and suitable for work, and when it is applied according to what is covered and is well-applied, then apply strength to it if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs, leave the stricture inside for seven days, and place a woolen cloth soaked in warm oil over it until the abscess reopens, and then strengthen that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of strengthening that area is to place a poultice on the fracture, and then cover it with a clean cloth; and then adjust your arm over that assistant, placing your hand on their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then place the cloth and strengthen the arm over the assistant's arm to keep it in place, if there is no cause for the bone to break.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And then place that splint which is placed farther and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of the fracture, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture plus three fingers of each part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the splints with the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is necessary that your structure on the site of the fracture be more straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture becomes more elongated, the structure becomes less straight.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore if you see the position of the stars and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its proper position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear pus, then leave the structure and the stars inside on day seven as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not accumulate in the wound or inflame; or it is prohibited for food to come to the member because of the disposition of excessive structure; and therefore correct all of this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are unsure whether any cause of this has occurred, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's sleeping position should be on their back, and their hands should be above their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a warm blanket evenly over the helper's body, and consider in every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not melted or dissolved, or that the bond has become soft, then correct that entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the second food of the patient according to the order we have given, unless the food is delicate at the beginning before it begins to strengthen; and then cover that with a cloth.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Because according to the custom of the helper and the cushion of the patient, they should be strengthened in ten days; and then cover that with a cloth, bathe it, and apply medicines with which it can be corrected.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not healed in ten days or two months, then do not remove the bond and the splints.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones, which are called the radius and ulna; one is small, and that is the one that goes to the wrist, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed next to the small one, from the elbow joint.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often the main tendon or the small one is broken alone, or both are broken at once.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small tendon is broken above, its repair is more difficult, and its healing is less likely.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the tendon from below the fracture is broken, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	But it is even worse when two bones are broken at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small one above, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate its repair by placing a small extension to help it heal as quickly as possible.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	However, if the main tendon is broken, then it is necessary to place a more forceful extension to help it heal.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both tendons are broken at once, then it is necessary to place a more powerful extension to help them heal.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you should place your hand over the injured area and extend the extension over a cushion, with the patient's arm above the rest, and the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should be lying on a pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion under the head or under the back of the patient, so that the sick person does not become tired.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the assistant should extend the arm of the deceased person on the side that is closest to the other hand or the sheet, and another assistant should do the same above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor should set the bones back in place as best as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are fractures in the bone, then carefully remove all the fragments to their original place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separate fragment that pulls the cord and is not within your hope of restoring it, then you should do on it and place it according to the method we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is in the shoulder, you have already treated that capital part, and therefore take care of that one.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth made of olive oil and white wax, and it should be thin yet strong, and you should place it over the subtle structure until the abscess has subsided; and then remove the poultice and apply prepared plaster made of powdered mold and clear honey, and place bandages on that.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of ribs in the arm is in the major positions, or if it is a fracture in one or two places at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage most strongly and forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when more string is needed above the fracture or below it, place the bandage a little softer than it was before in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or rough, and the best one is the one that is strong enough to move between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the limb close to those days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if something happens that requires correction, such as the one that happened to the member, and then make sure that you immerse the member in water before it stops that problem.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the member not be forced until it recovers, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has realigned and similar to those, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, then gradually soften that and lay it down for several days until the nourishment can reach it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if no cause of those things has occurred to the patient, then do not let it be removed within approximately 20 days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the hand of the patient be suspended over them for their skill in moving and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in approximately 30 days or 32 days, or if it is severe, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complexions and the dispositions of the skill.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of fracture of the little finger and those like it.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	When piercing the skin of the knee and the joints of said toes, be aware that this may cause fracture, and do not force them unless absolutely necessary.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When the patient experiences fracture or injury, ensure that they remain lying on their back with their legs evenly extended, and place your hand over their abdomen.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the assistant extends the broken bones, while the doctor sets them in good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And ensure that you apply plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess, and place your hand over the wound according to its size, and you have already covered it with cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the splint is in the parts of the abdomen, then make it similar to a belt, and command the patient to tighten it around their abdomen; ensure that it is not too tight.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And ensure that the belt of cloth in which the patient is lying is elevated, so that the abdomen is applied to the patient's body; tighten it according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the parts of the forearm, then place your hand and another on the other side of the part below the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then place the structure, as if the hand is rolled between the mentioned bones.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture occurs in one of the nuts of the mentioned bones, then if it is possible, place your hand and secondly, as if you are covering and approaching the palm and if you wish, place a small straight object underneath so that the fracture is elevated and not deformed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other mentioned places, such as the wrist, elbow, ear, or ring finger, then place your hand and secondly, on the same side as the injury; or all of them continuously, which is better; or place over that small straight object, as we have said in the palm.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and place that, the position of abscess cautery and opposite — on the same side as the operation — on that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to the narrative of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh is broken and is declared to be second-degree when it is converted to the part that is most prominent.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is stretched over the fracture and another ligament after the fracture, and the patient lies on his back and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the surgeon extends the entire ligament to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is directed towards the top of the thigh, then the ligament should be placed at the end of the femur to the part of the patella, so that the extension can be in front, and the other ligament after the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the fracture is directed towards the bottom, then the ligament should be placed at the end of the tibia and the extension to the parts behind.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor should gently guide the broken bones back into their natural position and join them with good joint connection; then apply a poultice and bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if there is an abscess in the member, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess has drained, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage of the member should be made as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it twice or three times, and remove any excess; and then place the pillow under the calf and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long, clean cloth between the thigh and the pillow, and bring the ends of the cloth from the more distant side of the two parts, and then roll it up on the pillow and thigh to cover any excess of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand on the thigh in the location of that fracture, and place a stool under the bones of the pillow.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty spaces between the chest and the cushion with many cloths, to prevent coagulation of the exudate.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the strong bandage from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you get closer to the edge of the fracture location, your bandage should be narrower and looser and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend two extremities of the bandage to the parts where it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the other part so that the bandage does not remain in its own place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then lay the bandage over that, so that it does not cause corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things to the member; and if any of those causes occur, then count on removing it from there, and rectify what happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a bone fracture in the place where it should be placed, then cover that according to what is possible for you; and if not, do so on it and return it, and cure that which is preceded by the remembrance within which it should be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some bandages are used to strengthen this fracture of the thigh or other ones that are adjusted to its shape, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of it in such a way that it does not happen to the patient with gout; and if it is restored alone, another one should be applied on the other cushion, then it is necessary that he should lean on that which is immediately available.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the thigh is strengthened in eleven days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the conditions and the other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the elbow joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the elbow joint usually happens suddenly, but it does not happen to the other bandages.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it happens to the fracture, then it is only a crack or a tear in its parts, and that is a small pain or several pains, and over that all depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the broken parts should be equal to what was broken off from the patient's body, and it should be added and joined together as much as possible for equality and ease of construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a bandage and place it over that round stone, if necessary for that one; and strengthen the structure with this one.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as a pus cautery and similar to those that are placed at all times for that one until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large and is called the rib; and the other is thin and is called the cartilage.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And depending on the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of it is made similar to the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are broken at once, the cushion is turned to all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if a more delicate bone is broken, the cushion is turned to the parts of the body.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if a larger bone is broken, take that one away, and it is from those causes that you are not familiar with.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and equalization and ligation of the splints according to that equality.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, may God, if the fracture of the bone is left without any supports, that the extension be less and more loose, and it will help your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the arm is some reason for surgery on the forearm, and it is when you equalize the splints and complete the entire operation, then you will take weights of wood that is placed next to the causes that are placed on the sole, and they are made entirely of palm branches; align them with those that are small and not too heavy, and be the longest according to the length of the arm, and the one closest to the elbow.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then cover each with a cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one on the part of the bed on one side and the other on the other side, and let it hang down to the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the three bedsteads in three places of the extremities and at the middle one, for this structure the bed is prohibited to turn to the right and left side, and it is good for a better position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a small board of wood according to the length of the bed is administered; and let it be placed on the bed so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially cover what you do in fracture, and when it is placed properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the bed every day and study what is behind it, and keep it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens of those, then stop at that which covers it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot and those mentioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not suffer a complete fracture; rather, some of the bones of the foot suffer fractures; and the mentioned ones of the foot rarely suffer fractures, and do not suffer them except in certain positions.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer fractures and sometimes those bones are raised above them between them, then place the patient on his side with his leg on the prepared ground as if he were walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and press those, and equalize them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place a bandage and a splint on top, and place a small table under the patient's belly with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then apply strength to that part of the leg that is below, because you have covered it with bandages and other causes of which it needs.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if three or four days pass, then you remove the bandage, where you will find the bones equalized, or broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as follows.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If the patient's toes are curled, then straighten them, and compare them with your own, and tell me how you would restore them in the treatment of such toes.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place your hand along the length of the curled toe, and put it on the side of it; then move the foot on this table that you have recommended, and strengthen that joint with a proper bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If that bone is curled in two or three or more places, then you should place your hand on each affected area covered with lion's cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the ends of the table to hold the patient's belly for better retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you to not forget that you should consider all the causes that have been told to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at every accident, and cover that which is appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the jawbone of the woman and the bone of the patella and the vertebrae of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's nipple is cut, then perform that cesarean section in the lower abdomen, and then gently incline that to the part of the back a little, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife should cover the nipple with her own, and do the same in the nipple of the other; and then the woman should be gently struck, and her back raised little by little, because all this is done before the nipple is cut and the broken bone returned.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place cushions on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cushion and allow her to urinate, and then reduce and return that second by the way it was placed at the beginning, and then return the first cushion.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take one bladder of lamb and strong on the throat of the other a cannula of cavern; and introduce all the bladder into the wound, and then blow through the cannula until the bladder is inflated within the wound, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with cotton and wrapped with bandages according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of the thighbone of a man or woman are broken, then administer in the restoration and insertion of that which we have recommended in the bone of the thigh.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is drawn out should not be hidden in these fractures, but rather given to those who study and use this book; for that fracture means that you must place it in the most suitable positions in the restoration and structure of it, and therefore understand it.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the wound of a man when it is punctured, take a piece of gauze, and place it in that; and then place your hand over it wrapped in cloth, and cover it, and leave it for three days or around those, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one who has suffered a fracture to have, and especially if the bone is large as the bones of the thigh or of the shoulder, or similar to those, that you take care and use crutches as soon as the conditions of crutch-bearing are present with you as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the pain continues, then make sure to keep the injured part immobilized, and apply a poultice made of three parts of barley flour, unless you have another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that following day, and do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs carefully, then leave the restoration of it until the sixth day, before the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, which you will cause to worsen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the hip, then make sure to reduce it and equalize it with your hands at your side, with facility and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not equal to your preparedness and the position of the patient, then reduce it with your hands and this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches, and the width of which is according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor who uses those three or four according to the quantity that is needed in the treatment in all cases of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and it should be in the place that is least greasy so that it does not slip during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be pointed at the end where there is a margin in the upper extremities; and it should be the underside of it underneath, and the top of it inside the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is the greasy palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order that the cover may be placed under the raised extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And insert that into a wheelbarrow to bring him back, and let it be level with some equality.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then try to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it is thin, and you do not take that instrument for a good reason, then make sure that you insert the extremity of that bone into where the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to all that we have recommended, then insert that which comes from the scissors, or saw it with one of the saws in some way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove those which are in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels great pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you consult with the patient greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is completed, which you do to the bone, and then submerge drap in vinegar black, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place on the wound or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause more damage and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stitches at the time of the bone's completion of restoration, and leave the wound open until it is incised with forceps and wrapped according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to stretch the wound over the fracture, as that is what the old doctors did, and they made it worse by making it rot or putrefy, which is harmful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the fracture is less rigid, soft, and different from the fracture of other bones.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear those evil accidents that we have mentioned, and intense pain in the area, then do not place stitches over those stitches, but rather make that wrapping of hard cloth instead of stitches and stretch it over them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to close after a day or two, there will be pus in it, so you should remove the cloth that you placed over it and administer poultices, using those that we use to treat wounds, such as tetter medicine and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should know that you should remove the bandage and consider the pain in each joint at dawn and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pain runs from it to the parts ahead for ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or healed by itself, then know that here are remedies to seek out the pain and try them.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those remedies, those that are separated and removed should be separated and placed on the member and make it bear less pain, pierce them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain is accompanied by swelling or discoloration, it is a sign of another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then make sure to place one of those that are suitable for the cure of which the previous narrative in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you should follow my best advice and you make present your hand: when the large ones are cut, emerge over the member as if they were the bones of the body and the helpers and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attachment or removal of it, for several months have passed since it occurred; leaving that inside which causes pain, for it will cause great harm if you approach it within twenty days or thirty; and then cure the pain if you see it, and if not leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of swelling that occurs at the site of a certain fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Such swellings occur at the site of a fracture healing, especially near joints, and are caused by the figure of the limb; and it often prevents the member from performing its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the swelling is recent and administer in those medicines that have stopped such as aloes, and enselges, and mirabilis, and sercacollo, and acrasia, and similar to those; and take some or all of them, and comfort those with a strengthening ointment, or album of honey, or a strengthening ointment, and place that over the swelling in a cloth, and bind it over the swelling for good binding.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And loosen the binding that does not cause pain for several days; and remove that and apply another, until the swelling has subsided; or strengthen it on that layer of plaster, which plaster has the property of reviving everything that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the joint has already become hard and narrow, and it is necessary to provoke an opening in that way, then divide it by the most suitable part of it, and incise the excess and eminent, or ratchet it with a reazor until it remains open; and cure it within that time when it becomes healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21:
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When the fracture is restored and brought back to its original position, the limb should not be too thin or weak according to its natural nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb becomes too thin or weak, this is not done for many reasons: one of which is the lack of solution of the ligaments and tendons of that part made according to its natural nature; or due to excessive strictness of the ligaments until the nutriment is prohibited from running to the limb; or due to excessive embrocation; or due to unnecessary movement at that time; or due to weakness in the body of the patient and weakening of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to apply heat to the patient and make them lie down with their chest facing up, and then administer a blanket and hot water bottles and let them rest.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a poultice on the affected limb, so that the poultice draws out any remaining toxins or continues to soothe the area with warm water, until the nutrients return to their natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of broken bones when they are restored improperly and prevent surgery from being performed on them due to this.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an injury occurs to a limb that has already been restored, it is important to address the deformity and swelling of the broken bone and to shape it back into its natural form, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural surgical operation, then you should not accept the word of anyone who claims that the limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our time; and this operation is very reprehensible as it causes great fear and can be fatal to the patient.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the pain and stiffness are recent, it is recommended to apply a poultice made of thistle leaves that have been boiled in water, along with herbs such as chamomile and mallows, and similar ones; and this should be applied to the affected area using a softening ointment. Or, it can be prepared by crushing the roots of chamomile and mixing them with gallnut or oil of camphor, and applying this to the affected area. Or, it can be prepared by boiling fatty figures in water and straining them through a cloth made of linen, and similar ones; and this should be applied to the affected area using an ointment called American consolidation medicine.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some waters are dissolved in frequent friction using the most humid ones, and they should be administered to move the limb throughout all its parts in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the tortuosity has already become chronic and is very hard and turned into stone and requires treatment with iron, it is recommended to apply a poultice of fresh meat and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and this should be scratched with a thin saw blade on the affected area, and this should be administered in order to facilitate movement in that area.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, distorts the shape of the limb, and causes severe pain and serious injuries on the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an injury occurs in dislocation, it is best to reduce it as soon as possible, and do not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and in that case, it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And in order to avoid this, it is not recommended to move or extend the limb during the inflammation stage, because movements and stretching cause spasms and dull pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When that happens, it is recommended to apply a flaxseed poultice to the patient's wound, and let it remain until the abscess subsides; then the limb should be rubbed with hot water and oil, and then reduced as easily as possible.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member should be treated with that which will bring its memory back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder, it enters into the part that is next.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the jaw below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the jaws are dislocated and not tart; and the dislocation of others is made in one of two ways: either they are realigned with their places by a little removal, and they are slightly molded; or they are dislocated entirely and completed, until they are molded at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and which cannot hold that nor can close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is slight, then in the most favorable positions return it by itself for a little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is entirely and completed, then cover that it be administered reduction of it more gently, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor's fingers in the mouth on one side of the jaw dislocation, or on both sides simultaneously if the dislocation is on both sides, and equal the other fingers to them; and command the patient to stop their jaws and release those from each part; and the doctor should equal the jaw and push it back into place before it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporated water and oil, until the reduction of both jaws is complete and does not delay the reduction of both jaws altogether, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are returned and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed but not molded, then place a poultice of cloth on those parts with wax, and make it from cera and oil; and apply it to facilitate the movement of the jaw.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And place the patient's head on their own shoulder, and let the doctor's head be between two chairs, so that it does not move to the front or left; and do not force any cause; having the same view, open the mouth with a lion's tongue, when the pains are relieved and the jaws are unlocked, then move that which is desired.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And that should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and breathing, until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws in a certain hour and they are not converted to their normal places, then use frequent vinegar baths and constant soda, and the stomach of the patient is often eructated, and often vomiting pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, know that it is lost; and many of those who experience that die within a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and its extremity.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not dislocated from its connection with the breastbone; and some fractures are dislocated at the front part, and this is called a sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then cover the area with your hand with strong pressure, so it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place a bandage and powder over it and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extremity of that which is in the back and continues to it, is not dislocated on any day; however, if it is reduced and bandaged according to what we have said and according to what is in your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place a bandage and powder over it, and apply pressure, and command the patient to rest in quiet until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26:
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the acromion to the part behind.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done quickly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is more commonly dislocated and deformed and sticks out behind the acromion, and especially in those in which the meat is thin, it is more likely to be dislocated; but in those in which there are thick meat, it is more difficult to be dislocated.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to some men that they are struck or hit, and the muscle of which is filled with pus, and it is swollen because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then cover that area with a cloth so that you are not overexerted in treating it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	When dislocation occurs at the joints behind, you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, as there are manifest differences between them; and when touching the concave part of the muscle head and beyond the joint, it feels like a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their limb to its proper position, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should press or lift it, and you will feel a distinct tactile sensation, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	This dislocation can be reduced when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of this joint is done by the assistant lifting the patient's limb above the joint; and placing their hand behind the joint, they lift the joint to its proper position, and the assistant lifts the patient's limb, and extends it; and then place it behind where it returns to its proper position.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If it does not return, and from the beginning of the accident that caused the dislocation, for several days, let the patient be bathed in warm water and given a decoction that softens and relaxes, such as if their joints were made of aloe, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should be placed on their back and supported under their neck with a cushion that is equal to the balance between elevation and restriction, and the doctor should place their hand on the patient's temple, elevate the muscle of the neck, and pull the hand of the patient so that it does not move to the sides, and another servant should hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move to the sides, as this is where it usually returns.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of the patient, and insert his muscle behind the neck of the patient and elevate the neck of the patient to the sides until the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from the sides of their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is heavier, then first ask what other cause could be suspended, so that the weight does not damage the one who is lifting them, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced by another method: and that the patient should be placed on the ground with a long pole under their head, similar to a mortar, which is not too thick or thin, and place a pillow behind them; then place the patient's head on the top of the pole, and stand the patient along the length of the pole, and extend the hand of the other part towards the parts behind the other part; and strengthen the joints of the other part, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the patient by all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and that you take a pole of the length of two arms, and its width should be four fingers, and the thickness of the other part should be removed in the tip of the tilt according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a lion's mane on the head of the patient to prevent them from moving.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place your hand or arm under the patient's chest, extend it towards the parts behind, and tie the chest, arm, and hand to the support.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place your arm on a pulley according to the latitude, extend your hand towards the parts behind, and the other things should be suspended from the other side, as the joint will soon enter.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And if the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible manner, and then cover it with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and apply an prepared paste of powdered mustard seed and albumen on all the muscle, as it is rolled over, and then strengthen the head from the patient's chest, and the bandage should be rolled over the paste, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it be, and do not make the hand of the patient dirty for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And the food of the patient should be placed on a low table, before the member is comforted, which is more beneficial for their recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given at intervals of 7 or 8 hours and exercise some movement; if it is stopped and not softened, then it has already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to swelling caused by moisture that has occurred to it or for another reason, then it should be administered a pointed cautery three times, as indicated in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if everything has been done and after 7 days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and structure have been reduced over it for some time, and it is not fixed and catheterized and cannot be raised to the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of which are at the head of the muscle, whether they have been cut or stretched or softened, and that the joint will never be fixed in place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation of that which is made of the chest and breast or the parts behind, reduction is made by impulse and extension of the arms, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply the other constraint in that place, and cure it while it is healing.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing of the member is delayed and slow in its movement, then use bandages wet with warm water until that gravity is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and when it is dislocated at all parts, and especially at the part connecting the arm to the body, and the dislocation of the shoulder is not noticed by you where it has been dislocated from the socket or from the touch according to whatever figure it has been dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated in the correct position, that is clearly apparent to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And if you see that it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, as soon as the abscess appears, it is very difficult to reduce it, and often not cured at all; and especially when it is in the parts behind, because it is worse than all the other species of dislocation, and causes more pain, and more dangerous movements away from that place, which often leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended towards both sides, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the back of the patient and below, and he should press the joint towards the palms of his hands, or at the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the parts behind, then return as soon as you bend your hand towards the back of your hand, until you hit the back of your hand at the base of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants should extend the arm, and another two assistants hold it in place so that it does not remain unsteady during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm throughout its entire range of motion, wrapped in a long, folded cloth on their chest or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, they should apply some oil to it in order to help alleviate the causes of the joint pain and facilitate its movement; then they should push the joint back into place with a sudden, forceful motion.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then place a compress over the wound that is soaked in a solution of honey and water, and extend it downwards, and hang the arm from the neck, and let it rest for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then remove the bandage; if the joint has returned to its proper place, then remove the cloth and leave it alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not yet strong enough, then reapply the ointment and bandage, and leave it alone for several days until it is healed; then remove the bandage.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If an accident occurs near the reduction of the joint, and its position is moving, then administer humidification in baths and gentle friction, and compresses, until it is dislodged; or place a greasy cloth over the joint, and leave it on the affected area at night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then place that in the bath; and when it is dry, then gently friction the joint with cold friction, and repeat over the greasy cloth, as a compress, once, twice, and three times.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	using a bath, until it is softened.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a wet and scorched cowhide bandage on that; and do this several times, as that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder joint, which is between the arm and the body.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Sometimes the shoulder joint is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is the other joints, but rather, be careful with the speed in reducing this joint when it is dislocated, because the joint may become infected or something happens to the abscess.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the patient's shoulder joint on a table and the assistant extends the patient's arm from there, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back to its original place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But rather, be careful if the palm is already stuck to the patient's chest, then the patient places his back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is on the other side, then the position of the patient's arm should naturally be on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be on the edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if he returns soon, it is good; and if not, then the assistant should press the abscess to let it out, and do not repeat this, because otherwise, it will not be softened or you cannot reduce the joint more than that.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	When the joint is deformed by its curvature; and if the patient does not know any cause, but only that the muscle is soft and cannot withstand any cause; then you know that the nerves are torn or crushed, and they are not engaged in it, but rather strengthened with a pointed cautery at the base of the joint and strongly apply that to the affected area.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the injury has healed, place a plaster on it as recommended, and let it be loose and strengthened for several days; and then remove it and let it be loose and exercise the muscle of the affected area.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of the affected area is stopped and there is some heaviness in it, then apply a wet cloth and some friction for several days, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of the mentioned dislocations.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these dislocations occur at any time.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of these bones is dislocated at the back of the hand or on the belly, then pull the bone and push the dislocation towards the fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the said patient, suspend the devil's claw to the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend the devil's claw and extend it until it is equal to that on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the first is not ripe, apply the second remedy, and do not cease to move that in the day and exercise with movement, and apply it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with that, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient, and apply it to that part and do that first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, do the same when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an accident occurs to one of the dorsal vertebrae or neck, and it remains dislocated in those places, then in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	When that happens, the patient is unable to control their bowel movements, and cannot hold it; then softening agents are applied to their body members or their bed or their sheets or their pillows, or one of those; or a sponge is placed on that spot, where the softening agents are applied and the removal of those is done in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it has been divided into parts behind and is called diaper.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The care of that is that you should consider whether the diaper has been soiled by urine, because in that case it is not a cure nor a healing for all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Moreover, in that which is seen through puncturing or percussion or similar to those, as the ancients called the methods of treatment for such a prolonged speech, of which the most returns to profit; but I have already and improved from that of which the few excuse the excess of it, by its proximity to the understanding and exposure, by which he has exposed and formed different instruments of that, and shown this and spared that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in cases where the part of the body is affected in the chest, there is neither cure nor healing for that; and similarly in those that are made at two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, none are cured except for the one that actually occurs in the back; and similarly, that is what I would recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face on a flat surface as close to the wall as possible, and then they should be extended behind them with a damp cloth to prevent the chest from being soaked.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a stick should be placed under the patient's head, resting on the ground at the end of the bed around their head, and another stick under their feet on the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the attendant should hold the stick, and not be stationary in the ditch; and another attendant should hold the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap a cloth over the patient's head and leave the tails of the cloth hanging down; extend the end of the cloth to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and strengthen the other cloth over their ankles and on the sides of their body; and adjust all the cloths and tie them on the other stick that should be under their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the assistant should extend the linen to the part of the bed where the patient's body is placed, and not leave the two beds and the linens of their places in which they were placed, but rather not let them remain there as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his hands on the patient's back between the strong points until he returns, or places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three arms, and dig in the wall of which we have said that it is a place for the patient where the end of the table is.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the patient's body on the back of the table, and the doctor places his hands on the other end, and stretches them until the back is covered and he returns to his place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the turntable that is rolled up on the floor; and it is that you should be on your knees behind the patient's head between the two beds, the length of which is about an arm, and you should be on your knees behind the patient's head exactly between the two beds; and the length between each bed should be a palm, and it has been made in each bed through which the turntable turns, and each one should be stopped on the ground so that it is not damaged.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be another rod in which it is turned, and it should be rolled in the two grooves of the two rods.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a groove in which the rod is made, the length of which is a span and a half, and on the other two rods there is a similar groove.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the straps that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the groove that is to be placed on his head, and the straps that you have tied on the thighs of the patient in the rod that is to be placed on his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then place each rod and have a servant twist the rod against his chest, as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the rod:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is returned, and the area is covered, then apply fresh honey on the dressing, and stop; and place a flat table of the width of three fingers or around those, and the length of which is the quantity that the wound took up, and on the part of the spine, and.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the bandage that we have mentioned, and use the patient as a source of subtle nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any imminence in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is recommended to administer medicines that moilify and cleanse the area for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that place as a plaster.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes some vaguades occur in the back of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already immines for that reason, so that it does not cause any further damage to you at this medication, which will surely help you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only suffer from dislocation, but also from those that occur in other joints due to slight removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the elbow is dislocated in four ways, either at the parts in front, or at the parts on the sides, or at the parts in front and behind, or at the parts on the back.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated at the parts in front, or at the parts behind, or at the parts on both sides.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And when adjusting the pillow for the healthy person and the sick one, if the sick one cannot bend their knee, they must lean on it, and this is the location where an abscess can form, so that the head of the pillow has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the unusual case of the one who experiences this dislocation is at the parts on the sides, because the injuries of this are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the unusual case of the one who experiences this dislocation at the parts behind is that they extend their leg on the other side, but they do not bend it where the pain is in the knee, and if they try to walk and cannot walk without bending their knee; and the urine of this one is retained, and the pressure of this one is an abscess, and you must place the foot of this one on the floor.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And if the person to whom this dislocation occurred in the parts behind is not able to extend their arm, nor bend the elbow that bends it, and the cushion under him is shorter than the other, and the elbow is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these species of this dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been treated by having it near you, then you administer reduction of it according to its arrangement, but not in that cure of all; and therefore do not expect that in that one be made prematurely.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In that one of whom the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, you should do that which turns the joint and extends it to the parts behind and to the parts in front, and also to the right and left, for that will return quickly and does not need another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this way, then you should expect that you prepare a strong person and extend the cushion of him from the part last, or at his hands, or at the bandage which is laid over the cushion above the elbow; and another minister extends the hand of that above in such a way that places his hands behind the tumors of him; and then strongly hold the lion's skin on the edge of the cushion, and another minister clean the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if the extension is from the shoulder to the neck, or from the back to the shoulder.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if the extension is of all those in one direction while the patient is lying on their back and their head is hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is especially common for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for each special case to direct the appropriate treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of this dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, make sure that the patient is lying on their back; and place your hand on the rim of the cushion in that place where the head of the cushion and the place that is left hanging are; and extend the ligament from the angle to the most distal part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another strong minister grasps the arms of the patient, and pushes the large part of the patient's body and extends to the parts forward by strong extension, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this specialty is the most difficult cure for which this member is reduced more than other specialties.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you excuse yourself from this specialty and do not obey its entrance, then have the patient's feet tied together with a strong rope, thinner than others, above the ankles and below the knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each should be equal to four fingers, and the patient's leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the middle; and the length of it from the ground should be equal to two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to traction the cushion, and another young man should suspend it from the patient, and the other young man should strengthen the cushion, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the shoulder part, have the patient lie on his back as soon as possible; and strengthen the ligament over the cushion of the patient properly and over his chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two pillows under them, one under their feet and the other under their head; and adjust the pillows under them to the side of the patient's chest, so that the patient is not suffocated by the pillow being between their legs, as you must extend the parts behind them without being pushed.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor places their hand to guide the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you succeed in the reduction, it is generally good; and if not, pause over that carefully and follow what we have said in the guide for that purpose.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May it be that the patient moves their legs calmly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the parts behind, then it is necessary that the leg be extended more widely, and according to this method described in the book; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the patient's back, and the other assistant holds that extension at the parts behind to the part of the hip.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back parts, then it is not recommended that the patient be extended at the back parts and raised on the ground; having covered them with a hard cause, as if they were lying on two beds; and if the jaw of the patient is dislocated at the front parts, according to what we have said about the patient's bed over two pillows; and it is on their face and the limbs are extended, according to what we have said, there is no pain.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And that compression be applied with an ointment on the place where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, when the reduction is completed according to what we have said — and if the assistant of the reduction of the patient is not with you, then extend two pillows from the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends the other pillow and expands that place, then know that the member according to what we have said is returned; and then adjust two cushions and press and extend the bend so that the limb is not injured in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and apply it again, comparing one cushion to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those joints correctly, then you know that the dislocation has been stopped, and therefore let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softness, then return and apply that, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and apply it again in an ambulation over each part for several days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the thumb.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thumb is dislocated in three ways, namely it is dislocated at the base, at the fingers, and at the back more than at the front; and at the base it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply his cushion on the area; then you know that the thumb is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is to place the patient upright, unless they can already support themselves; press their back against the bed, and place their foot between your feet; and then make sure the patient's hand is on your palm, and hold those things between your hands on the patient's chest for strength, and another minister extends the patient's leg into the position where the hand returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And when lifting the patient, make sure their back is against the cushion that does not slip.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then place that plaster on the back and make sure it adheres to the cushion, and hold those things with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not use the patient's bed for support for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then in the treatment of the hand previously described cure, apply strong extension to the tendons of which.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of talipes equinovarus (clubfoot).
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Sometimes the talus is slightly dislocated and sometimes it is dislocated in full extension, and the dislocation of it is made at the joints or at the bones.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that sometimes the talus inflates and comes out at the joint where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure of the dislocation of it is usually easy, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hands and returned quickly.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the treatment of it when it is dislocated in full extension, make sure that the patient stands straight, and hold a strong and skilled assistant at the back of the patient's shoulder on the side of it in the middle of its position.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you take the left hand straight on the most elevated part of the foot, and your left hand on the side of the foot behind it in the position of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then bring the foot to your left hand, and hold it with two fingers, and extend the left leg; and push the chest of the patient against the right side of the bed.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make those two fingers as many times as you have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the chest of the patient against the left side of the bed, and you are at the back.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one or two steps this way, and if you feel the foot equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation on it, as it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it in that way, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a firm pillow under their head, and put a blanket between their thighs, and you have already covered them with a sheet so that they do not catch cold.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot to their hands or to the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and then each assistant should be extended against the extension of their part, and the pillow should be extended between the thighs of the patient, so that the thing of the patient is not pulled away from their extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor should gently realign the dislocation with his hands, and another minister should hold the clean cloth at the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns to its place.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the reduction of it has healed, then apply ointment and wrap it strongly with a bandage, and tie the foot to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to injure the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over that area is not too tight and it does not hurt it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to go through that space, do not let it be said that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not require treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that the abscess bursts, then be careful not to administer in its cavity what our narrative has mentioned, in another place of treatment and of ointment, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter thirty-four.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	That which is dislocated should be reduced to its place with little force; and that is not difficult, if one knows how to do it.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the toes of the foot, then do so by placing the patient's foot on a level surface or table, and have him remain there as if he were standing.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand by the foot, and place your hand on the area where the joint is, and gently press that part of the foot until it returns to its original position and does not appear in the elevated position.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place your hand under the belly of the patient, on a table that holds the entire foot, which has two covers, and strengthen that part of the structure in a decent and firm manner for three days; and then remove it and let him rest from walking for several days, until it is restored and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the special types of dislocation that can occur due to pain or fracture or any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occurs, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration of that person, many complications may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that reason, you should not assume authority over the treatment of that person, but rather follow the knowledge gained from long use, mercy and compassion, delayed, not hasty or arrogant; and use in the beginning of medicines that cure wounds only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, unless to the one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, as alleviation of suffering, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then you should make an effort to reduce that person as soon as possible from the beginning of the cause, so that they do not develop an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as desired, then administer a regimen that cures wounds and abscesses and treats the pain with what is appropriate for them from drying remedies.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the bones that are separated, then you should perforate their skin, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that, in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid the second of that tool in the ways of fear according to what has preceded my sermon; for that is better for you to do your own Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more salutations to your own sight, as those will see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Here ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
